M11/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                           May 2011



           BUSINESS AND MANAGEMENT



                        Higher Level



                               Paper 1




21 pages
                              –2–            M11/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                         –3–             M11/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



The markbands on pages 3–6 should be used where indicated in the markscheme.


             Section A

    Q1 (c)    Q2 (c)     Q3 (d)                    Level descriptors

              Marks
               0–7

                                  • No knowledge or understanding of relevant
                0                   issues, concepts and theories.
                                  • No use of appropriate terminology.

                                  • Little knowledge and understanding of relevant
                                    issues, concepts and theories.
               1–2                • Little use of appropriate terminology.
                                  • No reference is made to the information in the
                                    case study.

                                  • A description or partial analysis/examination with
                                    relevant knowledge and/or understanding of
                                    relevant issues, concepts and theories.
                                  • Some use of appropriate terminology.
               3–5                • Some reference is made to the information in the
                                    case study, not just to the name of the
                                    organization.
                                  • At the lower end of the markband responses are
                                    mainly theoretical.

                                  • A balanced analysis/examination with accurate,
                                    specific,     well-detailed    knowledge      and
                                    understanding of relevant issues, concepts and
                                    theories.
               6–7
                                  • An analysis/examination that uses appropriate
                                    terminology throughout the response.
                                  • Explicit references are made to the information in
                                    the case study.
                        –4–             M11/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




Section B

 Q4 (d)
                                 Level descriptors
 Marks
  0–8

            • No knowledge or understanding of relevant issues,
   0          concepts and theories.
            • No use of appropriate terminology.

            • Little knowledge and understanding of relevant issues,
              concepts and theories.
  1–2       • Little use of appropriate terminology.
            • No evidence of judgments and/or conclusions.
            • No reference is made to the information in the case study.

            • A description with some knowledge and/or understanding
              of relevant issues, concepts and theories.
            • Some use of appropriate terminology.
  3–4       • No evidence of judgments and/or conclusions.
            • Some reference is made to the information in the case
              study, not just to the name of the organization.
            • The response is mainly theoretical.

            • A response with relevant knowledge and understanding of
              relevant issues, concepts and theories.
            • A response that uses relevant and appropriate terminology.
  5–6       • Evidence of judgments and/or conclusions that are little
              more than unsubstantiated statements that has balanced
              analysis and demonstrates understanding.
            • Explicit references to the information in the case study are
              made at places in the response.

            • A response with accurate, specific, well-detailed
              knowledge and understanding of relevant issues, concepts
              and theories.
            • A response that uses appropriate terminology competently
  7–8         throughout the response.
            • A response that includes judgments and/or conclusions
              that is well supported and underpinned by a balanced
              analysis.
            • Explicit references to the information in the case study are
              made throughout the response.
                        –5–             M11/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




Section C

 Q5 (c)                          Level descriptors

Marks 0–9

            • No knowledge or understanding of relevant issues,
    0         concepts and theories.
            • No use of appropriate terminology.

            • Little knowledge and understanding of relevant issues,
              concepts and theories.
   1–3      • Little use of appropriate terminology.
            • No reference is made to the information in the case study
              and/or the extension material within Section C.

            • A description or partial analysis/examination with relevant
              knowledge and/or understanding of relevant issues,
              concepts and theories.
            • Some use of appropriate terminology.
   4–6      • Some reference is made to the information in the case
              study and/or the extension material within Section C, not
              just to the name of the organization.
            • At the lower end of the markband responses are mainly
              theoretical.

            • A balanced analysis/examination with accurate, specific,
              well-detailed knowledge and understanding of relevant
              issues, concepts and theories.
   7–9      • An analysis/examination that uses appropriate terminology
              throughout the response.
            • Explicit references are made to the information in the case
              study and/or the extension material within Section C.
                                                   –6–               M11/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Section C

 Q5 (d)
                                                     Level descriptors
 Marks
 0–12

   0        • No knowledge or understanding of relevant issues, concepts and theories.
            • No use of appropriate terminology.

            • Little knowledge and understanding of relevant issues, concepts and theories.
            • Little use of appropriate terminology.
            • No evidence of synthesis of information from the case study, the extension material in Section C
  1–3         and, where applicable, from other responses within Section C. Information is merely lifted and
              copied into the response.
            • No evidence of judgments and/or conclusions.
            • No reference is made to the information in the case study and the extension material within
              Section C.

            • A description with some knowledge and/or understanding of relevant issues, concepts and
              theories.
            • Some use of appropriate terminology.
            • No evidence of synthesis of information from the case study, the extension material in Section C
  4–6         and, where applicable, from other responses within Section C. Information is merely lifted and
              copied into the response.
            • Evidence of judgments and/or conclusions that are no more than unsubstantiated statements.
            • Limited reference is made to the information in the case study and the extension material within
              Section C.
            • The response is mainly theoretical.


            • A response with relevant knowledge and understanding of relevant issues, concepts and theories.
            • A response that uses appropriate terminology.
            • At places in the response information from the case study, the extension material in Section C
              and, where applicable, from other responses within Section C is (synthesised and) integrated to
  7–9         provide a basis for analysis and evaluation.
            • A response that includes judgments and/or conclusions that have limited support and are
              underpinned by a balanced analysis.
            • Explicit references to the information in the case study and the extension material within Section
              C are made at places in the response.


            • A response with accurate, specific, well-detailed knowledge and understanding of relevant issues,
              concepts and theories.
            • A response that uses appropriate terminology competently throughout the response.
            • Information from the case study, the extension material in Section C and, where applicable, from
 10–12        other responses within Section C is proficiently (synthesised and) integrated to provide a basis for
              analysis and evaluation.
            • A response that includes judgments and/or conclusions that is well supported and underpinned by
              a thorough and balanced analysis.
            • Explicit references to the information in the case study and the extension material within Section
              C are made throughout the response.
                                                   –7–              M11/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



                                              SECTION A

1.   (a)   (i)   Identify two external stakeholders of Reach Out.                                   [2 marks]

                 External stakeholders of Reach Out include:
                 • families of children with autism (and children themselves) – do not count
                   twice
                 • private therapists (accept “private sector companies” but not just
                   “competitors”)
                 • government (local, regional or national – not all)
                 • local university and trainee teachers who need work experience with
                   children with autism
                 • companies producing communication resources/PECS cards
                 • accept any other relevant external stakeholder (as long as they are
                   relevant for Reach Out – for example “suppliers” is too vague unless
                   specified).


                 Award [1 mark] for each correct and relevant external stakeholder
                 identified up to a maximum of [2 marks].

           (ii) Outline a possible interest of one of Reach Out’s external stakeholders
                identified in part (i).                                                 [2 marks]

                 Answers will depend on the chosen stakeholder – for example, the private
                 therapists see Reach Out therapists (trainee teachers) as a new form of
                 competition (i.e. new entrants); Reach Out’s approach to pricing (up to four
                 times cheaper) presents a real threat to them, hence the interest. They may
                 protest or complain over the fact that the Reach Out therapists are not
                 professionally qualified.

                 Accept any other relevant outline.


                 Award [1 mark] for a basic outline of a possible interest of one external
                 stakeholder identified in part (i).

                 Award [2 marks] for a clear outline of a possible interest of one external
                 stakeholder identified in part (i); for [2 marks] the interest must be realistic
                 and explicit.

                 If the chosen external stakeholder is not from the answer to part (i), award a
                 maximum of [1 mark], no matter how good the outline of the possible
                 interest.
                                             –8–              M11/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




(b)   Construct a fully labelled organizational chart of Reach Out after the
      appointment of Andrew Grandin.                                         [4 marks]

                      Laura Chan                                       Neil Johnson
        Director – Communication and Networking               Director – Finance and Strategy


                                                Andrew Grandin
                                                Scheme Manager



                                                    Therapists



      Note: the job titles might be on one side, depending on the layout.

      Award [1 mark] for the relationship between Neil and Laura (at the same level).

      Award [1 mark] for the relationship between Andrew, Neil and Laura (Andrew
      reporting to both of them).

      Award [1 mark] for the relationship between Andrew and the therapists (trainee
      teachers) (the number of therapists on the chart does not matter).

      Award [1 mark] for the labelling of the job titles (for Andrew, accept alternatives
      such as “manager” or “therapists manager”; for Laura and Neil, accept
      “co-directors”).
                                           –9–             M11/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




(c)   Analyse the advantages and disadvantages for Reach Out of accepting the
      sponsorship offer from N-Pharma (Option 3).                             [7 marks]

      Advantages include:
      • a new and regular source of income for Reach Out ($10 000 a month), without
        any need for extra work/activities/spending
      • the sponsorship from N-Pharma could, in turn, attract other sponsors
      • the marketing advantage of being associated with N-Pharma – a well-known
        company
      • potential advice and support
      • information or research into autism
      • accept any other relevant advantage.

      Disadvantages include:
      • compromising Reach Out’s integrity (Laura’s main argument against it)
      • there is no link between a pharmaceutical company and the mission and vision
        statement of Reach Out (other than research on autism, line 137), so it is not
        clear what message this sponsorship would communicate to Reach Out’s
        stakeholders
      • should N-Pharma suffer bad publicity, Reach Out too could be negatively
        affected
      • accept any other relevant disadvantage.


      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                    – 10 –         M11/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




2.   (a)   Neil Johnson has prepared a business plan for Reach Out (line 31). Identify
           four elements of a business plan.                                           [4 marks]

           Possible elements could include:
           • an overall summary
           • the mission statement/vision statement
           • the aims/objectives of the business
           • a section about legal status
           • a section about marketing
           • a section about human resources (HR)
           • a section about operations
           • a section about finance/accounting
           • a calculation of start-up costs
           • appendices such as cash-flow forecast
           • accept any other relevant element.


           Award [1 mark] for each correct element identified, up to a maximum of
           [4 marks].

     (b)   With reference to Reach Out, distinguish between a vision statement and a
           mission statement (lines 44–47).                                          [4 marks]

           The vision statement is about the future: it presents the purpose of the
           organization, usually in terms of values or ideals. Reach Out’s vision is that
           “no child with autism will be left behind”: this is Reach Out’s driving force,
           the ultimate aim they seek, hence the idea of “vision”.

           In contrast, the mission statement is a concise description of what the organization
           does: in the case of Reach Out, they “provide online support for families of
           children with autism”. It is concrete and practical: it is about what they already do
           (e.g. through Laura’s blog and web site), their purpose or what they want to do as
           soon as possible (“to offer them communication resources at a greatly reduced
           price”).

           Accept any other relevant distinction.


           [1 to 2 marks]
           Award [1 mark] for an answer that just copies/lifts quotes from the case study.
           Award [2 marks] for an answer that shows some limited understanding of the
           difference between a vision statement and a mission statement, for example
           through a theoretical definition of the two.

           [3 to 4 marks]
           Award [3 marks] for an answer that combines “theory” (i.e. definition) and
           “practice” (i.e. reference to the case study). Award [4 marks] for an answer that
           clearly distinguishes between a vision statement and a mission statement,
           stressing the difference, with explicit reference to Reach Out.
                                                 – 11 –            M11/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



     (c)   Analyse the importance of information and communication technology (ICT)
           in the creation and operations of Reach Out.                             [7 marks]

           On the one hand, ICT played an important role right from the beginning as
           Reach Out is originally based on Laura’s blog about raising a child with autism.
           That blog even enabled Laura and Neil to meet, as Neil read it and saw the
           business potential. The first part of Reach Out’s mission statement is about online
           activities; some fundraising comes from it and it has further potential, for example
           with the sponsorship from N-Pharma. ICT is also important in the interactions
           between families and therapists; it is through ICT shortcomings that Neil found
           out that Andrew is not able to use a computer, which is a major problem for
           Reach Out, as they rely a lot on electronic communication.

           On the other hand, ICT remains a tool to support the other activities of Reach Out,
           especially the current therapist scheme and the future marketing of
           communication resources such as PECS cards. Both could not just exist virtually:
           therapists need to be in a room with the children, the PECS cards have to be real
           objects in the hands of the parents.

           Accept any other relevant analysis.


           Answers must be balanced and analyse both creation and operations for
           full marks.

           Note: the balance may be between creation and operations; it does not have to be
           “for” and “against” the importance of ICT.

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.


3.   (a)   Define the term corporate social responsibility (line 138).                            [2 marks]

           A socially responsible business is one that realises it has an obligation or
           commitment which incorporates the interests of various stakeholders and the
           environment in a manner which is deemed to be beneficial and correct according
           to societal values, e.g. a socially responsible business may manufacture products
           in such a way as to limit carbon emissions. (This includes behaving ethically to
           its stakeholders.)


           Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and
           understanding.

           Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
           understanding similar to the answer above.

           For only a relevant: example or application to the case study award [1 mark].
                                             – 12 –           M11/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




(b)   Identify two possible indirect costs of Reach Out.                                      [2 marks]

      Organizations’ indirect costs include rent, utilities, taxes etc. Possible answers in
      the case of Reach Out include the electricity bill, internet access and web site
      hosting – though a range of other answers can be accepted (e.g. office sundries,
      even rent as Laura’s office is in her house and Reach Out could pay her some
      rent).


      Award [1 mark] for each correct possible indirect cost relevant to Reach Out
      identified, up to a maximum of [2 marks].

(c)   Using information from Appendix 1,

      (i)   calculate the total cash receipts and the closing balance at the end of
            September 2010 if all figures follow the same pattern as in the previous
            months.                                                                  [2 marks]

                                                               September
                                                                  2010
             Opening balance (start of month)                    16 920

             Cash receipts
             Commission from therapist scheme                     32 000
             Charity contributions (donations)                       200
             Total cash receipts                                  32 200

             Cash paid out (expenses)
             Neil’s salary (10 % of cash receipts)                 3220
             Laura’s salary                                        2000
             Andrew’s salary                                       1000
             Direct costs                                            350
             Indirect costs                                          150
             Total cash paid out                                   6720
             Net cash flow                                        25 480
             Closing balance (end of month)                       42 400


            Candidates are not expected to complete the cash-flow forecast for
            September as above.

            Total cash receipts = 32 200
            Closing balance = 42 400

            Award [1 mark] for each correct calculation, up to a maximum of
            [2 marks].
                                       – 13 –       M11/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




(ii)   calculate the total cash receipts and the closing balance at the end of
       September 2010 if Neil Johnson’s proposal to ask families to pay higher
       fees (lines 121–124) is implemented that month.                         [2 marks]

                                                September
                                                   2010
        Opening balance (start of month)          16 920

        Cash receipts
        Commission from therapist scheme           64 000
        Charity contributions (donations)             200
        Total cash receipts                        64 200

        Cash paid out (expenses)
        Neil’s salary (10 % of cash receipts)       6420
        Laura’s salary                              2000
        Andrew’s salary                             1000
        Direct costs                                  350
        Indirect costs                                150
        Total cash paid out                         9920
        Net cash flow                              54 280
        Closing balance (end of month)             71 200

       Candidates are not expected to complete the cash-flow forecast for
       September as above.

       Total cash receipts = 64 200
       Closing balance = 71 200


       Award [1 mark] for each correct calculation, up to a maximum of
       [2 marks].
                                            – 14 –            M11/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




(d)   Examine the success of two elements of the marketing mix used by Reach Out. [7 marks]

      The 7 Ps of the marketing mix may be used here: candidates are expected to
      examine two elements from the list of price, product, promotion, place, people,
      process and physical evidence.

      Example for promotion:
      Reach Out’s promotion has two main channels: Laura’s blog (and other online
      activities such as podcasts where she must mention the therapist scheme) and
      word-of-mouth (as parents of children with autism must talk to one another about
      the scheme). This has been very successful (as “the number of families asking for
      support was doubling each month” (lines 77–78), ensuring an ever increasing
      stream of income for Reach Out (see monthly cash flow) but many other
      promotional methods could be considered. Neil’s proposal about brand
      development would further develop Reach Out’s notoriety and goodwill, which
      could also help with further fundraising. At the moment, fundraising is a minor
      source of income ($200 on average a month) but it has a lot of potential (e.g. with
      the sponsorship from N-Pharma) – however, promotion and communication are
      essential: this is one aspect of its marketing mix that has been successful but
      Reach Out could further develop.

      Example for people:
      People here refers to all the staff of Reach Out: the two directors, Andrew as well
      as the therapists. They all have skills and strengths that contribute to the success
      of Reach Out (e.g. Neil’s business acumen, Laura’s passion and drive) but some
      weaknesses too (e.g. Andrew’s inability to use a computer, the therapists’ lack of
      qualifications). From a marketing viewpoint, Reach Out could further use its
      strengths (e.g. Laura’s and Andrew’s personalities for networking and
      fundraising) – however they have to be careful that the weaknesses do not
      negatively affect the charity (e.g. Andrew’s lack of computer literacy blocking the
      process of booking/confirming therapists’ sessions). This is an aspect of the
      marketing mix that has not been so successful.

      Accept any other relevant examination.


      If the response is a one-sided relevant approach with no examination, award a
      maximum of [4 marks]. If only one element of the marketing mix is examined,
      award a maximum of [4 marks].

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                – 15 –           M11/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



                                             SECTION B

4.   (a)   Outline two features of public-private partnerships (line 22).                  [4 marks]

           Features of public-private partnerships (PPP) include:
           • a contract between a public sector authority and a private party
           • collaboration (combining strengths; getting “the best of two worlds”)
           • running more efficiently than bureaucratic public bodies
           • several forms of PPP exist e.g. private finance initiative (PFI)
           • accept other relevant features.


           Mark as 2+2.

           Award [1 mark] for each correct feature identified, and [1 mark] for the
           development of that feature (which could be through exemplification such as:
           Vector Arena in Auckland, New Zealand; Airport Link in Sydney, Australia; the
           National Maritime College of Ireland etc. up to a maximum of [2 marks]).
           Award [0 marks] if the candidate gives an example only.

           Note: some candidates may write about benefits rather than features: this
           is acceptable.      Some answers may be country-specific (as PPPs are
           country-specific): this is acceptable too.
                                            – 16 –           M11/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




(b)   With reference to Laura Chan and Neil Johnson, explain the difference
      between leadership and management.                                    [4 marks]

      Management is about planning, organizing and controlling. Neil is clearly a
      manager: he helped set up Reach Out in a professional, rational and efficient way.
      He is interested in the successful operations of the charity (which is probably why
      he was upset when he realized that Andrew was not performing well) and in
      financial success (which is why he identified options for further revenue).

      Leadership is different: it has a more emotional dimension. A leader has the
      ability to inspire and a vision to share. Laura is clearly a leader: she knows what
      she wants Reach Out to reach and achieve (hence the vision statement that she is
      working to achieve). She is less interested in administrative aspects.

      This contrast explains why Neil and Laura complement each other very well –
      but also why there is some tension between them, especially as the charity grows.

      Accept any other relevant explanation.


      [1 to 2 marks]
      Award [1 mark] for an answer that just copies/lifts quotes from the case study.
      Award [2 marks] for an answer that shows some limited understanding of the
      difference between leadership and management, for example through a theoretical
      definition of the two or the correct use of terminology.

      [3 to 4 marks]
      Award [3 marks] for an answer that combines “theory” (i.e. definition) and
      “practice” (i.e. reference to the case study). Award [4 marks] for an answer that
      clearly explains the difference between leadership and management, with explicit
      reference to Neil as manager and Laura as leader.

(c)   With reference to Reach Out, explain two benefits of having a family brand
      (line 126).                                                                [4 marks]

      Benefits of having a family brand include the following:
      • using the existing reputation of Reach Out (and the goodwill associated
        with it), there is no need to spend much time or money on brand awareness
        raising
      • all marketing and promotion for the Reach Out brand will benefit from
        marketing economies of scale (e.g. the therapist scheme) that are
        commercialized under the same umbrella name
      • family branding could be used as a means of differentiating Reach Out from
        other non-profit organizations
      • accept any other relevant benefit explained.
                                              – 17 –        M11/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



      Mark as 2+2.

      Award [1 mark] for each correct and relevant benefit identified, and [1 mark] for
      the explanation of that benefit up to a maximum of [2 marks].

      Award a maximum of [1 mark] for answers that refer to branding and not
      “family” branding.

(d)   Using Lewin’s force field analysis model, discuss the differences between
      Laura Chan’s and Neil Johnson’s views about the growth of Reach Out.      [8 marks]

      Some candidates may draw a force field diagram, though this is not explicitly
      required as they are asked to “discuss”, they may just write a textual answer;
      this is fine. Candidates must not be penalized if they do not draw a diagram as
      they may just refer to the relevant concepts (driving forces, change, problem
      situation etc.).

      • The driving forces for change correspond to Neil’s motivations to generate
        further revenue. He has identified three options (which could actually be
        combined). Reach Out has the potential to grow much further and Neil is keen
        to seize all opportunities. Other driving forces include the need to increase
        donations to offer more services and the fact that Neil is on commission.
      • The restraining forces for change correspond to Laura’s doubts: she “was
        content with the current therapist scheme” and she is not interested in the
        three options (revised pricing structure, branding, sponsorship). She has the
        feeling that she may be losing control of the charity. Other restraining forces
        include size, personnel, finance and Laura’s emotional commitment to children
        with autism.

      To overcome these differences, Neil and Laura could rather focus on the
      second part of the mission statement about producing and commercializing
      communication resources: this would fulfill both Laura’s ambitions (to help
      families of children with autism) and Neil’s business interests (marketing
      development, financial success).

      Accept any other relevant discussion.


      Award a maximum [1–2 marks] to answers that do not use the concept of
      Lewin’s force field analysis or has used Lewin’s force field analysis but not
      mentioned either Neil or Laura.

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 4.
                                                – 18 –           M11/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



                                            SECTION C

5.   (a)   Referring to Item 2, identify two new additional factors that Neil Johnson
           could include in his STEEPLE analysis of Reach Out.                       [2 marks]

           From the extract from Item 2, there are indications of changes in the social,
           economic and political factors, which could affect Reach Out.
           If the full STEEPLE is considered, technological, ethical and legal factors could
           be identified. (It would be unlikely that environmental would be included.)
           • technological: (online provision of communication resources or improvements
               in production processes allowing greater productivity at lower cost)
           • legal: the political decision to provide equal opportunities (Item 1) will have
               legal implications for schools, health providers and the workplace
           • ethical: it may be perceived as unethical for private sector companies seeking
               profit maximization to produce PECS cards and obtain some free publicity on
               the back of the work already undertaken by the non-profit organization:
               Reach Out
           • accept any other relevant new additional factor.


           Award [1 mark] for each relevant factor identified up to a maximum of
           [2 marks].

           If a candidate identifies an element from Item 2 but applies it to a different
           situation; this is acceptable.

           If a candidate uses an element from Item 2 but does not apply it to a different
           situation; this is not acceptable – they are merely lifting from the text.
                                           – 19 –          M11/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




(b)   Explain how changes in social behaviour towards autism (Items 1 and 2)
      could impact on Reach Out and its competitors.                        [7 marks]

      Clearly, there will be impacts on both Reach Out and the competitors if social
      behaviour towards autism changes. Explanations should be in context and contain
      elements, which impact on both Reach Out and its competitors.
      • On a positive note greater awareness may lead to increased revenue for the
         competitors and a greater surplus for Reach Out. (However, Reach Out will
         need to investigate how its positioning will be affected if other competitors
         anticipating growth in this market decide to offer competing services
         (therapists and PECS cards: both services) to families.
      • One impact of society’s changing attitude towards autism is that Reach Out
         may not be able to cope with increased trading. The current structure of the
         organization may not be appropriate.
      • A greater acceptance of autism could strengthen Reach Out and other charities
         push for more government funding and support for families. Reach Out may
         be able to achieve its vision much quicker than anticipated.
      • The reaction of other stakeholders such as charities representing other
         worthwhile causes may feel that Reach Out is gaining too much attention for
         its work in raising the awareness of autism.
      • Government policy towards autism in Item 1 covering equal opportunities
         should benefit both Reach Out and its competitors.

      Accept any other relevant explanation.


      [1 to 2 marks]
      A limited response, but with some understanding of the impact that changes in
      social behaviour could have on either Reach Out or its competitors.

      [3 to 5 marks]
      The explanation is relevant with some understanding of the impacts on Reach Out
      and its competitors. At the top of the markband there is more detail and
      development of the explanation. If there is no mention of the additional
      information, award a maximum of [4 marks].

      [6 to 7 marks]
      A clear, relevant and developed explanation of how changes in social behaviour
      could have an impact on Reach Out and its competitors. The concepts are well
      explained and clearly linked to issues in the case study and additional
      information.
                                            – 20 –           M11/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




(c)   Analyse the appropriateness for Reach Out of using a predatory pricing
      method for its PECS cards.                                            [9 marks]

      • Laura’s frustration is understandable that three new competitors (private
        publishing companies) may be able to take advantage of all the hard work
        which Reach Out has undertaken to raise the awareness of autism, by charging
        lower prices (perhaps they have advantages of economies of scale which Reach
        Out do not possess).
      • Reach Out’s decision to introduce predatory pricing will lead to increased
        sales revenue (given price elasticity of demand in Item 2) and re-establish
        Reach Out’s ethical credentials and preserve the mission.
      • Laura clearly feels that this would benefit families even though the economy is
        slowly moving out of recession.
      • Reach Out enjoys brand loyalty from its customers and predatory pricing may
        reinforce this.

      Balance
      • However, a lower price may trigger quality concerns about the finished
        product to families who depend on these PECS cards as a communication
        device for children with autism.
      • Significant price cuts may trigger the competitors into following suit, and lead
        to a “race to the bottom”, which given Reach Out’s non-profit status may
        jeopardize the organization’s future viability.
      • Predatory pricing may be illegal and unsustainable in the long run (Laura and
        Neil will need to check) (what if Reach Out tries to increase prices).

      Accept any other relevant analysis.


      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 5.

(d)   Using information contained in the case study and Items 1 to 5, discuss
      whether Reach Out should outsource the production of its PECS cards to an
      overseas producer as part of a new strategy.                              [12 marks]

      It should be recognized that, given time constraints, answers are likely to include
      a much narrower range of issues and concepts than identified below. There is no
      “correct” answer.

      Examiners must be prepared to award full marks to answers which synthesise and
      evaluate even if they do not examine all the stimulus materials or if they do not
      use strategic planning tools.
                                        – 21 –          M11/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



At the centre of this strategic decision is the dilemma that in order to maintain a
competitive position in a market with significant market potential, Reach Out may
be forced to outsource production of its communication resources to overseas
providers. In doing this it will be risking its ethical credentials and violating its
mission and vision if large numbers of adults with autism are forced out of work,
by not taking orders from its local producer.
• The goodwill lost could be considerable especially as Reach Out has been
   given a prize (Item 1) and Laura’s declaration that she intends to honor her
   commitment to the vision.
• The analytical framework for this strategic decision is left open. Reference is
   expected to Item 2, highlighting the need to consider the changes in social
   behaviour and other elements of the STEEPLE.
• An application of Porter’s generic strategy is not required but given the
   competitors potential in the market, one could argue that Reach Out may need
   to undertake a five forces analysis.
• Information from Item 5 would suggest that Reach Out needs to be careful
   when deciding on the benefits of outsourcing.

Candidates should be rewarded by looking at the cost savings (Item 4) from the
outsourcing and how these could translate into real benefits for families with
children with autism who are struggling according to Item 3, the blog postings.

There is no definitive answer here. Given the seemingly growing tension between
Neil and Laura, it is difficult to see how this situation can be resolved. Reach Out
will need to look at its mission statement and see if the new strategic move best
serves this. This was the key motivator in the decision to start up this non-profit
organization. However, changes in the external environment are impacting on
Reach Out and action must be taken to ensure that there is the opportunity to
realize the vision. Laura will need to accept that she cannot solve all of the issues
of autism by herself and compromises will need to be made.

Accept any other relevant discussion.


Award a maximum of [7–9 marks] where both the case study and Items 1 to 5
have not been used, i.e. only one set of data.

Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 6.
