M11/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX




     22115602

Philosophy
Higher level AND STANDARD LEVEL
PAPER 2

Wednesday 4 May 2011 (morning)

1 hour


INSTRUCTIONS to candidates

 Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Answer one question.




2211-5602                                                                                          4 pages
                                                           © International Baccalaureate Organization 2011
                                                       –2–                   M11/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

In your answer you are expected to:

     • present an argument in an organized way
     • use clear, precise and appropriate language, demonstrating that you understand the author’s specific
       terminology
     • show an understanding of the specific demands of the question
     • give detailed references to the ideas and arguments presented in the text
     • provide relevant supporting material and examples where appropriate
     • analyse the supporting material
     • develop a critical evaluation of the ideas and arguments of the text
     • state a clear, personal response to the position expressed by the author.

Answer one question.  Each question is worth [30 marks].

Bhagavad Gita

1.     Explain and discuss the concept of sacrifice.


2.     Explain and discuss the images of light, fire and darkness.



Confucius: The Analects

3.     “In the practice of the rites or rules of propriety (li), harmony (natural ease) is the most valuable thing,
       and in the ways of the ancient kings this is regarded as the most beautiful thing. It is adopted in all
       matters, both small and great.” Discuss and evaluate.


4.     Evaluate the claim that if the notion of humaneness (ren) is adequately understood, it has significant
       potential to be applied to different fields of contemporary life.



Lao Tzu: Tao Te Ching

5.     Explain and discuss the importance of non-action (wu wei) to an understanding of the Tao.


6.     Explain and discuss the unspoken nature of the Tao.




2211-5602
                                                     –3–                M11/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Plato: The Republic, Books IV–IX

7.    Explain and discuss the nature of belief and knowledge.


8.    Explain and discuss the qualities of the ideal ruler.



René Descartes: Meditations

9.    Explain and discuss Descartes’s concept of the self.


10.   Explain and discuss the argument for the belief in the existence of the external world.



John Locke: Second Treatise on Government

11.   “Locke’s primary contention is that the right to govern comes with a duty to govern in the interest of
      the governed.” Discuss and evaluate this claim.


12.   Explain and discuss the extent of legislative power.



John Stuart Mill: On Liberty

13.   Evaluate the relationship between liberty and utility.


14.   Evaluate the problem posed by conformity.



Friedrich Nietzsche: The Genealogy of Morals

15.   Evaluate the claim that our morality has a clear and traceable genealogy.


16.   To what extent is the will to power the essence of life?




2211-5602                                                                                        Turn over
                                                    –4–                   M11/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Bertrand Russell: The Problems of Philosophy

17.   Evaluate Russell’s claim that the essential characteristic of philosophy is criticism.


18.   Discuss and evaluate Russell’s claim that, “all our knowledge depends upon our intuitive knowledge”.



Hannah Arendt: The Human Condition

19.   Explain and discuss Arendt’s claim that work gives permanence to the world.


20.   Discuss and evaluate the role that speech and power play in the vita activa.



Simone de Beauvoir: The Ethics of Ambiguity

21.   Explain and discuss de Beauvoir’s account of how adult responsibility emerges out of childhood.


22.   Explain and discuss de Beauvoir’s treatment of the individual.



Charles Taylor: The Ethics of Authenticity

23.   Evaluate the claim that the self fits with the aspiration to combine full moral autonomy with the
      recovery of community and is both expressive of the common life of its members and constitutive of
      their individuality.


24.   Discuss and evaluate Taylor’s view that our current main task is to lift culture closer to the ideal
      of authenticity.




2211-5602
