M11/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                           May 2011



                      PSYCHOLOGY



          Higher Level and Standard Level



                               Paper 1




9 pages
                              –2–            M11/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                                  –3–              M11/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


                                              SECTION A

Biological level of analysis

1.   Explain how one hormone influences human behaviour.                                          [8 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands below when awarding marks.

     The command term “explain” requires candidates to give a detailed account of how the
     chosen hormone influences a chosen human behaviour. Responses should make a clear
     link between the function of the hormone and human behaviour.

     A number of different hormones could be chosen, including: adrenaline, cortisol,
     melatonin, testosterone, estrogen, oxytocin.

     Any aspect of human behaviour (e.g. aggression, depression, stress, sexual interest) is
     acceptable as long as the response focuses on how the hormone influences the particular
     behaviour.

     Examples of how hormones influence human behaviour could be the influence of
     cortisol on memory, oxytocin on attachment, testosterone on aggression, or melatonin
     on sleep patterns. Responses that address the influence of neurotransmitter such as
     dopamine, serotonin, GABA and acetylcholine should not be awarded any marks.
     Where a neurotransmitter and hormone are chemically the same (e.g. noradrenaline)
     answers should make it clear that they are explaining the hormonal function.

     Responses should address just one hormone’s influence, and where candidates have
     provided more than one example, credit should be given only to the first response.


     Section A markbands

     Marks          Level descriptor

     0              The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

     1 to 3         There is an attempt to answer the question, but knowledge and
                    understanding is limited, often inaccurate, or of marginal relevance to the
                    question.

     4 to 6         The question is partially answered. Knowledge and understanding is
                    accurate but limited. Either the command term is not effectively
                    addressed or the response is not sufficiently explicit in answering the
                    question.

     7 to 8         The question is answered in a focused and effective manner and meets
                    the demands of the command term. The response is supported by
                    appropriate and accurate knowledge and understanding of research.
                                                  –4–              M11/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Cognitive level of analysis

2.   Outline one theory of how emotion may affect one cognitive process.                          [8 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands below when awarding marks.

     Responses should give a brief account of one theory explaining how emotion may affect
     one cognitive process.

     Responses may focus on any cognitive process that is affected by emotion such as
     intelligence, perception, memory, decision making. Whichever cognitive process is
     selected, responses should demonstrate how emotion may affect it.

     For instance, responses may include Frank’s explanation that passion serves an
     important function in decision-making contexts precisely because emotions do not
     constitute a “rational” calculation of self-interest. It would also be appropriate to
     explain Brown and Kulik’s explanation of what they called flashbulb memories. These
     authors argue that flashbulb memories involve a special biological mechanism that we
     have developed through evolution so that highly consequential surprising events are
     very well remembered. If Freudian repression is included, then the candidate must
     explicitly justify the relationship to the cognitive level of analysis.

     No marks should be awarded for responses that outline only a cognitive process. Low
     markband answers might outline a potentially appropriate theory, but without any link
     made to a cognitive process.

     Where candidates have provided more than one theory or more than one cognitive
     process, credit should be given only to the first response.


     Section A markbands

     Marks          Level descriptor

     0              The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

     1 to 3         There is an attempt to answer the question, but knowledge and
                    understanding is limited, often inaccurate, or of marginal relevance to the
                    question.

     4 to 6         The question is partially answered. Knowledge and understanding is
                    accurate but limited. Either the command term is not effectively
                    addressed or the response is not sufficiently explicit in answering the
                    question.

     7 to 8         The question is answered in a focused and effective manner and meets
                    the demands of the command term. The response is supported by
                    appropriate and accurate knowledge and understanding of research.
                                                  –5–               M11/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Sociocultural level of analysis

3.   Describe one theory or study on the formation of stereotypes.                                 [8 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands below when awarding marks.

     Responses should give a detailed account of the theory or study on the formation of
     stereotypes. Where candidates offer studies on the effect of stereotypes on behaviour,
     no marks should be awarded.

     There are a number of theories which explain the formation of stereotypes including:

        Tajfel’s (1969) social categorization theory
        Campbell’s (1967) theory of gatekeepers and the grain of truth hypothesis
        Hamilton and Gifford’s (1976) illusory correlation theory
        stereotyping as a natural cognitive process (Brislin, 1993)
        cognitive miser theory, as a resource-saving device (Fiske, 2004).

     Possible studies could include:

      Tajfel et al. (1971) on intergroup discrimination
      Sherif et al. (1961) – Robber’s cave experiment on competition between groups
      Qualtrone & Jones (1981) on in-group and out-group influences on decision-making.

     Where candidates describe one theory or study, but do not relate clearly relate this to the
     formation of stereotypes, a maximum of [4 marks] should be awarded.

     Where candidates have provided more than one theory or study, credit should be given
     only to the first response.


     Section A markbands

     Marks          Level descriptor

     0              The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

     1 to 3         There is an attempt to answer the question, but knowledge and
                    understanding is limited, often inaccurate, or of marginal relevance to the
                    question.

     4 to 6         The question is partially answered. Knowledge and understanding is
                    accurate but limited. Either the command term is not effectively
                    addressed or the response is not sufficiently explicit in answering the
                    question.

     7 to 8         The question is answered in a focused and effective manner and meets
                    the demands of the command term. The response is supported by
                    appropriate and accurate knowledge and understanding.
                                                  –6–              M11/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Section B assessment criteria

A — Knowledge and comprehension

Marks         Level descriptor

0          The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

1 to 3     The answer demonstrates limited knowledge and understanding that is of marginal
           relevance to the question. Little or no psychological research is used in the
           response.

4 to 6     The answer demonstrates limited knowledge and understanding relevant to the
           question or uses relevant psychological research to limited effect in the response.

7 to 9     The answer demonstrates detailed, accurate knowledge and understanding
           relevant to the question, and uses relevant psychological research effectively in
           support of the response.


B — Evidence of critical thinking: application, analysis, synthesis, evaluation

Marks      Level descriptor

0          The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

1 to 3     The answer goes beyond description but evidence of critical thinking is not linked
           to the requirements of the question.

4 to 6     The answer offers appropriate but limited evidence of critical thinking or offers
           evidence of critical thinking that is only implicitly linked to the requirements of
           the question.

7 to 9     The answer integrates relevant and explicit evidence of critical thinking in
           response to the question.


C — Organization

Marks      Level descriptor

0          The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

1 to 2     The answer is organized or focused on the question.         However, this is not
           sustained throughout the response.

3 to 4     The answer is well organized, well developed and focused on the question.
                                                 –7–              M11/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


                                             SECTION B

4.   Discuss the use of brain imaging technologies to investigate the relationship
     between biological factors and behaviour.                                     [22 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered and balanced
     review that includes a range of arguments, factors or hypotheses. Opinions or
     conclusions should be presented clearly and supported by appropriate evidence.

     At least two brain imaging technologies should be discussed and could include:
      CAT
      PET
      fMRI.

     Discussion could be focused on:
      advantages and limitations of brain imaging technology – non-invasive, side effects.
      ecological validity
      certain techniques may be more appropriate than others – for example, functional
       (PET, fMRI) versus structural (CAT, MRI) scanning.

     Studies could relate to abnormal behaviour, neuromarketing, localization of function:
      Gazzaniga (2008) – MRI scans in split brain cases
      Ramachandran (2000) – using the fMRI to measure plasticity in the somatosensory
        cortex in phantom limb patients.
      The use of PET scans in determining disorders like autism, Alzheimer’s disease or
        schizophrenia.

     Studies should focus on how the technology is used to investigate the relationship
     between biological factors and behaviour. Ethical considerations should refer to the use
     of the technology and not focus on the application of studies that have used the
     technology.

     Where candidates have discussed only one example of a brain imaging technology, a
     maximum of [11 marks] should be awarded.

     Description of non-imaging techniques which are not related to the discussion should be
     awarded no marks.
                                                 –8–              M11/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


5.   To what extent is one cognitive process reliable?                                          [22 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “to what extent” requires candidates to consider the merits or
     otherwise of an argument or concept; in the case of this question, the reliability of a
     cognitive process. Opinions and conclusions should be presented clearly and supported
     with appropriate evidence and sound argument.

     The cognitive process discussed may be one of many such as:
      Memory – reconstructive memory, false memories, eye-witness testimony, flashbulb
       memory, memory distortions. Studies could include those by Bartlett, Loftus.
      Perception – top-down/bottom-up processing, visual illusions, values, context,
       cultural factors. Studies could include Wright et al. (2001) who studied race bias.
      Cognitive processes such as decision-making, thinking, and language could also be
       discussed.

     Whichever cognitive process is selected, the focus of the response should be on its
     reliability, by providing a range of arguments that is supported by empirical research
     and evidence.

     Where candidates discuss the reliability of more than one cognitive process, credit
     should be given only for the first example. It should be noted that a good discussion of
     reliability of a single cognitive process may refer to other cognitive processes; for
     example, a candidate may discuss attention as part of a discussion of memory or
     memory/schema theory as an influence on perception.
                                                 –9–               M11/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


6.   Discuss factors influencing conformity.                                                     [22 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered and balanced
     review of factors influencing conformity. More than one factor should be addressed.

     There are a number of factors influencing conformity that can be discussed, including:
      culture
      groupthink
      risky shift
      minority influence
      group size.

     Individual factors could include Crutchfield’s conforming personality theory (1956) that
     argues that personality factors influence whether or not an individual will conform.

     In a meta-analysis, Bond (2005) found differences in the effect of group size based on
     the type of social influence. Specific research on the influence of unanimity and
     accuracy, cohesion, confidence, gender, status, cultural norms, among others could
     be cited.

     Candidates may discuss a relatively small number of factors in greater depth or a greater
     number of factors in less depth, thereby demonstrating a breadth of understanding.
     Both approaches are equally acceptable.

     If factors influencing obedience, rather than conformity, are discussed, no marks should
     be awarded for this. Responses discussing Stanford Prison Study should not be
     awarded marks unless they clearly address the influence of societal roles on conformity.
