No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic
or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without written permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of
any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties,
including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study
services, preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping
services or teacher resource digital platforms and app developers, is not
permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license. More
information on how to request a license can be obtained from http://
www.ibo.org/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-
third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni
par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation
écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation
commerciale de tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit.
L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs,
des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou d’aide aux études,
des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des
gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs
d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations
sur la procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à
l’adresse http://www.ibo.org/fr/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni
por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin que medie la
autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines
comerciales de todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El
uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales,
profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o ayuda para el
estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan
recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del
IB. En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una
licencia: http://www.ibo.org/es/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.
M19/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




English A: language and literature – Higher level – Paper 1
Anglais A : langue et littérature – Niveau supérieur – Épreuve 1
Inglés A: lengua y literatura – Nivel superior – Prueba 1

Thursday 16 May 2019 (afternoon)
Jeudi 16 mai 2019 (après-midi)
Jueves 16 de mayo de 2019 (tarde)

2 hours / 2 heures / 2 horas


Instructions to candidates
yy Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
yy Question 1 consists of two texts for comparative analysis.
yy Question 2 consists of two texts for comparative analysis.
yy Choose either question 1 or question 2. Write one comparative textual analysis.
yy The maximum mark for this examination paper is [20 marks].

Instructions destinées aux candidats
yy N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
yy La question 1 comporte deux textes pour l’analyse comparative.
yy La question 2 comporte deux textes pour l’analyse comparative.
yy Choisissez soit la question 1, soit la question 2. Rédigez une analyse comparative de textes.
yy Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est de [20 points].

Instrucciones para los alumnos
yy No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
yy En la pregunta 1 hay dos textos para el análisis comparativo.
yy En la pregunta 2 hay dos textos para el análisis comparativo.
yy Elija la pregunta 1 o la pregunta 2. Escriba un análisis comparativo de los textos.
yy La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [20 puntos].




                                                                                                2219 – 2013
      9 pages/páginas                                       © International Baccalaureate Organization 2019
                                                                               –2–                                   M19/1/AYENG/H P1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Choose either question 1 or question 2.

1.        Analyse, compare and contrast the following two texts. Include comments on the similarities
          and diﬀerences between the texts and the signiﬁcance of context, audience, purpose and
          formal and stylistic features.

Text A




                  UK    world sport   football   opinion culture   business   lifestyle   fashion   environment    tech   travel       browse all sections
               home    sport   football   cricket   rugby union      tennis   golf   cycling   boxing   racing    rugby league


             Justin Gatlin gatecrashes1 Usain Bolt’s
             London 2017 farewell party in 100m
                Gatlin wins world championship gold for USA in 9.92 sec
                Christian Coleman takes silver and Bolt has to settle for bronze




             As a full moon rose over the London Stadium, athletics’ greatest pantomime2 villain, Justin
             Gatlin, sank his teeth into the carefully laid plans for Usain Bolt’s retirement party. And then,
             in the last desperate steps of a compelling world championships 100m final, brutally ripped
             them apart. The 35-year-old American, who was banned twice early in his career for doping
     5       offences, is not necessarily the champion the sport wants. But given its problems, it is one that
             many will feel it deserves.

             When it flashed on the scoreboard that Gatlin had taken gold in 9.92 sec – 0.02 clear of the
             young American Christian Coleman, who took silver, and Bolt who claimed bronze a further
             0.01 sec behind – most of the 56,000 crowd in the stadium went silent before they collectively
     10      booed in disgust. A couple of years ago, Gatlin described himself as “the Batman of the track –
             a vigilante”. But few in the London Stadium were celebrating the rising again of this self-styled
             Dark Knight.

             It was, staggeringly, the US sprinter’s first world title since 2005. It has been a topsy-turvy
             journey since then – which included a four-year doping ban in 2006, which he claimed came
     15      from a massage therapist rubbing testosterone cream on his legs without his knowledge.
             Everyone thought Gatlin, a 25-1 underdog going into the final, was too old and too slow.
                                                     –3–                  M19/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

          Instead the Jamaican’s main challenge was supposed to come from the 21-year-old Coleman,
          who gave up his dreams of playing American football to move to track and field. Yet somehow
          Gatlin found a way to roll back the years – however much it displeased the crowd.

    20    Bolt’s reaction to his defeat, his first in a major final since 2011 when he false-started in the
          100m in Daegu, showed the immense class of the man. Immediately he went to hug Gatlin,
          who bowed to him, to congratulate him on his performance. Then he also lavished praise on
          the crowd. “London, I really appreciate the support you gave me. I’m just sorry I couldn’t
          deliver as I wanted. It is one of those things.”

    25    And despite suffering the most painful defeat of the year, he turned the atmosphere from a
          morgue to a party by performing his traditional lap of honour and posing for selfies as if he
          had just claimed his 12th world title.

          Afterwards Bolt was left ruing3 his shocking start, which left him two metres behind Coleman
          and a stride behind Gatlin after only 30 metres – and ultimately with too much to do. The way
    30    he rises from the blocks has never been much better than adequate, even at his peak. But in
          London it has resembled a hospital patient getting out of bed following back surgery. “My start
          is killing me,” he admitted. “Normally I get better through the rounds but it didn’t. This is the
          first time in a major championship it hasn’t come together. And that’s what killed me. It was
          the reason I lost.”

    35    Two years ago, at the world championships in Beijing, Bolt and Gatlin had gone head to head
          in an epic showdown. With 20m to go the two men were locked together in a desperate tango,
          stretching and straining for the line. But then Gatlin over-reached, stumbled and, in a flash of
          50,000 camera-phones and a whoosh of cheers, Bolt had him – just.

          This time Gatlin kept his composure. After 70 metres it looked like Coleman, who made a
    40    superb start in lane five, was going to claim his first gold medal. But with the hot breath of Bolt
          on his shoulder, he began to tie up, allowing his compatriot in lane eight to pounce.

          No wonder the crowd were stunned. After all, Bolt’s record since he blitzed and charmed his
          way into the public’s consciousness at the Beijing Olympics, when he obliterated the 100m and
          200m world records, has been staggering.

    45    Before Saturday night’s semi-finals and final Bolt had run 142 races since the start of 2008 –
          and won all but seven of them.

          Yet throughout 2017 there had been the nagging feeling that he was uniquely vulnerable. He
          had missed three weeks of the season after his close friend Germaine Mason was killed in a
          road accident. His back had troubled him. His 100m times were no longer immortal. The door
    50    was open for someone to take him. The question was, could anyone step up?

           It was Bolt’s first defeat for more than four years, since being beaten by Gatlin in Rome in
           June 2013. With no other athlete breaking 10 seconds, the final looked set to be an immediate
           rematch between the sport’s greatest sprinter and showman and the young contender. Gatlin,
           however, had other ideas.
                                                           Text: Copyright Guardian News & Media Ltd 2019
                    Photo: World Athletics Championships, London 2017, footage courtesy of DENTSU INC.
                                                                                           All rights reserved.
1
    gatecrash: to arrive at a party uninvited
2
    pantomime: theatrical comedy for children based on a fairy story
3
    ruing: bitterly regretting

                                                                  Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                                    –4–                        M19/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Text B


                                    HOME   FOOTBALL   SPORT   TV & SHOWBIZ   NEWS   FABULOUS   MONEY   MOTORS   TRAVEL   TECH   DEA


         GAT-CRASH Usain Bolt sunk as drugs cheat Justin Gatlin
         ruins golden goodbye by storming to 100m gold
          American twice banned for doping shocks London 2017 as Bolt has to settle for bronze in his
          final individual race
         By Duncan Wright
         6th August 2017, 9:55 am


                                                                                                                         15
                                                                                                                         COMMENTS
         DRUGS cheat Justin Gatlin shocked the world as he claimed 100 metres gold to shatter
         Usain Bolt’s golden goodbye.
         Bolt was aiming to win his twelfth world title in the final individual race of his brilliant career.




                                           Removed for copyright reasons




         But to the dismay of the 60,000 fans packed into the London Stadium it was American doper Gatlin
         who stormed to victory.

         Gatlin, twice banned for doping, came from nowhere to dip on the line with a time of 9.92 seconds,
         beating US teammate Christian Coleman into second.

    5    Bolt paid the price for making another shocking start and no matter how hard he tried to get back
         on level terms he came up just short and had to settle for the bronze with a time of 9.95 secs.

         In extraordinary scenes a stunned London Stadium crowd then started booing the result, venting
         their fury at the way the cheat had been able to come back to the sport twice to inflict such a painful
         blow on old foe Bolt.

   10    As the American attempted to take a lap of honour, the fans left him in no doubt he shouldn’t as they
         vented their anger with jeers and abuse.
                                                 –5–                    M19/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

     Instead it was Bolt who took the acclaim of the crowd – bringing the curtain down on a stunning
     career which has seen him win eight Olympic titles and 11 world crowns.

     For the third race at this competition, Bolt made a woeful start – and unlike in previous years he was
15   unable to haul back his rivals.

     The Jamaican said: “My start killed me. Normally I get better through the rounds but it didn’t come
     together. The fact I didn’t get it is why I lost.

     “This was wonderful. I knew they would come out and support me. I’m just sad I couldn’t come out
     and win.

20   “The support has been outstanding. They have stood behind me and pushed me and I really
     appreciate that.”

     Gatlin disappeared from view after a brief run down the home straight, but when he returned for
     interviews he was greeted with chants of “cheat, cheat, cheat” while he was live on air.

     Gatlin said: “I tuned it out (the boos) through the rounds and stayed the course. I did what I had to
25   do.

     “The people who love me are here cheering for me and cheering at home. I thought of what I would
     do if I did win but I didn’t do any of that.

     “It is Bolt’s last race. I have had many victories and many defeats down the years. It is an amazing
     occasion.

30   “We are rivals on the track but in the warm-down area we joke and have a good time.

     “The first thing he did was congratulate me and say that I didn’t deserve the boos. He is an
     inspiration.”

                                                        The Sun / News Licensing; text with image:
      https://www.thesun.co.uk/sport/athletics/4179736/usain-bolt-justin-gatlin-world-championships/




                                                               Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                         –6–                M19/1/AYENG/H P1/ENG/TZ0/XX

2.        Analyse, compare and contrast the following two texts. Include comments on the similarities and
          diﬀerences between the texts and the signiﬁcance of context, audience, purpose and formal and
          stylistic features.

Text C




             Ladies Who Cab
             By Betsy Morais September 16, 2014




                                                  Removed for copyright reasons




             Every day, as many as six hundred thousand cab rides are taken in New York City. Stella
             Mateo, who is starting a women-only cab service, estimates that sixty per cent of those
             passengers are female. Women and cabs share in an enduring romance. In a taxi, a woman
             can feel independent and safe; she can shed the defensive shell the sidewalk requires and
      5      gaze freely out the window, or chat, or cry, or bark directions while the driver takes her where
             she wants to go. That’s the fantasy, anyway. Much depends on the person behind the wheel–
             probably a man, since ninety-five per cent of for-hire cabbies and ninety-nine per cent of
             yellow-taxi drivers are. He might impose a lecture, a detour, or, perhaps, a sense of alarm.
             Dinorah De Cruz, who is sixty-four and one of New York’s few female cabbies, has been
     10      driving a cab for around twenty years. Women, she thinks, possess qualities advantageous for
             the job: “When you have kids, you need to be patient,” she explained.

             On Monday, on the steps of City Hall, Mateo held a press conference introducing SheTaxi–
             known as SheRides in the city – through which female passengers, via an app, can request a
             pickup from one of the female drivers at Mateo’s affiliated bases. The drivers will not pick up
     15      men and they will all wear pink pashminas1.

             At the announcement, the Mateos were joined by some fifty recruits in white blouses, black
             pants, and the requisite pink scarves. De Cruz was among them. After the press conference
             dissolved, De Cruz left to retrieve her car. She wanted to take a taxi to the garage, on the
             Lower East Side, so she hailed one, jerking her body forward, thrusting her right arm into the
     20      air, and snapping her fingers. Nothing. Her eye moved across the street. “Hey, look at that
             taxi!” She ran toward it, through traffic, waved it down, slid in, and gave thorough directions to
             her destination.
                                                      –7–                    M19/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

          “This is a lady who knows New York!” the driver (a man) said.

          From the back seat, De Cruz told him that she was a cab driver, too. He’d never seen a
    25    woman driving a taxi in the city, he said. She explained the SheTaxi concept.

          “Is this kind of like that new thing? Hubert?” he asked.

          “Uber,” she corrected. “It’s not going to be like that because it’s going to be more feminine,
          more smelly. A nice smell. You know women. We all like our perfume.”

          “So it’s not going to smell like taxi?” he asked.

    30    “No, it’s not going to smell like taxi. It’s going to smell like your private car. Go to the right!”

          “We’re more peaceful to drive with,” De Cruz told me. She mimed a bumpy ride. “Not like that.
          That’s the main difference.” She paused to give the driver directions—“You make a left and
          then you make a left again like you’re coming back from the highway”—then she went on,
          “When you take cabs, you find yourself uncomfortable.”

    35    De Cruz said that she prefers female passengers. “A female is like me, a man is stronger than
          me,” she said. She turned to the driver again, “At the corner, you make a right on Delancy.
          Right here.”

          He laughed. “You’re a lady who knows what’s goin’ on!” he said.

          She had the cash ready before he tapped the meter. “Here, sir,” she said, handing it to him.
    40    “Thank you.”

          We got out at the garage, where De Cruz fetched her car, a charcoal-gray Acura S.U.V.
          SheTaxi was supposed to launch today, September 16th, but they need five hundred drivers
          to meet the expected demand, and they only have a hundred so far. Mateo has been hosting
          lunches for recruits. Until SheTaxi came along, De Cruz thought she’d retire. In her front
    45    seat, she had an apple, a black Yankees2 cap, two dozen pens, a water bottle, and a pair of
          comfortable shoes. A cross hung from the rearview mirror. And there was something else—
          a new car smell?

          “No, that’s my perfume,” she said. “I like Chanel3.”

                                              Betsy Morals, The New Yorker © Conde Nast; text with image:
                                                   https://www.newyorker.com/business/currency/ladies-cab




1
    pashmina: a scarf made from Kashmiri wool
2
    Yankees: a New York baseball team
3
    Chanel: a famous French fashion house that makes clothes and perfume




                                                                    Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                        –8–             M19/1/AYENG/H P1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Text D


                                                 FUND SOMEONE     START FUNDRAISING


          The Pink Rickshaw; Putting Women in the Driving Seat
          Fundraising campaign by Zar Aslam

                   Story                      Updates         Backers & Comments        Followers




         Lahore, PK | Charity & Nonproﬁts
         Links
         Description of Proposed Initiative:
         Our proposal is to launch an initiative in Pakistan, titled “The Pink Rickshaw; Putting Women in
         the Driving Seat”.
         The aim is to empower women by providing them with a means of transportation and a
         potential opportunity to generate revenue/income for their families and to give safe rides to
    5    other women.
         The visibility of “The Pink Rickshaw; Putting Women in the Driving Seat” will revolutionize how
         women are perceived in the public space in Pakistan, encouraging other women to follow suit
         as drivers.
         Thus, the initiative’s effect will perpetuate a virtuous cycle of women becoming self-reliant
  10     independent and productive members of the society.

         Background:
         Most middle and lower-middle class women in Pakistan depend on their brothers, fathers
         and husbands to get to work, school, hospital runs and for other errands. Public transport is
         often unavailable on many routes, but where it is available, women often face harassment
         waiting on street corners for rickshaws, at bus stops for buses and on board buses. With
  15     the ownership and ability to transport themselves and their kids, it will empower the women
         and open up the world and new possibilities to generate revenue for their families. They can
         become financially independent, providing safe rides for other women.
                                                   –9–                   M19/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

         Challenges:
         • There is no space for women as service providers (drivers) in the transportation industry.
           There is only 1 woman taxi driver in the entire country!
    20   • Women are harassed on the streets while waiting for transportation to work or school.
         • Many women do not enter the workforce or acquire education for lack of safe
           transportation.
         • Semi-professional women can only find jobs which are walking distance from their homes.
         • For lack of transportation, women are barred from personal growth activities, such as
    25     exercise and cultural, educational and extracurricular events because they are not deemed
           necessary by their male family members.
         • Low visibility of empowered women from the lower and middle classes.
         • Most women are at the mercy of their male family members’ whims in terms of getting
           transportation to and from work and educational institutions and for this reason are often
    30     late or absent from work/class.

         Opportunities:
         Women between the ages of 18–45 have immense potential but not enough tangible
         opportunities to tap into that potential. We believe that when a project like this is introduced to
         potential beneficiaries, there will be a huge demand from women who have the wherewithal
         to step up to this challenge. The effect of this very visible and tangible activity of empowered
    35   lower-to-middle class women driving Pink Rickshaws on the road will create a desire in other
         women from the same strata, where they will see that it is possible for them to also become
         independent, mobile & generate income. That it can be done!

         Often it is the power of visualization that drives and motivates people to achieve their goals
         and dreams. Initially this concept/project will create a big buzz and will probably be the talk
    40   of town, over time it will become more acceptable and commonplace to see more women out
         driving rickshaws and even perhaps scooters. This activity will “break the ice”.


                                                  DONATE NOW


                                                              Logo: with permission from GoGetFunding
     Text and photo: used with permission. ‘Pink Rickshaw Initiative - Putting Women in the Driving Seat’




