M19/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                   May / Mai / Mayo de 2019


                  English / Anglais / Inglés A:
                   language and literature /
                     langue et littérature /
                       lengua y literatura


                         Higher level
                       Niveau supérieur
                        Nivel superior

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1


5 pages/páginas
                                      –2–              M19/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic
or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without written permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of
any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties,
including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study
services, preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping
services or teacher resource digital platforms and app developers, is not
permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license. More
information on how to request a license can be obtained from http://
www.ibo.org/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-
third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni
par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation
écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation
commerciale de tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit.
L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs,
des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou d’aide aux études,
des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des
gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs
d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations
sur la procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à
l’adresse http://www.ibo.org/fr/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni
por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin que medie la
autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines
comerciales de todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El
uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales,
profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o ayuda para el
estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan
recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del
IB. En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una
licencia: http://www.ibo.org/es/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.
                                                –3–             M19/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


General marking instructions

 These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking. They are not
 offered as an exhaustive and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must
 rigidly adhere.
 Good ideas or angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate.
 Similarly, answers which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here should be
 rewarded appropriately.

 Of course, some of the points listed will appear in weaker papers, but are unlikely to be
 developed.


Instructions générales pour la notation

 Ces remarques sont de simples lignes directrices destinées à aider les examinateurs lors de la
 notation. Elles ne peuvent en aucun cas être considérées comme un ensemble fixe et exhaustif
 de réponses ou d’approches de notation auxquelles les réponses doivent strictement
 correspondre.
 Les idées ou angles valables qui n’ont pas été proposés ici doivent être reconnus et
 récompensés de manière appropriée.
 De même, les réponses qui ne comprennent pas toutes les idées ou approches mentionnées ici
 doivent être récompensées de manière appropriée.

 Naturellement, certains des points mentionnés apparaîtront dans les épreuves les moins bonnes
 mais n’y seront probablement pas développés.


Instrucciones generales para la corrección

 El objetivo de estas notas para los examinadores es servir de directrices para ayudar en la
 corrección. Por lo tanto, no deben considerarse una colección fija y exhaustiva de respuestas y
 enfoques por la que deban regirse estrictamente todas las respuestas.
 Los buenos enfoques e ideas que no se mencionen en las notas para la corrección deben recibir
 el reconocimiento y la valoración que les corresponda.
 De igual manera, las respuestas que no incluyan todas las ideas o los enfoques que se sugieren
 en las notas deben valorarse en su justa medida.

 Por supuesto, algunos de los puntos que se incluyen en las notas aparecerán en exámenes
 más flojos, pero probablemente no se habrán desarrollado.
                                                   –4–              M19/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.       Text A and text B

Both texts are sports news reports about Usain Bolt’s last 100m race in London in August 2017.
Both were published on the same day, one in a “quality” newspaper, The Guardian, the other in
The Sun, a “tabloid”.

An adequate to good analysis will:

     •    identify the texts as two different reports about the same event in two different newspapers
     •    state that the common purpose of the articles is to report on a sporting event, a world 100m
          race final
     •    identify the target audience as readers of the two UK papers and comment on possible
          differences between the two groups of readers
     •    make some comparative comments about the illustrations, particularly with regard to how
          each paper has chosen to visually represent the outcome of the race.
     •    comment on the differences of content emphasis, for example the focus in text B on Gatlin
          the “cheat” and what he said after the race and in text A on Bolt, the challenge he faced
          and how he acted in defeat
     •    make some comments on some of the following differences of style and diction between
          the two texts: the different headline styles, sentence and paragraph lengths, complexity of
          diction, use of reported speech, imagery, metaphor, similes, hyperbole, alliteration,
          onomatopoeia.

A good to excellent analysis may also:

     •    refer to the conventions of the sports report text type and comment on the extent to which
          each article gives the reader an account of the race, considering perhaps reasons why the
          actual race is not reported in much detail in either article
     •    analyse in more detail the content of both articles, pointing out ways in which the accounts
          of the race and editorial choices about content differ, for example noticing the strong
          emphasis on the crowd’s reaction and the interpretation of it in text B, the emphasis on
          Bolt’s preparation for the race and his reaction to the result in text A
     •    comment in more detail on the editorial choice of visual image to accompany the text (a
          video still of the finishing line with all the runners in text A and a photographic still of the
          victor and one other runner – a British one – in text B) and comment on the possible
          reasons for these differences
     •    analyse in more detail the stylistic differences between the texts relating these to the
          readership of the two papers; for example, notice particularly the literary and cultural
          allusions in text A and the emotive language and predominance of reported speech in text
          B
     •    note the differences in the links offered on the two websites to indicate potential readership
          (e.g. Business, Lifestyle vs. Showbiz, Motors)
     •    compare and contrast in particular how the two runners are described in the two reports.
                                               –5–              M19/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   Text C and text D

Text C is an online article from The New Yorker reporting on the creation of a new women-only taxi
cab company in New York while Text D, from a fundraising website, is an appeal for donations to
finance a similar service being created in Pakistan.

An adequate to good analysis will:

• identify both texts as being about a new taxi service for women
• make observations about differences between the text types and their purposes: an online
  article that informs and entertains and a webpage that informs and appeals for funds
• make some observations about the different audiences the texts are aimed at and the different
  contexts that the texts describe
• notice some differences between the structural elements of the two texts: for example, the use
  of narrative and reported dialogue in text C; sections with subheadings and bullet points, the
  use of repetition in text D
• make some observations and comment on the way the two texts visually present their points of
  view to the reader, contrasting perhaps the focus on the woman passenger in text C and the
  focus on women driving in text D
• make some comments about the differences in diction, tone and style between the two texts,
  giving examples, perhaps, of the factual, the anecdotal, the informal or colloquial in text C, the
  more formal diction, logical expository style and persuasion of text D
• observe and perhaps comment on the fact that while text C is about a service that has been set
  up and funded, text D’s focus is on raising funds in order to launch a new service for women.

A good to excellent analysis may also:

• recognize that as well as being about a new taxi service for women, both texts are more
  generally about the theme of the emancipation and empowerment of women
• make more detailed observations and comments about the different text types, their specific
  purposes and the audiences they are likely to appeal to
• comment on the dual focus on women as drivers and women as passengers in the two texts
• comment on the effects of the lengthy dialogue and the focus on details in C
• make more detailed comments about the nature of the two texts and their structure, observing
  perhaps that while text C is an example of interview reportage by an individual female journalist
  writing from her own personal point of view, text D aims to present in a succinct, logical and
  persuasive way the collective voice of an organization
• analyse in more detail the differences in diction, tone and style between the two texts, perhaps
  further contrasting the informal, entertaining style of text C and the militant and more formal
  prose style of text D and contrasting perhaps also the significance of the predominant use of the
  past tense in the first and the future in the second
• analyse in more detail how the two main images are used to complement the content of the two
  texts – but in very different ways – as well as how visual elements and layout are used to
  appeal to and influence the potential donor in text D
• comment on some of the similarities between the two initiatives, though more significantly on
  the contrasts between the situations and the contexts described in the two texts, such as the
  very different ways women and their social and cultural contexts are referred to in both texts
• comment on how men and their attitudes to women are represented in the two texts.
