No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic
or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without written permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of
any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties,
including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study
services, preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping
services or teacher resource digital platforms and app developers, is not
permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license. More
information on how to request a license can be obtained from http://
www.ibo.org/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-
third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni
par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation
écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation
commerciale de tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit.
L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs,
des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou d’aide aux études,
des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des
gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs
d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations
sur la procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à
l’adresse http://www.ibo.org/fr/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni
por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin que medie la
autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines
comerciales de todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El
uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales,
profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o ayuda para el
estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan
recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del
IB. En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una
licencia: http://www.ibo.org/es/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.
M19/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX




English A: literature – Standard level – Paper 1
Anglais A : littérature – Niveau moyen – Épreuve 1
Inglés A: literatura – Nivel medio – Prueba 1

Thursday 16 May 2019 (afternoon)
Jeudi 16 mai 2019 (après-midi)
Jueves 16 de mayo de 2019 (tarde)

1 hour 30 minutes / 1 heure 30 minutes / 1 hora 30 minutos


Instructions to candidates
 Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Write a guided literary analysis on one passage only. In your answer you must address both of
  the guiding questions provided.
 The maximum mark for this examination paper is [20 marks].

Instructions destinées aux candidats
 N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
 Rédigez une analyse littéraire dirigée d’un seul des passages. Les deux questions d’orientation
  fournies doivent être traitées dans votre réponse.
 Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est de [20 points].

Instrucciones para los alumnos
 No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
 Escriba un análisis literario guiado sobre un solo pasaje. Debe abordar las dos preguntas de
  orientación en su respuesta.
 La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [20 puntos].




                                                                                              2219 – 0067
     4 pages/páginas                                      © International Baccalaureate Organization 2019
                                                     –2–                  M19/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX

Write a guided literary analysis on one passage only. In your answer you must address both of the
guiding questions provided.

1.

          On Saba’s last day in Addis Ababa, she had just one unchecked to-do left on her long and
          varied list, which was to explore the neighborhood on her own, even though she’d promised
          her relatives that she would always take someone with her when she left the house. But she
          was twenty, a grownup, and wanted to know that on her first-ever trip to this city of her birth,
      5   she’d gained at least some degree of independence and assimilation. So it happened that Saba
          had no one to turn to when she got to the intersection around Meskel Square and realized she
          had seen only one functioning traffic light in all of Addis Ababa, population four million people
          by official counts, though no one there seemed to trust official counts, and everyone assumed
          it was much more crowded, certainly too crowded for just one traffic light. That single, solitary,
     10   lonely little traffic light in this mushrooming metropolis was near the old National Theater, not too
          far from the UN offices, the presidential palace, the former African Union—a known, respected
          part of the city located an unfortunate mile (a disobliging 1.6 kilometers) away from where Saba
          stood before a sea of cars, contemplating a difficult crossing.
                  Small, nimble vehicles, Fiats and VW Bugs, skimmed the periphery of the traffic, then
     15   seemed to be flung off centrifugally, almost gleefully, in some random direction. The center was
          a tangled cluster of cars slowly crawling along paths that might take an automobile backward,
          forward, sideward. In the middle of this jam was a sometimes visible traffic cop whose tense job
          seemed to be avoiding getting hit while keeping one hand slightly in the air. He was battered
          by curses, car horns, diesel exhaust as he nervously shifted his body weight and tried to avoid
     20   these assaults. Saba quickly saw she couldn’t rely on him to help her get across. She dipped
          her foot from the curb onto the street, and a car raced by, so she retreated. A man walked up
          next to her and said in English, “True story, I know a guy who crossed the street halfway and
          gave up.”
                  Saba looked at the stranger. “Pardon, what was that?”
     25           “He had been abroad for many years and came back expecting too much,” the man said,
          now speaking as slowly as Saba. “That sad man lives on the median at the ring road. I bring him
          books sometimes,” he said slyly, taking one out of his messenger bag and holding it up. “A little
          local wisdom: don’t start what you can’t finish.” Saba watched the stranger dangle his toes off
          the curb, lean forward, backward, forward and back, and then, as if becoming one with the flow
     30   of the city, lunge into the traffic and disappear from her sight until he reemerged on the opposite
          sidewalk. “Miraculous,” Saba said to herself as he turned, pointed at her, then held up the book
          again. Saba tried to follow his lead and set her body to the rhythm of the cars, swaying forward
          and back, but couldn’t find the beat.
                  As she was running through her options, a line of idling taxis became suddenly visible
     35   when a city bus turned the corner. She realized that, as impractical as it seemed, she could
          hail a cab to get her across the busy street. The trip took ten minutes; the fare cost 15 USD,
          for she was unable to negotiate a better rate, though at least she’d found a way to the other
          side. She turned back to see the taxi driver leaning out the window talking to a few people,
          gesturing at her, laughing, and she knew just how badly she’d fumbled yet another attempt to
     40   fit in. All month Saba had failed almost every test she’d faced, and though she’d seized one last
          chance to see if this trip had changed her, had taught her at least a little of how to live in this
          culture, she’d only ended up proving her relatives right: she wasn’t even equipped to go for a
          walk on her own. What she thought would be a romantic, monumental reunion with her home
          country had turned out to be a fiasco; she didn’t belong here.

                                     “The Suitcase” by Meron Hadero. Copyright © 2015 by Meron Hadero,
                                                            used by permission of The Wylie Agency LLC
                                           –3–                 M19/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX


(a)   How do the events in this passage contribute to your understanding of Saba’s character?

(b)   In what ways does the author use contrast to develop the passage?




                                                       Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                 –4–                  M19/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX

2.

                                          Little Boy Crying

                         Your mouth contorting in brief spite and
                         Hurt, your laughter metamorphosed into howls,
                         Your frame so recently relaxed now tight
                         With three-year-old frustration, your bright eyes
                     5   Swimming tears, splashing your bare feet,
                         You stand there angling for a moment’s hint
                         Of guilt or sorrow for the quick slap struck.

                         The ogre towers above you, that grim giant,
                         Empty of feeling, a colossal cruel,
                    10   Soon victim of the tale’s conclusion, dead
                         At last. You hate him, you imagine
                         Chopping clean the tree he’s scrambling down
                         Or plotting deeper pits to trap him in.

                         You cannot understand, not yet,
                    15   The hurt your easy tears can scald him with,
                         Nor guess the wavering hidden behind that mask.
                         This fierce man longs to lift you, curb your sadness
                         With piggy-back or bull-fight, anything,
                         But dare not ruin the lessons you should learn.

                    20   You must not make a plaything of the rain.

                                   Mervyn Morris, I been there, sort of: New & Selected Poems (2006),
                                            reproduced with permission from Carcanet Press Limited


     (a)   What is revealed about the adult/child perspectives in the poem?

     (b)   By what means does the poet’s descriptive language enhance our understanding of
           the poem?
