No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic
or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without written permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of
any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties,
including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study
services, preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping
services or teacher resource digital platforms and app developers, is not
permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license. More
information on how to request a license can be obtained from http://
www.ibo.org/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-
third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni
par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation
écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation
commerciale de tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit.
L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs,
des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou d’aide aux études,
des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des
gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs
d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations
sur la procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à
l’adresse http://www.ibo.org/fr/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni
por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin que medie la
autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines
comerciales de todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El
uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales,
profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o ayuda para el
estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan
recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del
IB. En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una
licencia: http://www.ibo.org/es/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.
M19/1/TEXTP/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




Literature and performance
Standard level
Paper 1 – prose and performance


Thursday 16 May 2019 (afternoon)


1 hour 30 minutes


Instructions to candidates

yy Do not turn over this examination paper until instructed to do so.
yy Answer one question.
yy A copy of the novel you have studied may be brought into the examination.
yy The copy of the novel may have annotations in the margins, such as word meanings.
yy The annotations in the margins may not take the form of extended writing.
yy The maximum mark for this examination paper is [20 marks].




                                                                                            2219 – 0301
     2 pages                                            © International Baccalaureate Organization 2019
                                                –2–                  M19/1/TEXTP/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Answer one question. Refer closely to the novel you have selected to study, a copy of which may be
brought into the examination.

1.   Encounters between characters who hold differing perspectives or values are often used by writers
     to generate interest or tension. Using such a scene from a novel you have chosen to study, explain
     how you would stage it so as to convey the tone and impact of such encounters.


2.   Without occasional moments of surprise, the unfolding of a novel can lack reader interest. From a
     novel you have chosen to study, select a passage and outline a dramatic proposal that offers such
     a moment, contextualizing it in a way that will convey to an audience how and to what purpose the
     surprise factor is included.


3.   From a novel you have chosen to study, select a passage that reveals a crucial moment of
     understanding for one or more characters. Offer a dramatic proposal that makes clear the
     occurrence of that moment and its effect on the speaker or other players in the scene.
