M19/1/TEXTP/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Marking notes


                                 May 2018


                  Literature and performance


                               Standard level


                                  Paper 2




6 pages/páginas
                                      –2–               M19/1/TEXTP/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic
or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without written permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of
any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties,
including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study
services, preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping
services or teacher resource digital platforms and app developers, is not
permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license. More
information on how to request a license can be obtained from http://
www.ibo.org/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-
third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni
par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation
écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation
commerciale de tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit.
L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs,
des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou d’aide aux études,
des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des
gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs
d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations
sur la procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à
l’adresse http://www.ibo.org/fr/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni
por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin que medie la
autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines
comerciales de todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El
uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales,
profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o ayuda para el
estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan
recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del
IB. En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una
licencia: http://www.ibo.org/es/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.
                                                 –3–              M19/1/TEXTP/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                        Assessment criteria

These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking and as a supplement
to the published external assessment criteria for written paper 2. They are not offered as an
exhaustive and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must rigidly adhere.
Good ideas or angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate.
Similarly, answers which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here should not be
so heavily penalized as to distort appreciation of individuality.

With reference to criterion C, the better answers will contain examples that show an adequate
sense of stylistic features with some awareness of their effects, using critical analysis and pertinent
detail.

The best answers will show a strong sense of the stylistic and comparable features of the works,
as well as the effects of these features.

Of course, some of the points listed below will appear in weaker papers but are unlikely to
be developed.

These apply to all answers below.

A maximum of [5 marks] may be awarded for each of the five criteria.

Criteria A and B

The danger of rewarding or penalizing the use of illustration/references/quotations twice in both
these categories should be avoided.

Criterion B

“Personal response” and “independence of thought” appear as the levels of the descriptors
increase. What is sought is an engaged and individual treatment of the chosen topic. Engaged and
individual essays will usually make themselves clear by showing insight into the implications of the
question and the quality and interest of the details cited in support.

The first-person singular does not automatically constitute a personal response and conversely an
impersonal academic style does not necessarily indicate a lack of personal response.

Criterion C

It is expected that every question set will provide candidates with ample opportunities to
demonstrate their awareness of the demands of this criterion. However, where a question does not
explicitly offer such opportunities, examiners should interpret criterion C broadly, to ensure that
candidates are not unfairly disadvantaged. In such cases it would be sufficient for candidates
to show, as appropriate to the question, an awareness of how elements such as plot, character,
setting, structure, voice, etc, are used by writers to meet their purposes. No matter how the
question is phrased, candidates must also address related matters of style and technique.

“Awareness” and “appreciation” of literary features are the key elements under this criterion.
The mere labelling, without appreciation, of literary features will not score the highest marks.
On the other hand, the candidate who is attentive to literary features and deals with them in a
meaningful way, but who does not consistently use the vocabulary of literary criticism, can still be
awarded the higher achievement levels.

Reminder: the term “literary features” is broad and includes elements as basic as plot, character
etc, attention to which is valid and must be rewarded as appropriate.
                                                  –4–              M19/1/TEXTP/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion D

Any form of structuring to the essay will be rewarded if it is effective and appropriate.
Different conventions are in operation and therefore all approaches are acceptable and will be
judged on the basis of their effectiveness. Examiners should remember that structure does not
exist by itself, but any structure must be measured by appropriate reference to the terms of the
question and by its capacity to integrate these towards the development of an organized and
coherent essay.

Reminder: in this criterion, supporting examples must be evaluated in terms of how fluently they
are incorporated/integrated to shape/advance the argument, not in terms of their appropriateness
or accuracy.

Criterion E

If you have reservations about awarding a 4, you should ensure that these are well founded before
awarding a 3. The broadness of achievement in level three sometimes makes examiners reluctant
to award 4.

Judgment needs to be used when dealing with lapses in grammar, spelling and punctuation;
therefore, do not unduly penalize.

Mechanical accuracy is only part of this criterion. Ensure that all the other elements are
considered.

Examiners should be careful to avoid being prejudiced in their application of this criterion by
achievement levels in other criteria. It is possible to score highly on this criterion even if candidates
have scored in the lower levels on other criteria, and vice versa.
                                               –5–             M19/1/TEXTP/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.   An adequate to good answer will:
      • identify with some precision references to time past included by the poets
      • provide details of the events or memories addressed in the poems
      • argue for the particular attitude to the materials that the poems deliver
      • show how the poets have presented their recollections in the poems through their
         use of word choice, and other poetic techniques such as structure, imagery, sound
         effects and the like.

     A very good to excellent answer may also:
      • choose poems that effectively compare different approaches or personal experience
         as well as wider concerns, or probe more deeply one approach
      • distinguish with greater sophistication the varying attitudes the chosen poets evince
         about the past
      • structure the essay in such a way that each poet’s particular style is foregrounded
      • provide a persuasive analysis of the literary techniques that offers not only the
         identification of such features but addresses their effects.

2.   An adequate to good answer will:
      • select poems in which the endings either offer resolutions/answers or withhold them,
         i.e., finish in an ambiguous or inconclusive way consider
      • describe the endings in relation to either or both possibilities
      • explain the way the poet has built up the material of the poem to result in such
         endings
      • explore in some detail the way the poets have delivered their materials through the
         use of conventional literary techniques.

     A very good to excellent answer may also:
      • provide a more precise argument about the nature of the poems’ endings
      • show persuasively how the materials of the poem lead cohesively to the endings or
         how they manage a reversal of expectations
      • provide compelling detail about techniques that affirm the positions the candidate
         has taken, going on to assess the effect of these features.

3.   An adequate to good answer will:
      • identify poems that contain notable sound effects created by meter, rhyme,
         anaphora, alliteration, consonance or other techniques
      • describe in some detail where and how these features are operative
      • connect the way sound enhances meaning or adds complexity
      • show how interest or stimulation can be possibly experienced by the reader, owing
         to such effects.

     A very good to excellent answer may also:
      • focus attention on a few significant sound effects, comparing their usage in poems
         by the different poets
      • provide close and convincing analysis of how sound effects operate together to
         produce their effects
      • consider the question of silent reading of poems: what effect can sound choices
         produce in this kind of reading?
      • provide a more sophisticated analysis of the relation of sound to meaning.
                                                  –6–               M19/1/TEXTP/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   An adequate to good answer will:
      • select poems where the candidate’s definition or classification of violence can be
         seen to obtain in a valid way
      • explore the content of the poem as it relates to violence
      • explain the role of tone in relation to content in the poems
      • show how other chosen literary techniques work to convey the poet’s treatment of
         violence.

     A very good to excellent answer may also:
      • parse more carefully the nature and meaning of violence as it appears in the chosen
         poems
      • show more precisely how tone carries significant weight in conveying an attitude to
         violence
      • examine more subtle elements of the poem that contribute to complexity about
         matters related to violence
      • provide close exploration of both well-selected literary techniques in the poems and
         the effects they produce.

5.   An adequate to good answer will:
      • write either about paradox in its strictest definition or explore ‘internal contradictions’
         of various kinds; the question accommodates both of these approaches
      • describe effectively the intellectual, emotional or verbal contradictions that appear in
         poems or form the basis for the poem itself
      • attempt to show how the contradictions can appear in different forms in the chosen
         poems
      • assess the way literary techniques work to present or support such paradoxes and
         contradictions.

     A very good to excellent answer may also:
      • display some acuity about the nature and use of paradox or contradiction in poetry
         or address the prompt of Heaney
      • choose highly apt examples of paradox as opposed to simpler contradictions
      • identify places in poems where the poet has prepared for, led up to or developed
         ideas with the use of a pithy or central paradox
      • show how other stylistic features of the poem work to enhance the power of
         paradox.

6.   An adequate to good answer will:
      • identify elements of the natural world that appear in the poems’ particular settings
      • identify both the depiction of the landscape features and the contemplations
         included in the poems
      • discuss the connection of these natural elements to the musings of the poet
      • explore the ways the poet has used the literary tools to connect natural elements to
         such things as memories, regrets or insights in an effective way.

     A very good to excellent answer may also:
      • focus judiciously on elements that may be compared or contrasted in the chosen
         poems
      • exhibit some acuity about the shaping and delivery of both natural features and
         emotions to create impact
      • probe more deeply some techniques that have served to convey the external and
         internal perceptions of the poet.
