8823 – XXXX




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

    November / Novembre / Noviembre de
                   2023


                  English / Anglais / Inglés B


                        Standard level
                        Niveau moyen
                         Nivel Medio


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1



9 pages/páginas
                                            –2–                                      8823 – XXXX




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                –3–                                     8823 – XXXX

Criterion A: Language

How successfully does the candidate command written language?
• To what extent is the vocabulary appropriate and varied?
• To what extent are the grammatical structures varied?
• To what extent does the accuracy of the language contribute to effective communication?

  Marks                                         Level descriptor
     0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
             Command of the language is limited.
             Vocabulary is sometimes appropriate to the task.
    1–3
             Basic grammatical structures are used.
             Language contains errors in basic structures. Errors interfere with communication.
             Command of the language is partially effective.
             Vocabulary is appropriate to the task.
             Some basic grammatical structures are used, with some attempts to use more
    4–6
             complex structures.
             Language is mostly accurate for basic structures, but errors occur in more complex
             structures. Errors at times interfere with communication.
             Command of the language is effective and mostly accurate.
             Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied.
    7–9      A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used.
             Language is mostly accurate. Occasional errors in basic and in complex grammatical
             structures do not interfere with communication.
             Command of the language is mostly accurate and very effective.
             Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied, including the use of idiomatic
             expressions.
  10–12
             A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used effectively.
             Language is mostly accurate. Minor errors in more complex grammatical structures
             do not interfere with communication.


Language
Not all errors have the same importance, and examiners should bear this in mind. Some errors
affect the communication of meaning significantly, and others do not. Also, some errors indicate a
fundamental lack of command of the language, while others may simply indicate a moment of
forgetfulness.

SLIPS – mistakes at all levels of difficulty, but erratic and occasional – eg the candidate normally
forms past tenses well, but occasionally forgets “-ed”.

FLAWS – errors occur more regularly, particularly in certain structures – eg past tenses are formed
correctly quite often, but are not really reliable, and there may be basic confusions (eg past simple
versus present perfect).

GAPS – some structures are rarely correct, or simply don’t appear – eg the past tenses are
needed, but do not appear.
                                                 –4–                                      8823 – XXXX

Criterion B: Message
To what extent does the candidate fulfil the task?
  • How relevant are the ideas to the task?
  • To what extent are ideas developed?
  • To what extent do the clarity and organization of ideas contribute to the successful delivery of
    the message?

The “descriptor unpacked” explain the assessment criteria in greater detail. Where a candidate’s
response does not correspond exactly to a single mark band, the statements in bold should be
used as a guide for the ‘best fit’ approach.

 Marks            Level descriptor                              Descriptor unpacked
   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
         The task is partially fulfilled.    The link between the response and task tends to
                                                 be unclear; the reader has difficulty understanding
         Few ideas are relevant to the task.     the message.
         Ideas are stated, but with no           The response touches upon some aspects of the task
         development.                            but there is also much unrelated information.
  1–3    Ideas are not clearly presented and     The response addresses the task in a simple manner,
         do not follow a logical structure,      and supporting details and/or examples barely feature,
         making the message difficult to         if at all.
         determine.                              The ideas do not link well together; inadequate or
                                                 inappropriate use of cohesive devices confuse the
                                                 message.
         The task is generally fulfilled.        The link between the response and the task is
                                                 mostly detectable; the reader’s general
         Some ideas are relevant to the          understanding of the message is not impeded,
         task.                                   despite some ambiguity.
         Ideas are outlined, but are not fully   The response covers some aspects of the task, or
         developed.                              touches upon all aspects but superficially.
  4–6
         Ideas are generally clearly             The response includes some supporting details and
         presented and the response is           examples.
         generally structured in a logical       The ideas are organized in a logical way; some
         manner, leading to a mostly             cohesive devices are used appropriately to aid the
         successful delivery of the              delivery of the message, although there may be areas
         message.                                of confusion at times.

         The task is fulfilled.                  The link between the response and the task is
                                                 clear; the reader has a good understanding of the
         Most ideas are relevant to the task.    message conveyed.
         Ideas are developed well, with          The response covers all aspects of the task, despite
         some detail and examples.               losing focus at times.
  7–9
         Ideas are clearly presented and the     The response uses supporting details and examples to
         response is structured in a logical     clarify the message.
         manner, supporting the delivery of      The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive
         the message.                            devices are used appropriately to deliver the message
                                                 with little or no ambiguity.
         The task is fulfilled effectively.      The link between the response and the task is
                                                 precise and consistently evident; the reader has a
         Ideas are relevant to the task.         clear understanding of the message conveyed.
 10–12
         Ideas are fully developed, providing The response covers all aspects of the task fully, and
         details and relevant examples.       maintains focus throughout.
                                                    –5–                                      8823 – XXXX

             Ideas are clearly presented and the    The response uses well-chosen supporting details and
             response is structured in a logical    examples to illustrate and explain ideas persuasively.
             and coherent manner that               The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive
             supports the delivery of the           devices are used appropriately to deliver the message
             message.                               with clarity and ease.


Note: When marking candidate responses, keep in mind that neither the factual accuracy of the
information presented, nor the validity of the candidates’ personal opinions, are being assessed.
Therefore, scripts that are factually inaccurate should not be marked down, provided the ideas
presented have coherence and are sufficiently developed.



Criterion C: Conceptual understanding

To what extent does the candidate demonstrate conceptual understanding?
   •       To what extent is the choice of text type appropriate to the task?
   •       To what extent are register and tone appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of
           the task?
   •       To what extent does the response incorporate the conventions of the chosen text type?

  Marks                                            Level descriptor
       0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
              Conceptual understanding is limited.
              The choice of text type is generally inappropriate to the context, purpose or audience.
   1–2        The register and tone are inappropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response incorporates limited recognizable conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is mostly demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is generally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   3–4        The register and tone, while occasionally appropriate to the context, purpose and
              audience of the task, fluctuate throughout the response.
              The response incorporates some conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is fully demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   5–6        The register and tone are appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response fully incorporates the conventions of the chosen text type.



Note: Examiners must balance all three elements in criterion C (choice of text type, appropriateness
of tone and register, and use of text type conventions) to arrive at the final mark.
                                                 –6–                                      8823 – XXXX

Question specific guidance (Criterion B and C)

Task 1

You just graduated from school. You and your friends marked this occasion with a special
celebration that was very meaningful to you. You want to record your thoughts about it. Write a
text in which you describe the celebration and consider why it meant so much to you.

Blog                              Diary                         Speech

Criterion B:
   •   The two required aspects of the task are (i) “describe the celebration” and (ii) “consider why
       it meant so much to you”.
   •   Equal weight does not have to be given to those two elements, but both should be given
       some developed attention. If any aspect is ignored or given only cursory attention (e.g. very
       brief and general or in a single sentence), no more than the 4-6 band should be awarded
       since the task has only been “generally fulfilled” at best.
   •   The celebration in (i) may take any form, provided it involves their friends. This may be a
       large group of friends, or just a few.
   •   Description of the celebration may include preparations, responsibilities, etc. This should be
       considered relevant if the focus remains on the ‘celebration’ itself rather than the graduation.
   •   Discussion of (ii) should focus principally on the significance of the celebration to the writer,
       rather than on the act of graduating.

Criterion C:
Choice of text type:
                           Text type         Rationale
Appropriate                Diary             The text type is appropriate for the purpose of
                                             expressing one’s thoughts about an event or
                                             experience that is personal to the writer.
Generally appropriate      Blog              The text type is suitable for the purpose of
                                             expressing one’s thoughts, but it has a wider
                                             audience than oneself. The choice may be
                                             considered “appropriate” if the text is reflective, but
                                             also written in a way that would be engaging for
                                             other readers.
Generally inappropriate    Speech            The text type is typically used to communicate with a
                                             large, specified audience, on a topic that would be of
                                             interest to them. It is not usually used for personal
                                             reflection.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the stated task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”,
and the “generally inappropriate” text type can be considered “generally appropriate”.

Register and tone:
• informal register
• personal and reflective tone

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                   –7–                                       8823 – XXXX

Task 2

Your local government is planning to build a new road across a park close to your home. You
strongly disagree with this plan. Write a text for the local government in which you explain why the
park is important to your community and describe some of the negative effects the planned road
might have.

Diary                               Email                           Proposal

Criterion B:
   •    The two required aspects of the task are (i) “explain why the park is so important to your
        community” and (ii) “describe some of the negative effects the planned road might have”.
   •    Equal weight does not have to be given to those two elements, but both should be given
        some developed attention. If any aspect is ignored or given only cursory attention (e.g. very
        brief and general or in a single sentence), no more than the 4-6 band should be awarded
        since the task has only been “generally fulfilled” at best.
   •    Discussion of (i) may include examples taken from the writer’s personal experience, but it
        should focus principally on the importance of the park to the community. “the community”
        may be interpreted as those living close to the park/the writer, or as people living in the
        town/city in general.
   •    Ideas could be about (1) the park being completely replaced with the road or (2) the road is
        constructed across the park. Both should be accepted.
   •    It is expected that the “effects” in (ii) be plural i.e. there should be 2 or more distinguishable
        effects. If, however, there is one effect only that is well developed, this is permissible. If
        there is really only one effect, and this is very general and superficial, the response should
        be marked down.
   •    For (ii) any negative effects should be accepted, e.g. effects on the people, on the
        environment, on the town’s reputation etc.

Criterion C:
Choice of text type:
                            Text type          Rationale
Appropriate                 Email              The text type is appropriate for the purpose of
                                               conveying a point of view to a specified
                                               audience/entity (the local government).
Generally appropriate       Proposal           The text type is suitable for conveying a point of view
                                               to a decision maker, but it would usually include
                                               alternative suggestions. The choice may be
                                               considered “appropriate” if the proposal is for
                                               abandoning the plans, and it addresses the local
                                               government.
Generally inappropriate     Diary              The text type is primarily used for personal reflection.
                                               It is not usually used to communicate with an
                                               external audience.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the stated task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”,
and the “generally inappropriate” text type can be considered “generally appropriate”.

Register and tone:
• formal register
• persuasive but respectful tone

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                  –8–                                       8823 – XXXX

Task 3

The local sports centre, where you volunteer, has started a new and fun fitness class. The
manager of the sports centre has asked you to inform the public about it. Write a text to explain
what is new and fun about this fitness class and what benefits people can expect.

Leaflet                             Proposal                                Speech

Criterion B:
   •   The two required aspects of the task are (i) “explain what is new and fun about this fitness
       class” and (ii) “(explain) what benefits people can expect”.
   •   Equal weight does not have to be given to those two elements, but both should be given
       some developed attention. If any aspect is ignored or given only cursory attention (e.g. very
       brief and general or in a single sentence), no more than the 4-6 band should be awarded
       since the task has only been “generally fulfilled” at best.
   •   Discussion of (i) may include practical information, such as activities, times and location, but
       it should focus principally on what makes the class new and fun. Any description justified as
       ‘new’ or ‘fun’ should be accepted; it is not necessary for this to be factually accurate.
   •   Any discussion of ‘benefits’ should be accepted in (ii), e.g. health, fitness, social,
       entertainment etc.
   •   It is expected that the “benefits” in (ii) be plural i.e. there should be 2 or more distinguishable
       benefits. If, however, there is one benefit only that is well developed, this is permissible. If
       there is really only one benefit, and this is very general and superficial, the response should
       be marked down.
   •   “the fitness class” in some responses could be referred to as “programme” or a number of
       classes. This is permissible.

Criterion C:
Choice of text type:
                           Text type           Rationale
Appropriate                Leaflet             The text type is suitable for promoting an event or a
                                               new service, and it may be distributed to members of
                                               the public.
Generally appropriate      Speech              While the text type is suitable for informing a large
                                               group of audience, the size of audience is likely to be
                                               more limiting than the flyer, and it is not typically
                                               used for promoting an event or new service. The
                                               choice may be considered “appropriate" if the
                                               response makes it clear (1) it is addressing members
                                               of the public and (2) shows clear understanding of
                                               the context (writer is a volunteer asked to inform the
                                               public, etc).
Generally inappropriate    Proposal            The text type is typically used to convince a specific
                                               person/entity of an idea. It is not usually used to
                                               promote something that has already been done.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the stated task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”,
and the “generally inappropriate” text type can considered “generally appropriate”.

Register and tone:
• semi-formal register
• enthusiastic and encouraging tone

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                               –9–                                      8823 – XXXX


Appendix: Text type conventions (Criterion C)

The most common and recognisable conventions of the text types are given below:

Blog
  • first person statement and/or narration
  • awareness of the reader, e.g. direct address, a lively and interesting style etc.
  • closing statement, e.g. invitation to comment, a conclusion drawn etc.

Diary
  • first person narration
  • closing statement to round off the entry
  • no self-evident explanatory phrases (e.g. “I saw Alicia, my best friend”)

Email
 • clear sense of address to a specific person
 • statement of Subject in the heading
 • appropriate opening and closing salutations

Leaflet
  • engaging title
  • ideas identified by format features, e.g. sub-headings, bullet points, numbering etc
  • practical information, e.g. “contact us”, or a phone number and/or an email address.

   N.B.: Graphic design as such is not marked

Proposal
  • title summarising the overall subject
  • clearly set-out format, e.g. headings, short clear paragraphs, bullets, numbering, insetting
    etc.
  • style aimed to persuade a specified audience

Speech
 • catch the audience’s attention at the beginning, and leave a clear impression at the end
 • address the audience and keep contact with them throughout, e.g. use of “we” and “you” etc.
 • elements of speech rhetoric e.g. rhetorical questions, repetition etc.
