8823 – 2233M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

    November / Novembre / Noviembre de
                   2023

                   English / Anglais / Inglés B


                          Higher level
                        Niveau supérieur
                         Nivel Superior


                   Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




10 pages/páginas
                                            –2–                                     8823 – 2233M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                –3–                                     8823 – 2233M

Criterion A: Language

How successfully does the candidate command written language?
• To what extent is the vocabulary appropriate and varied?
• To what extent are the grammatical structures varied?
• To what extent does the accuracy of the language contribute to effective communication?

  Marks                                         Level descriptor
     0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
             Command of the language is limited.
             Vocabulary is sometimes appropriate to the task.
    1–3      Some basic grammatical structures are used, with some attempts to use more
             complex structures.
             Language contains errors in both basic and more complex structures. Errors interfere
             with communication.
             Command of the language is partially effective.
             Vocabulary is generally appropriate to the task and varied.
    4–6      A variety of basic and some more complex grammatical structures is used.
             Language is mostly accurate for basic structures, but errors occur in more complex
             structures. Errors at times interfere with communication.
             Command of the language is effective and mostly accurate.
             Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied, including the use of idiomatic
             expressions.
    7–9
             A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used effectively.
             Language is mostly accurate. Occasional errors in basic and in complex grammatical
             structures do not interfere with communication.
             Command of the language is mostly accurate and very effective.
             Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and nuanced and varied in a manner that
             enhances the message, including the purposeful use of idiomatic expressions.
  10–12      A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used selectively in
             order to enhance communication.
             Language is mostly accurate. Minor errors in more complex grammatical structures
             do not interfere with communication.

Language
Not all errors have the same importance, and examiners should bear this in mind. Some errors
affect the communication of meaning significantly, and others do not. Also, some errors indicate a
fundamental lack of command of the language, while others may simply indicate a moment of
forgetfulness.

SLIPS – mistakes at all levels of difficulty, but erratic and occasional – eg the candidate normally
forms past tenses well, but occasionally forgets “-ed”.

FLAWS – errors occur more regularly, particularly in certain structures – eg past tenses are formed
correctly quite often, but are not really reliable, and there may be basic confusions (eg past simple
versus present perfect).

GAPS – some structures are rarely correct, or simply don’t appear – eg the past tenses are
needed, but do not appear.
                                               –4–                                        8823 – 2233M

Criterion B: Message
To what extent does the candidate fulfil the task?
  • How relevant are the ideas to the task?
  • To what extent are ideas developed?
  • To what extent do the clarity and organization of ideas contribute to the successful delivery of
    the message?

The “descriptor unpacked” explain the assessment criteria in greater detail. Where a candidate’s
response does not correspond exactly to a single mark band, the statements in bold should be
used as a guide for the ‘best fit’ approach.

 Marks           Level descriptor                             Descriptor unpacked
   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
         The task is partially fulfilled. The link between the response and task tends to be
                                             unclear; the reader has difficulty understanding the
         Few ideas are relevant to the       message.
         task.
                                             The response touches upon some aspects of the task but
         Ideas are stated, but with no       there is also much unrelated information.
  1–3    development.
                                             The response addresses the t ask in a simple manner,
         Ideas are not clearly presented     and supporting details and/or examples barely feature, if
         and do not follow a logical         at all.
         structure, making the message       The ideas do not link well together; inadequate or
         difficult to determine.             inappropriate use of cohesive devices confuse the
                                             message.
         The task is generally fulfilled.    The link between the response and the task is mostly
                                             detectable; the reader’s general understanding of the
         Some ideas are relevant to the      message is not impeded, despite some ambiguity.
         task.
                                             The response covers some aspects of the task, or
         Ideas are outlined, but are not     touches upon all aspects but superficially.
         fully developed.
  4–6                                        The response includes some supporting details and
         Ideas are generally clearly         examples.
         presented and the response is       The ideas are organized in a logical way; some cohesive
         generally structured in a logical   devices are used appropriately to aid the delivery of the
         manner, leading to a mostly         message, although there may be areas of confusion at
         successful delivery of the          times.
         message.
         The task is fulfilled.              The link between the response and the task is clear;
                                             the reader has a good understanding of the message
         Most ideas are relevant to the      conveyed.
         task.
                                             The response covers all aspects of the task, despite
         Ideas are developed well, with      losing focus at times.
  7–9    some detail and examples.
                                             The response uses supporting details and examples to
         Ideas are clearly presented and     clarify the message.
         the response is structured in a     The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive devices
         logical manner, supporting the      are used appropriately to deliver the message with little or
         delivery of the message.            no ambiguity.
         The task is fulfilled effectively. The link between the response and the task is precise
                                             and consistently evident; the reader has a clear
         Ideas are relevant to the task.     understanding of the message conveyed.
 10–12
         Ideas are fully developed,          The response covers all aspects of the task fully, and
         providing details and relevant      maintains focus throughout.
         examples.
                                                   –5–                                       8823 – 2233M

             Ideas are clearly presented and     The response uses well-chosen supporting details and
             the response is structured in a     examples to illustrate and explain ideas persuasively.
             logical and coherent manner         The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive devices
             that supports the delivery of the   are used appropriately to deliver the message with clarity
             message.                            and ease.


Note: When marking candidate responses, keep in mind that neither the factual accuracy of the
information presented, nor the validity of the candidates’ personal opinions, are being assessed.
Therefore, scripts that are factually inaccurate should not be marked down, provided the ideas
presented have coherence and are sufficiently developed.



Criterion C: Conceptual understanding

To what extent does the candidate demonstrate conceptual understanding?
   •       To what extent is the choice of text type appropriate to the task?
   •       To what extent are register and tone appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
           task?
   •       To what extent does the response incorporate the conventions of the chosen text type?

  Marks                                           Level descriptor
       0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
              Conceptual understanding is limited.
              The choice of text type is generally inappropriate to the context, purpose or audience.
   1–2        The register and tone are inappropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response incorporates limited recognizable conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is mostly demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is generally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   3–4        The register and tone, while occasionally appropriate to the context, purpose and
              audience of the task, fluctuate throughout the response.
              The response incorporates some conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is fully demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   5–6        The register and tone are appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response fully incorporates the conventions of the chosen text type.



Note: Examiners must balance all three elements in criterion C (choice of text type,
appropriateness of tone and register, and use of text type conventions) to arrive at the final mark.
                                                 –6–                                     8823 – 2233M

Question specific guidance (Criterion B and C)

Task 1

 A politician has suggested that high school graduates could contribute more to their country by
 going straight into work, rather than going to university. You want to express your own views
 about this suggestion to your peers. Write a text in which you summarize the politician’s ideas,
 explain how the suggestion would affect you personally, and consider its potential effects on
 your generation.
 Blog                               Letter to the editor                         Review

Criterion B:
• The three required elements of the task are (i) summarize the politician’s ideas, (ii) explain how
  the suggestion would affect you personally, and (iii) consider its potential effects on your
  generation.
• Equal weight does not have to be given to all three elements, but all should be given some
  developed attention. If one is ignored, dismissed in one sentence or not approached as detailed
  below, no more than the 4-6 band should be awarded, since the task has only been ‘generally
  fulfilled’ at best.
• An effective summary for (i) should include why the politician believes that high school graduates
  can contribute more by entering the workforce rather than continuing with education. The politician
  does not need to be identified, nor does it need to make clear where/when the suggestion was
  made.
• Discussion of (ii) may be approached in terms of how going straight into work rather than going
  to university would affect the student personally, or whether the student personally would
  contribute more to their country by going to university rather than going straight into work.
• It is expected that the discussion of (iii) will focus on the impact of the politician’s suggestion on
  the student’s generation. However, impact on society as a whole should also be accepted.

Criterion C:
Choice of text type:
                           Text type         Rationale
Appropriate                Blog              The text type is suitable for expressing one’s own
                                             views with an audience who share a common interest
                                             (peers).
Generally appropriate      Letter to the The text type is suitable for expressing one’s own
                           editor        views on a topical issue, but it typically has a more
                                         general readership. The choice may be considered
                                         “appropriate” if the response makes clear the text is
                                         to be read by the younger generation.
Generally inappropriate    Review        The text type is typically used for a critical appraisal
                                         of a product or event. It is not usually used to
                                         respond to a person’s ideas or opinions. The choice
                                         may be considered “generally appropriate” if the
                                         response makes clear that this is the review of a text
                                         the student read, viewed or heard, e.g. video, radio
                                         broadcast, etc and that the review will be read by the
                                         younger generation.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the stated task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”,
and the “generally inappropriate” text type can be considered “generally appropriate”.
                                                 –7–                8823 – 2233M



Register and tone:
• Semi-formal tone with some informality
• Engaging, discursive, impassioned tone

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                   –8–                                       8823 – 2233M

Task 2

 Your local tourism association is looking to hire a young person with new ideas for tourism in
 your area. You would like to be considered for this job. Write a text for the association explaining
 why you want to join them, what new ideas you have for promoting an important tourist attraction
 in the area, and what personal qualities you have that make you an ideal person for the job.

 Blog                                Personal statement                               Speech

Criterion B:
• The three required elements of the task are (i) explain why you want to join them, (ii) what new
  ideas you have for promoting an important tourist attraction in the area (place, event, etc), and
  (iii) what personal qualities you have that make you an ideal person for the job.
• Equal weight does not have to be given to all three elements, but all should be given some
  developed attention. If one is ignored, dismissed in one sentence or not approached as detailed
  below, no more than the 4-6 band should be awarded, since the task has only been ‘generally
  fulfilled’ at best.
• An effective discussion of (i) will include reasons why the student wants to join the local tourism
  association, as opposed to focusing purely on why they are applying for this particular job.
• It is important that the ‘ideas’ in (ii) be plural i.e. (ii) there should be at least 2 ideas discussed for
  promoting an important tourist attraction in the area. However, if there is only one idea effectively
  developed and supported, this should be accepted.
• Discussion of (iii) should link personal qualities they possess with what is likely to be required in
  the job.

Criterion C:
Choice of text type:
                            Text type       Rationale
Appropriate                 Personal        The text type is suited to allowing the writer to express
                            Statement       an interest in a vacancy, and to describe their personal
                                            qualities.
Generally appropriate       Speech          The text type is suited for communicating information
                                            about oneself, but it is not necessarily used to apply for
                                            a job. The choice may be considered “appropriate” if the
                                            response makes clear that the audience is the tourism
                                            association, and the context is a professional one (e.g.
                                            a verbal expression of interest in the job, or a speech
                                            given in an interview etc.)
Generally inappropriate     Blog            The text type is typically used by the writer to share
                                            information and ideas that may be of interest to an
                                            unspecified audience. It is not usually used to persuade
                                            a potential employer to offer someone a job. The choice
                                            may be considered “generally appropriate” if the
                                            response makes clear that the private blog entry is
                                            reached thorough the credentials given to the
                                            association to read that entry only.
Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the stated task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”,
and the “generally inappropriate” text type can be considered “generally appropriate”.

Register and tone:
• Formal register
• Serious and persuasive tone
Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                –9–                                     8823 – 2233M

Task 3

 Starting next month, your local council will introduce a law banning the use of all disposable
 plastic in your city. You want to help other students at your school prepare for this change. Write
 a text in which you explain why the law is being introduced, how the law will affect young
 people’s day to day experience, and what you can all do to prepare for this change.
 Guidelines                              Review                           Speech

Criterion B:
• The three required elements of the task are (i) explain why the law is being introduced, (ii) how
  the law will affect young people’s day to day experience, and (iii) what you can all do to prepare
  for this change.
• Equal weight does not have to be given to all three elements, but all should be given some
  developed attention. If one is ignored, dismissed in one sentence or not approached as detailed
  below, no more than the 4-6 band should be awarded, since the task has only been ‘generally
  fulfilled’ at best.
• Discussion of (i) should provide details or reasons for the local council banning the use of all
  disposable plastic in the city.
• In (ii), “day to day experience” may be interpreted as experience within a school context or outside
  of school (or both). However, impact that would affect young people exclusively is not essential.
• Discussion of (iii) should involve providing practical steps that students can take to prepare for
  the change.

Criterion C:
Choice of text type:
                           Text type         Rationale
Appropriate                Speech            The text type is suited for providing important
                                             information to a large, specified audience within a
                                             school context.
Generally appropriate      Guidelines        The text type is suited for providing practical
                                             information to a large audience, but it is less
                                             immediate or targeted than the speech. The choice
                                             may be considered “appropriate” if the response
                                             makes clear the guidelines are produced for other
                                             students at the school.
Generally inappropriate    Review            The text type is typically used for a critical appraisal
                                             of a product or event. It is not usually used to provide
                                             practical information or guidance. The choice may be
                                             considered “generally appropriate” if the response
                                             makes clear that this is the review of a text the
                                             student read, viewed or heard, e.g. video, radio
                                             broadcast, etc and that the review will be published
                                             in the school magazine.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the stated task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”,
and the “generally inappropriate” text type can be considered “generally appropriate”.

Register and tone:
• Formal to semi-formal register.
• Clear and direct but encouraging tone.

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                – 10 –                                   8823 – 2233M

Appendix: Text type conventions (Criterion C)

The most common and recognisable conventions of the text types are given below:

Blog
   • first person statement and/or narration
   • awareness of the reader, e.g. direct address, a lively and interesting style etc.
   • closing statement, e.g. invitation to comment, a conclusion drawn etc.


Guidelines
   • clear and focused heading/title
   • clearly set-out format e.g. bullets, sub-headings, numbering, etc.
   • short introduction and conclusion.


Letter to the editor
   • appropriate opening and closing salutations
   • reference to the original article/issue raised
   • interesting and engaging style


Personal statement
   • relevant title/heading
   • distinct introduction and conclusion
   • style that is lucid and easy to follow



Review
   • title intended to attract and interest the reader
   • name of the reviewer
   • style to engage the reader


Speech
   • catch the audience’s attention at the beginning, and leave a clear impression at the end
   • address the audience and keep contact with them throughout, e.g. use of “we” and “you” etc.
   • elements of speech rhetoric e.g. rhetorical questions, repetition etc.
