N18/2/ABENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX




English B – Standard level – Paper 2
Anglais B – Niveau moyen – Épreuve 2
Inglés B – Nivel medio – Prueba 2

Friday 2 November 2018 (morning)
Vendredi 2 novembre 2018 (matin)
Viernes 2 de noviembre de 2018 (mañana)

1 h 30 m


Instructions to candidates
• Do not turn over this examination paper until instructed to do so.
• Choose one task. Each task is worth [25 marks].
• The maximum mark for this examination paper is [25 marks].

Instructions destinées aux candidats
• Ne retournez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
• Choisissez une tâche. Chaque tâche vaut [25 points].
• Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est de [25 points].

Instrucciones para los alumnos
• No dé la vuelta al examen hasta que se lo autoricen.
• Elija una tarea. Cada tarea vale [25 puntos].
• La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [25 puntos].




                                                                                               8818 – 2230
     2 pages/páginas                                       © International Baccalaureate Organization 2018
                                                    –2–                   N18/2/ABENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Complete one of the following tasks. Write 250 to 400 words.

1.   Cultural diversity

     You are living in an English-speaking country and your school will be enrolling 25 refugee
     teenagers next month. Write an email to the principal of your school with your ideas about how
     the school community can help these new students integrate smoothly into school life.


2.   Customs and traditions

     Your English B class is planning to go on a month-long exchange visit to an English-speaking
     country. Write a set of guidelines for the class, describing what customs or traditions they will
     find different there and explaining what is acceptable or should not be done in the host culture.


3.   Health

     You read an article in your local newspaper which suggested that, because of teenagers’ sleep
     patterns, it would be beneficial to start the school day at a later time. Write a letter to the editor
     in response to this article, giving your opinion on the topic and the reasons for your views.


4.   Leisure

     You recently watched a film that starred your favourite actor. Unfortunately, the performance of
     this actor was unsatisfactory. Write a review of the film for your school magazine, describing
     the film and the reasons for your disappointment.


5.   Science and technology

     You recently read an article which stated that, nowadays, what shapes our future the most is
     technology. This has inspired you to write a blog entry discussing what you think will be the most
     important technological advance in the next five years and why you think this would be the case.




