M14/1/AXENG/HP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


                    May / mai / mayo 2014

         ENGLISH / ANGLAIS / INGLÉS A:
          LITERATURE / LITTÉRATURE /
                 LITERATURA

                        Higher Level
                      Niveau Supérieur
                       Nivel Superior

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2



6 pages/páginas
                              –2–        M14/1/AXENG/HP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.
                                               –3–           M14/1/AXENG/HP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M



Examiners: please note that the term “comparison”, both in the descriptors and in the
marking notes, includes the discussion of relevant “contrasts” as well.

The features of the “very good to excellent” answers assume that those for “adequate to good”
are included.

Drama

1.   An adequate to good answer will identify and compare some moments where sub-text is
     evident, whether through speech, action or other theatrical means such as the use of symbols
     or setting to extend or advance meaning. It will consider how this sub-text moves or shapes
     the action of the drama. For example, does it act as a catalyst, reveal a new depth / aspect to a
     character, have a choric function or have thematic significance? Candidates may approach
     this question in a range of appropriate ways, depending on the texts studied.

     A very good to excellent answer, four to five, may reveal a deeper understanding of the
     creation and function of sub-text, with more effective illustration and analysis. The evaluative
     element will be persuasive and cogent.


2.   An adequate to good answer will select and compare appropriate examples and show how the
     narrator or chorus, or absence of the same, helps or hinders in finding meaning. Examiners
     should be aware of the variety of different appropriate responses here.

     A very good to excellent answer, may discuss and compare these examples more thoughtfully
     and cogently. This will lead to a coherent, reasonable evaluation of the author’s choices.


3.   An adequate to good answer will identify appropriate examples of plays which employ either
     a limited or an extended time frame. They will explore how and to what ends the given time
     frames function in the plays chosen. Examiners should accept a variety of interpretations of
     compressed or expanded time.

     A very good to excellent answer may discuss more confidently and in more detail the
     dramatic effect of different time frames on plays. This comparison will need to include an
     evaluative element.
                                               –4–          M14/1/AXENG/HP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


Poetry

4.   An adequate to good answer will give examples of the presence of multiple levels of meaning
     in the works of at least two poets and discuss how these levels of meaning have been created.
     Answers could grapple with metaphor, symbol, imagery, allegory, or many other generators
     of multiple levels of meaning. Answers will also discuss and compare the effectiveness of the
     techniques used.

     A very good to excellent answer may offer clearer examples of levels of meaning within a
     poem. It will more pointedly compare the effectiveness of specific techniques. There will be
     an evaluation of the impact of these techniques.


5.   An adequate to good answer will provide and compare clear examples of line endings, or
     moments of transition from one line to the next. Discussions of effects will be wide ranging,
     from considerations of structure to more emotional aspects of impact, because of the many
     kinds of poetry that may have been studied.

     A very good to excellent answer may offer a more interesting and specific discussion of the
     question, with a more subtle analysis of what lies behind a poet’s decision to end one line and
     start another. Answers will evaluate the effectiveness of these choices.


6.   An adequate to good answer will show how poets have taken broad subjects and made them
     personal. It will offer a comparison of the techniques used by at least two poets, in focusing
     on their subject matter.

     A very good to excellent answer may offer a more convincing argument for the distillation of
     subject matter and its relative personalization. It may argue that poets may equally attempt to
     generalize the personal. Answers will compare techniques and perhaps their purposes.
     Answers will also evaluate the relative effectiveness of these techniques.
                                                –5–           M14/1/AXENG/HP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


Prose: novel and short story

7.   An adequate to good answer will provide and compare relevant examples of characters whose
     thoughts are not revealed either to the reader or to other characters. It will also seek to specify
     how such characters are made interesting or made to play an important part in the narrative.

     A very good to excellent answer may more closely compare techniques by which characters
     whose thoughts are hidden from us are made interesting. Candidates may take different
     approaches to this question and may explore more deeply how and to what extent the hiding
     of characters’ thoughts provokes interest. Whichever the route taken, evaluation of techniques
     and effects is essential.


8.   An adequate to good answer will explore and compare how journeys (actual, metaphorical
     etc.) have operated as structuring elements of fiction: providing starting points, transitions,
     endings, settings, cultural change, conflict etc. It will have some discussion of the effects
     produced through use of the journey convention.

     A very good to excellent answer will explore the convention of the journey in fiction in a
     more sophisticated way. It will also offer an evaluation of how this convention has been used.


9.   An adequate to good answer will show, through focused and comparative discussion of
     relevant examples, an awareness of how authors endeavour to increase or decrease our
     sympathy (through presentation of character, situation, authorial intrusion, setting, etc.).

     A very good to excellent answer will show a more sophisticated discussion of how sympathy
     may be controlled by authors, and an awareness that there are differing means by which this
     may be accomplished. The discussion will include some evaluation of these means.
                                                –6–           M14/1/AXENG/HP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


Prose other than fiction

10.   An adequate to good answer will identify and compare techniques used in representing
      unfamiliar settings and/or experiences. It will discuss techniques such as anecdote, use of
      factual detail, reported speech, imagery etc.

      A very good to excellent answer may refine discussion of techniques and offer a more
      sophisticated understanding as to whether these settings or experiences are unfamiliar to the
      author, the reader or both. The discussion of techniques should include evaluation of their
      effects.


11.   An adequate to good answer will identify and compare works in which the author does or
      does not become more interesting than the subject matter (such as through first person
      address, anecdotes, distinctive style, setting, situation etc.)

      A very good to excellent answer may provide a more sophisticated and detailed discussion of
      relevant stylistic and/or narrative features that may foreground either the author or the subject
      matter. This discussion will also include an evaluation of these features.


12.   An adequate to good answer will show how purpose is made clear to varying degrees in
      candidates’ chosen works. It will compare techniques by which purpose may be revealed.

      A very good to excellent answer may provide a sustained discussion of the techniques used in
      prose fiction with a purpose, possibly through addressing the idea of multiple or ambiguous
      purposes. This discussion will also include an evaluation of these techniques.
