M14/1/AYENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX




      22142016

ENGLISH A: LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE – STANDARD LEVEL – PAPER 2
ANGLAIS A : LANGUE ET LITTéRATURE – NIVEAU MOYEN – ÉPREUVE 2
INGLÉS A: LENGUA Y LITERATURA – NIVEL MEDIO – PRUEBA 2

Tuesday 6 May 2014 (afternoon)
Mardi 6 mai 2014 (après-midi)
Martes 6 de mayo de 2014 (tarde)

1 hour 30 minutes / 1 heure 30 minutes / 1 hora 30 minutos


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES
 Do not turn over this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on both of the Part 3 works you
  have studied.
 You are not permitted to bring copies of the works you have studied into the examination room.
 The maximum mark for this examination paper is [25 marks].

INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS
 Ne retournez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
 Traitez un seul sujet de composition. Vous devez baser votre réponse sur les deux œuvres de
  la troisième partie que vous avez étudiées.
 Vous n’êtes pas autorisé(e) à apporter des exemplaires des œuvres que vous avez étudiées dans
  la salle d’examen.
 Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est [25 points].

INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS
 No dé la vuelta al examen hasta que se lo autoricen.
 Conteste una sola pregunta de redacción. Base su respuesta en las dos obras estudiadas de
  la Parte 3.
 No está permitido traer copias de las obras estudiadas a la sala de examen.
 La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [25 puntos].




2214-2016                                                                                   2 pages/páginas
                                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2014
                                                   –2–                 M14/1/AYENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on both of the Part 3 works you
have studied. Answers which are not based on a discussion of both Part 3 works will not score
high marks. Your answer should address the ways in which language and context contribute to your
reading of each work.

1.    Show some of the ways in which the writers of the two works you have studied enable the
      reader/audience to discern a meaning that is only implied.


2.    Texts originally produced in a culture or in a language different from that of the reader’s can have a
      strong impact. With close reference to the two texts you have studied, show how they challenge the
      reader to see the world in a new way.


3.    Plays are meant to be staged; poems are often read aloud, and books are often made into movies.
      What aspects of the two works you have studied would appeal to an audience’s eyes or ears?


4.    Can the ends ever be said to justify the means? Consider the ways in which this idea is explored
      or discussed in the two works you have studied.


5.    Show how and to what effect the two writers whose works you have studied make use of myth, legend
      or other stories and tales.


6.    Looking closely at how weakness and strength are represented in the two works you have studied,
      discuss the significance of the relationship between the two.




2214-2016
