M14/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


                    May / mai / mayo 2014

         ENGLISH / ANGLAIS / INGLÉS A:
         LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE /
           LANGUE ET LITTÉRATURE /
            LENGUA Y LITERATURA


                        Higher Level
                      Niveau Supérieur
                       Nivel Superior

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1

4 pages/páginas
                                –2–           M14/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.



Ces remarques pour la notation sont confidentielles. Leur usage
est réservé exclusivement aux examinateurs participant à cette
session.

Ces remarques sont la propriété de l’Organisation du
Baccalauréat International. Toute reproduction ou distribution
à de tierces personnes sans l’autorisation préalable du centre de
l’évaluation de l’IB est interdite.



Estas notas para la corrección son confidenciales y para el uso
exclusivo de los examinadores en esta convocatoria de exámenes.

Son propiedad del Bachillerato Internacional y no se pueden
reproducir ni distribuir a ninguna otra persona sin la
autorización previa del centro de evaluación del IB.
                                                   –3–              M14/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


 These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking. They are not offered as an
 exhaustive and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must rigidly adhere.
 Good ideas or angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate.
 Similarly, answers which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here should be rewarded
 appropriately.

1.   In both texts racial discrimination is present, implicitly in Text A, explicitly in Text B. The first is
     a poem in which the speaker is travelling by public transport in an unnamed city. The second is an
     article written for a current events magazine by a black visitor arriving, for the first time, in South
     Africa under apartheid.

An adequate to good analysis will:

• identify the different text types and their purposes and bring out some of the main contrasts in setting
  or situation
• illustrate the contrast in context between texts A and B while identifying the common theme of racial
  discrimination or other common themes (eg, travelling, alienation, isolation)
• make comparisons about the relationship of the two travellers in text A and the two travellers in text B
  and how they communicate with each other
• recognise in one way or another the contrast between the implicit in text A and the explicit in text B
• identify and make comments on some of the literary features (eg, narrative voice, tone, free verse,
  repetition, rhythmical effects, metaphor, oxymoron, alliteration) that make the texts different, or those
  they have in common.


A good to excellent analysis may also:

• make more informed comments about the contexts referred to or implied (which may include
  observations about the titles of the texts)
• bring out more fully some of the sharper contrasts between the texts (the spoken and written word/the
  unspoken; the “sudden discovery”/the “lifelong practice”, exterior/interior, the local/the universal, etc)
• comment on how atmosphere is created in the two texts
• comment on the way the two texts end
• make more detailed comments about how these very different texts fulfil their purposes including more
  detailed observations about the literary features of both the article and the poem.
                                                    –4–              M14/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.    Both texts are about fathers trying to do their best for their daughters and not succeeding very well.
      The first is an interview with a billionaire father in the UK newspaper The Guardian about his
      daughters. The second is taken from a blog post on the site of an organisation in the US whose
      mission is to make fathers more responsible and committed parents.

An adequate to good analysis will:

• identify the common theme as being that of the relationship between fathers and their daughters
• recognize that despite the good intentions of the fathers (one an identifiable individual, the other a
  hypothetical father), the relationship with their daughters is not as successful as they would like.
• compare the attitudes of the daughters in both texts and how they are presented (indirectly in text C,
  directly in text D)
• compare the way money is referred to in the two texts (for example, the abundance of it in text C, the
  lack of it in text D) as well as recognising, in some way, that reference to it is metaphorical in the latter
• make some observations about the form in which the experience of the fathers is presented to the
  reader: interview in text C, imaginary dialogue in text D as well as some remarks about the layout and
  visual features of both texts
• identify the audiences and purposes of the texts.


A good to excellent analysis may also:

• comment more fully on the relationships between father and daughter in the two texts, for example
  observing that the daughters appear to have the whip hand
• analyse in more depth the possible causes of the dissatisfaction that both men are experiencing in their
  roles as fathers. Possibly also observe that they are represented as being in need of sympathy
• deal more fully with the differences in tone between the two texts, including that of the interviewer in
  text C and that of the introduction to the dialogue in text D
• comment more fully on the techniques used by the website and the blog to influence readers and, for
  example, on the effect on the reader of the images and layout in both texts
• comment further on the forms and styles of the interview (C) and the mock interview (D)
• comment in more detail on the audiences and purposes of both texts
• offer comments about the situations these two fathers find themselves in and about the importance they
  give to money.
