M14/1/AYENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




      22142015

ENGLISH A: LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE – STANDARD LEVEL – PAPER 1
ANGLAIS A : LANGUE ET LITTéRATURE – NIVEAU MOYEN – ÉPREUVE 1
INGLÉS A: LENGUA Y LITERATURA – NIVEL MEDIO – PRUEBA 1

Monday 5 May 2014 (morning)
Lundi 5 mai 2014 (matin)
Lunes 5 de mayo de 2014 (mañana)

1 hour 30 minutes / 1 heure 30 minutes / 1 hora 30 minutos


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES
 Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Write an analysis on one text only.
 It is not compulsory for you to respond directly to the guiding questions provided.
  However, you may use them if you wish.
 The maximum mark for this examination paper is [20 marks].

INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS
 N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
 Rédigez une analyse d’un seul texte.
 Vous n’êtes pas obligé(e) de répondre directement aux questions d’orientation fournies.
  Vous pouvez toutefois les utiliser si vous le souhaitez.
 Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est [20 points].

INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS
 No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
 Escriba un análisis de un solo texto.
 No es obligatorio responder directamente a las preguntas de orientación que se incluyen,
  pero puede utilizarlas si lo desea.
 La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [20 puntos].




2214-2015                                                                                   4 pages/páginas
                                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2014
                                                                 –2–                 M14/1/AYENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Write an analysis on one of the following texts. Include comments on the significance of context, audience,
purpose and formal and stylistic features.

Text 1




HOME         LATEST NEWS         CELEBRITIES             INSIDER         LIFESTYLE ENTERTAINMENT WIN          IN THE MAG
Celebrity Profiles Photos Celebrity Interviews Celebrity Fashion Video               Login Join OK!   RSS Search:

            OK! CAUGHT UP WITH BIG BROTHER1 WINNER BEN!
            Date posted: November-16-2012 14:00             Comments: 0


            Congratulations on your win!
            Oh my God, thank you so much! I can’t believe it. This is the
            most amazing experience that has ever happened to me,
            and the way that it came out all in all is just thrilling.

     5      Are you still running on a high?
            I’ve officially run-out. I love OK! magazine – I’m just like …
            oh my God!

            How did you guys spend your final day in the house?
            Was it bittersweet?
   10       No, I was really quite keen to get out of there. I was ready
            for the next stage of my life. Whilst I walked around the
            house and made the most of it and felt privileged to be there,
            it became a lot harder in the last 48 hours … I thought,
            ‘Am I going to be the winner, am I going to be the loser?
   15       What’s going on?’ It was scary.

            How did you feel when you realised that you had won?
            I hyperventilated! They read out that I was the winner and I literally felt like my head was going
            to explode – the amount of sweat that poured out of my head when I got on stage! It was just the
            most amazing experience, it doesn’t settle in. It never kicks in when you get told that you’re the
   20       winner of something like this, there’s only one and there was an incredible list of people in there
            that were trying to win this program. The fact that I got to that stage was quite amazing.

            What was it like being left alone in the house after Layla was evicted?
            Once Layla was gone I was terrified. I was like, ‘How long am I going to be in here for?’, and time
            stood still. I then felt overwhelmed by the fact that I had won.

   25       Did you take any mementos from the house for yourself?
            Stacey gave me this Humpty Dumpty2 set, which was by my bed at night and I took that, but apart
            from that, I haven’t taken anything. I think I‘d be in trouble with the big chief − with Big Brother.




2214-2015
                                                                   –3–                       M14/1/AYENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

            Was it fun exiting the BB house with host Sonia Kruger?
            When I saw Sonia in there I thought, ‘I’m going to lose my mind’. Mainly because for me Sonia
    30      is like an Australian icon and I hadn’t really had much of a chance to meet her. When I went into
            the house I only said two words to her and then disappeared. To meet her and then have that
            one-on-one chat was incredible.

            You wore your Nicole Kidman shirt last night ...
            Yes, I wanted to wear it in, but they said to me no I couldn’t, and they chose a different outfit
    35      for me. I think once you get to the point you’re in the final three, you get to have more say in
            what you wear. Nicole Kidman … when I was eight years of age, I was obsessed […]

            So you were a big fan from day one?
            Not like a crazy fan … If she was at a party I was at I wouldn’t even walk up to her and talk to her.
            I’m not some crazy person who wants to be her friend or anything, more I like the way that she
    40      speaks and talks about being an Australian and talks about family. I think that she’s been quite a
            strong role model and a good presence in my life. It felt right to wear something like that. It’s a
            signed picture – she signed it for me.

            You said that being part of the final three, with Layla and Estelle, was hard.
            I think the reason why the last part was very hard was that I think in lots of ways – while I think
    45      Estelle is an incredible person – she jarred on me quite considerably. It was just really hard
            to be in this environment where you’ve probably been put in there to clash against someone,
            the personalities just don’t click. She just kept saying things that weren’t really what I believe to
            be true in the last couple of days. It was just hard to be sitting there, the three at the end and
            feeling like, ‘Why am I here when you are making something that’s so amazing so difficult’.

                                                            Adapted from the website of OK! Magazine Australia (2012)



1
    Big Brother: a reality TV game show in which a group of people live together in a large house, isolated from
    the outside world. To win the final cash prize, a contestant must survive periodic evictions and be the last
    one remaining.
2
    Humpty Dumpty: egg-man character from the nursery rhyme that begins, “Humpty Dumpty sat on the wall,
    Humpty Dumpty had a great fall”.



         – Analyse both the questions and the answers in this interview to show how Ben is presented and
           how he presents himself.

         – Comment on the attitudes and values expressed here, particularly with respect to celebrity.




2214-2015                                                                     Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                                  –4–         M14/1/AYENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Text 2

            William Morris, English textile designer, artist and writer, was invited to speak to the Trades’ Guild
            of Learning, an organization founded in 1873 by artisans and skilled workers to provide themselves
            with vocational and further education.

                   And Science – we have loved her well, and followed her diligently, what will she do? I fear
            she is so much in the pay of the counting-house, the counting-house and the drill-sergeant1, that she
            is too busy, and will for the present do nothing. Yet there are matters which I should have thought
            easy for her; say for example teaching Manchester how to consume its own smoke, or Leeds2
      5     how to get rid of its superfluous black dye without turning it into the river, which would be as
            much worth her attention as the production of the heaviest of heavy black silks or the biggest of
            useless guns. Anyhow, however it be done, unless people care about carrying on their business
            without making the world hideous, how can they care about Art? I know it will cost much both
            of time and money to better these things even a little; but I do not see how these can be better
     10     spent than in making life cheerful and honourable for others and for ourselves; and the gain of
            good life to the country at large that would result from men seriously setting about the bettering
            of the decency of our big towns would be priceless, even if nothing especially good befell the arts
            in consequence: I do not know that it would; but I should begin to think matters hopeful if men
            turned their attention to such things, and I repeat that, unless they do so, we can scarcely even
     15     begin with any hope our endeavours for the bettering of the arts.
                   Unless something or other is done to give all men some pleasure for the eyes and rest for the
            mind in the aspect of their own and their neighbours’ houses, until the contrast is less disgraceful
            between the fields where the beasts live and the streets where men live, I suppose that the practice
            of the arts must be mainly kept in the hands of a few highly cultivated men, who can go often
     20     to beautiful places, whose education enables them, in the contemplation of the past glories of
            the world, to shut out from their view the everyday squalors3 that the most of men move in.
            Sirs, I believe that art has such sympathy with cheerful freedom, open-heartedness and reality,
            so much she sickens under selfishness and luxury, that she will not live thus isolated and exclusive.
            I will go further than this and say that on such terms I do not wish her to live. I protest that it would
     25     be a shame to an honest artist to enjoy what he had huddled up to himself of such art, as it would
            be for a rich man to sit and eat dainty food amongst starving soldiers in a beleaguered4 fort.
                   I do not want art for a few, any more than education for a few, or freedom for a few.

    Extract from a lecture The Decorative Arts, Their Relation to Modern Life and Progress, London (1877)



1
    the counting-house and the drill-sergeant: business and the military
2
    Manchester … Leeds: large industrial towns in the North of England
3
    squalors: dirt and poverty
4
    beleaguered: under siege



       – How might the concerns Morris raises in his speech have been relevant and important to
         his audience?

       – Comment on the techniques and devices the speaker uses to persuade and engage the audience.



2214-2015
