M14/1/AYENG/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


                    May / mai / mayo 2014

         ENGLISH / ANGLAIS / INGLÉS A:
         LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE /
           LANGUE ET LITTÉRATURE /
            LENGUA Y LITERATURA


        Higher Level and Standard Level
       Niveau Supérieur et Niveau Moyen
          Nivel Superior y Nivel Medio

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2

3 pages/páginas
                                –2–           M14/1/AYENG/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.



Ces remarques pour la notation sont confidentielles. Leur usage
est réservé exclusivement aux examinateurs participant à cette
session.

Ces remarques sont la propriété de l’Organisation du
Baccalauréat International. Toute reproduction ou distribution
à de tierces personnes sans l’autorisation préalable du centre de
l’évaluation de l’IB est interdite.



Estas notas para la corrección son confidenciales y para el uso
exclusivo de los examinadores en esta convocatoria de exámenes.

Son propiedad del Bachillerato Internacional y no se pueden
reproducir ni distribuir a ninguna otra persona sin la
autorización previa del centro de evaluación del IB.
                                                        –3–               M14/1/AYENG/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


     Context should be understood in the widest possible sense. It may include the social and/or historical
     setting of the work; it may include the context of a situation within the work and will certainly include
     contexts of production and reception of a work.
     In addition to the notes below, responses should be structured with a logical sequence and development.
     Clear, varied and accurate language should be used, as well as appropriate register, style and terminology.

1.       An adequate to good answer will identify a few of the techniques or stylistic features the writers studied
         used to imply meaning rather than to state it explicitly and give some examples that illustrate the effects
         on the reader/audience.

         A good to excellent answer may also show a more detailed analysis of the techniques or stylistic
         features used by the writers to infer meaning and convincingly illustrate the effects on the
         reader/audience.


2.       An adequate to good answer will give examples of how literary works from one language or culture
         challenge readers from another to see the world in a new or different way.

         A good to excellent answer may also consider in detail how the literary works or their stylistic features
         challenge readers from other languages or cultures, taking a critical approach that may involve
         discussion of issues such as context or translation.


3.       An adequate to good answer will identify works, or parts of works studied that appeal to an audience in
         terms of sight and sound and discuss some of the techniques or stylistic features that would make this
         possible, such as theatrical devices, imagery, rhyme, setting, characters, actions, dialogues, narrative
         voice.

         A good to excellent answer may also give more detailed examples of the visual and auditory dimensions
         of the works studied, showing good understanding of techniques or stylistic features.


4.       An adequate to good answer will show understanding, provide some discussion of the “ends justifying
         the means” and illustrate with relevant examples that demonstrate awareness of context.

         A good to excellent answer may also address the moral or ethical issues raised and provide pertinent
         examples.


5.       An adequate to good answer will identify the use of myth, legend or other stories and tales (including
         those internal to the text) in the works studied, give examples and show awareness of the effects of these
         on the reader.

         A good to excellent answer may also show good knowledge of how myth, legend or other stories and
         tales are used by the writers and convincingly illustrate how they affect the reader’s understanding.


6.       An adequate to good answer will define weakness and strength in the works studied and discuss the
         relationship between them, using relevant examples.

         A good to excellent answer may also show thorough convincing discussion a fuller awareness of the
         relationship between weakness and strength and its significance in the works studied.
