M14/1/AXENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX




      22140068

ENGLISH A: LITERATURE – STANDARD LEVEL – PAPER 2
ANGLAIS A : LITTéRATURE – NIVEAU MOYEN – ÉPREUVE 2
INGLÉS A: LITERATURA – NIVEL MEDIO – PRUEBA 2

Tuesday 6 May 2014 (afternoon)
Mardi 6 mai 2014 (après-midi)
Martes 6 de mayo de 2014 (tarde)

1 hour 30 minutes / 1 heure 30 minutes / 1 hora 30 minutos


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES
 Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on at least two of the Part 3
  works you have studied and compare and contrast these works in response to the question.
  Answers which are not based on a discussion of at least two Part 3 works will not score
  high marks.
 You are not permitted to bring copies of the works you have studied into the examination room.
 The maximum mark for this examination paper is [25 marks].

INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS
 N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
 Traitez un seul sujet de composition. En basant votre réponse sur au moins deux des œuvres
  de la troisième partie que vous avez étudiées, vous devez comparer et opposer ces œuvres
  dans le cadre du sujet. Les réponses qui ne sont pas basées sur au moins deux des œuvres de
  la troisième partie n’obtiendront pas une note élevée.
 Vous n’êtes pas autorisé(e) à apporter des exemplaires des œuvres que vous avez étudiées dans
  la salle d’examen.
 Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est [25 points].

INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS
 No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
 Conteste una sola pregunta de redacción. Base su respuesta en al menos dos de las obras
  estudiadas de la Parte 3, comparándolas y contrastándolas en relación con la pregunta.
  Las respuestas que no se basen en al menos dos obras de la Parte 3 no recibirán una
  puntuación alta.
 No está permitido traer copias de las obras estudiadas a la sala de examen.
 La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [25 puntos].




2214-0068                                                                                   3 pages/páginas
                                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2014
                                                   –2–                  M14/1/AXENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX

Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on at least two of the Part 3 works you have
studied and compare and contrast these works in response to the question. Answers which are not based
on a discussion of at least two Part 3 works will not score high marks.

Drama

1.    Discuss the presentation and importance of minor characters in at least two plays you have studied.


2.    In drama, characters often “break the fourth wall” by communicating directly with the audience.
      Compare the methods and effects of doing so in at least two plays you have studied.


3.    With reference to at least two plays you have studied, consider how playwrights incorporate sound
      and/or light to convey their ideas.



Poetry

4.    Compare the ways in which at least two poets you have studied use imagery to convey one or more
      kinds of love.


5.    With reference to at least two poets you have studied, discuss the ways in which they employ formal
      and/or informal language to convey their subject matter.


6.    How and to what effect do at least two poets you have studied use rhyme and/or rhythm to organize
      their ideas?



Prose: novel and short story

7.    Writers often use key events to contribute to the development of central characters. Compare how,
      and how successfully, this has been done in at least two works you have studied.


8.    Weather is often an important element in the setting of a work. Compare the ways in which writers
      use weather in at least two works you have studied.


9.    Some works have a single line of action; others involve one or more subplots. Compare the
      effectiveness of the choices made by at least two writers you have studied in regard to this statement.




2214-0068
                                                  –3–                M14/1/AXENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX

Prose other than fiction

10.   With reference to at least two works you have studied, compare the impact achieved of beginning at
      the particular point chosen.


11.   With reference to at least two works you have studied, compare the ways in which each writer’s tone
      reveals a particular attitude to the content of the works.


12.   How far and in what ways do at least two works you have studied portray a physical journey as
      an allegory?




2214-0068
