© International Baccalaureate Organization 2022

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2022

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2022

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Sports, exercise and health science
Higher level
Paper 1

Thursday 19 May 2022 (morning)


1 hour


Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y Answer all the questions.
y For each question, choose the answer you consider to be the best and indicate your choice on
  the answer sheet provided.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [40 marks].




                                                                                             2222 – 6601
     15 pages                                            © International Baccalaureate Organization 2022
                                                –2–                                         2222 – 6601


1.   The diagram shows a gymnast performing a handstand. What is the position of the tarsals in
     relation to the femur?




     A.   Superior

     B.   Inferior

     C.   Lateral

     D.   Medial


2.   What is the function of a ligament?

     A.   To attach muscle to bone

     B.   To attach bone to bone

     C.   To reduce friction

     D.   To secrete synovial fluid
                                                              –3–                                              2222 – 6601


3.     The diagram shows average respiratory volumes. What happens to the expiratory reserve
       volume (ERV) when an athlete begins to run?

                   6.0
                                                                 Maximal inspiratory
                                                                       level             Inspiratory reserve
                                                                                         volume
     Volume / L




                   2.7
                                                                                         Tidal volume
                   2.2
                                              Resting expiratory
                                                                                         Expiratory reserve
                                                     level
                                                                                         volume
                   1.2
                                             Maximal expiratory
                                                   level                                 Residual volume

                      0
                                                     Time

       A.         It increases until the residual volume is 0 litres.

       B.         It decreases.

       C.         There is no change.

       D.         It increases but is limited by residual volume.


4.     Which occurs during the inhalation phase of ventilation during exercise?


       A.         increased pressure in the lungs           contraction of the internal intercostal muscles

       B.         relaxation of the diaphragm               decreased volume in the lungs

       C.         increased volume in the lungs             decreased pressure in the lungs

       D.         contraction of the diaphragm              decreased airflow



5.     What is the function of leucocytes?

       A.         To assist in clotting the blood.

       B.         To transport oxygen.

       C.         To protect the body from infection.

       D.         To transport carbon dioxide.




                                                                                                              Turn over
                                                –4–                                         2222 – 6601


6.   Which describes the cardiac output of an athlete recovering from strenuous exercise?


           Stroke volume (ml per beat)       Heart rate (bpm)

     A.    decreasing                        unchanged

     B.    increasing                        decreasing

     C.    unchanged                         decreasing

     D.    decreasing                        decreasing



7.   The maximal oxygen uptake of an athlete when tested on a treadmill is measured to be
     53 ml kg–1 min–1. What happens to this measurement when using an arm ergometer?

     A.   It increases to 120 % – 130 %.

     B.   It decreases to 70 % – 80 %.

     C.   It remains unchanged.

     D.   It decreases to 20 % – 30 %.


8.   Which process occurs when blood glucose levels are decreased?

     A.   Glycolysis

     B.   Lipolysis

     C.   Glycogenolysis

     D.   Glycogenesis


9.   Which represents the production of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) via the aerobic
     glycolysis system?

     A. PC + ADP → 1ATP + C

     B. glucose → pyruvate → 2 ATP + lactate + H+

     C. glucose → pyruvate + O2 → acetylCoA → Krebs cycle → electron transport chain →
        38 ATP + H2O + CO2 + heat

     D. ADP + P = ATP
                                                   –5–                                       2222 – 6601


10.   The diagram shows an animal cell. What is the function of X?




                                                                 X




      A.   Protein synthesis

      B.   Controlling gene expression

      C.   Cell respiration

      D.   Ingestion and removal of waste


11.   The diagram shows a motor unit. In which area does the neurotransmitter acetylcholine act?

                                         A.



                                              B.



                                                   C.
                                                                     D.




                                                                                            Turn over
                                                    –6–                                             2222 – 6601


12.   The diagram shows an athlete extending their left elbow while throwing a javelin. According
      to the sliding filament theory, which occurs in the muscle fibres of the athlete’s left triceps?




      A.    The H zone increases.

      B.    The A band shortens.

      C.    The Z lines move closer together.

      D.    The A band lengthens.


13.   The diagram shows a downhill speed skier. What type of muscle contraction occurs in the
      skier’s quadriceps during this action?




      A.    Isotonic eccentric

      B.    Isotonic concentric

      C.    Isokinetic

      D.    Isometric


14.   Which muscle is the agonist during the lowering phase of a sit-up?

      A.    Pectoralis

      B.    Rectus abdominis

      C.    Erector spinae

      D.    Latissimus dorsi
                                                  –7–                                          2222 – 6601


15.   The diagram shows a volleyball player serving right-handed. Which is an example of a first-
      class lever during the acceleration phase of the serve?




      A.   Extension of the right elbow

      B.   Flexion of the left elbow

      C.   Plantar flexion of the right ankle

      D.   Extension of the left knee


16.   The image shows a 100 m freestyle swimming race. What is the classification of motor skills
      for a competitor in this race?




      A.   Interactive

      B.   Discrete

      C.   Fine

      D.   Coactive




                                                                                              Turn over
                                                      –8–                                        2222 – 6601


17.   Which is an example of a perceptual motor ability?

      A.   Reacting to the starter pistol.

      B.   Lifting a heavy weight.

      C.   Completing a vertical jump.

      D.   Analysing a video of a 1500 m run.


18.   Which is an example of reaction time at the start of a 100 m swimming race?

      A.   The time it takes to sense the sound of the starter pistol.

      B.   The time from the sounding of the starter pistol to the initiation of movement.

      C.   The time taken to hear the starter pistol and complete the movement off the block.

      D.   The time taken to hear the starter pistol and enter the water.


19.   When learning a new skill, how do coaches generally make the activity predictable and more
      self-paced?

           I.     Decrease the number of stimuli
           II.    Decrease the intensity of stimuli
           III.   Allow increased movement time

      A.   I and II only

      B.   I and III only

      C.   II and III only

      D.   I, II and III


20.   Which best describes the characteristics of a novice learner in the cognitive phase of learning
      a physical skill?


      A.    Relies on external feedback      Clear knowledge of skill requirements

      B.    Relies on internal feedback      Clear knowledge of skill requirements

      C.    Relies on external feedback      Does not have clear knowledge of skill requirements

      D.    Relies on internal feedback      Does not have clear knowledge of skill requirements
                                                   –9–                                          2222 – 6601


21.   The diagram shows a gymnast performing a tuck somersault.

      What type of transfer occurs when a gymnast learns that forming a tuck in a somersault will
      reduce the moment of inertia and allow them to spin faster?




      A.   Skill to skill

      B.   Practice to performance

      C.   Stage to stage

      D.   Principles to skills


22.   A researcher is designing a study to assess free-throw ability in basketball. How could they
      improve the reliability of the data?

           I.     Increase the number of participants
           II.    Allow participants to record their own scores
           III.   Increase the number of trials per participant

      A.   I and II only

      B.   I and III only

      C.   II and III only

      D.   I, II and III




                                                                                                Turn over
                                                 – 10 –                                           2222 – 6601


23.   A study investigated the effects of a carbohydrate-rich mouthwash on soccer players. The
      investigators used a double-blind protocol. What characterizes a double-blind study?

      A.   The investigators and participants know who is given the carbohydrate-rich mouthwash.

      B.   The investigators know which participants are given the carbohydrate-rich mouthwash but
           the participants do not.

      C.   Neither the investigators nor the participants know which participants are given the
           carbohydrate-rich mouthwash.

      D.   The investigators know which participants are given a placebo but the participants do not.


24.   What is the predominant fitness component required for high-level performance in shot put?




      A.   Aerobic capacity

      B.   Agility

      C.   Muscular endurance

      D.   Power


25.   Which fitness test is used to evaluate the effectiveness of a cardiovascular endurance
      training programme?

      A.   Cooper’s 12-minute run

      B.   Illinois agility test

      C.   Sit and reach

      D.   Maximum push-ups
                                                   – 11 –                       2222 – 6601


26.   Which are the functions of the skin?

           I.     Regulation of body temperature
           II.    Protection and immunity
           III.   Synthesis of vitamin D

      A.   I and II only

      B.   I and III only

      C.   II and III only

      D.   I, II and III


27.   The diagram shows the blood supply to the brain. What is X?




                                         X




      A.   The right brachiocephalic trunk

      B.   The left brachiocephalic trunk

      C.   The right internal carotid artery

      D.   The right external carotid artery


28.   When competing in hot weather, which gland regulates water in the body?

      A.   The pineal gland

      B.   The pituitary gland

      C.   The thyroid gland

      D.   The pancreas




                                                                                Turn over
                                                   – 12 –                   2222 – 6601


29.   The diagram shows the endocrine system. What is X?




                                                                        X




      A.    The hypothalamus

      B.    The pineal gland

      C.    The pancreas

      D.    An adrenal gland


30.   Which is a characteristic of peripheral fatigue?

      A.    It develops rapidly.

      B.    It is developed during prolonged exercise.

      C.    It is caused by impairment of the central nervous system.

      D.    It causes mental fatigue.
                                                  – 13 –                                         2222 – 6601


31.   What strategies can a coach employ to minimize fatigue during a basketball game?

      A.   Ensure players are substituted regularly.

      B.   Ensure players consume low GI food at half time.

      C.   Ensure the best players complete the full game.

      D.   Ensure players have complete rest the week before the match.


32.   Which would reduce the coefficient of friction?

      A.   An ice skater sharpens their skates.

      B.   A rock climber applies chalk to their hands when climbing.

      C.   A baseball player uses cleats (studs) on their boots.

      D.   A golfer wears a glove when hitting the ball.


33.   The diagram shows a cyclist riding in the “top tube safe” position. Why does a cyclist use this
      position to increase speed?




      A.   To increase friction

      B.   To decrease ground reaction force

      C.   To decrease air resistance

      D.   To increase push




                                                                                                Turn over
                                                   – 14 –                                  2222 – 6601


34.   What is a feature of non-linear pedagogy?

      A.   Content-focused learning

      B.   Process-orientated learning

      C.   Coach-led learning

      D.   A coach has responsibility for all learning


35.   What is a limitation of using information technology in sports analysis?

      A.   It may lead to an over-reliance on collected data.

      B.   Many new technologies are increasingly inexpensive.

      C.   It generates large quantities of objective data.

      D.   Many technologies are available as mobile/cellphone apps.


36.   The frequency table shows the individual data for a soccer player during one game.


      Technical data                Individual data

      Involvement with ball         45

      Short passes                  28

      Long passes                   5

      Crosses                       2

      Headers                       3

      Tackles                       2

      Shots on target               1

      What are the strengths of using this data for analysis?

      A.   It is useful for concurrent feedback.

      B.   It provides objective data for feedback.

      C.   It provides sequential data.

      D.   It provides information about successful performances.
                                                   – 15 –                                          2222 – 6601


37.   How can genes influence human characteristics?

            I.     Single genes always determine measurable human characteristics.
            II.    Genes affect the development of an individual.
            III.   Genes can be switched on by external factors.

      A.    I and II only

      B.    I and III only

      C.    II and III only

      D.    I, II and III


38.   A sporting institute sets up a talent ID programme. Which data would be most relevant?

      A.    Ancestry

      B.    Income

      C.    Nationality

      D.    Diet


39.   An athlete has sustained cortisol levels that suppress their immune system. What has caused this?

      A.    Regular rest days during their training programme

      B.    Maintaining a high carbohydrate diet during their training programme

      C.    Undertaking a short-term high-intensity training programme

      D.    Undertaking a high-intensity and prolonged training programme


40.   During the Olympic Games, athletes live in a residential village. What strategy will limit the
      risk of illness and infection spreading among the athletes?

      A.    All athletes eating in the same food service areas

      B.    All sleeping quarters are shared

      C.    All athletes using a common water source

      D.    All athletes being required to wash their hands regularly
References:

3.        William F. Ganong, MD: Review of Medical Physiology 19th Edition, Copyright © McGraw-Hill Education. All rights
          reserved.

10.       Siyavula, n.d. [Animal cell] [image] Available at: https://www.siyavula.com/science/lifesciences/grade-10/02-the-basic-
          units-of-life/02-the-basic-units-of-life-03.cnxmlplus This file is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
          International (CC BY 4.0) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) [Accessed 09 August 2017]. Source
          adapted.

11.       Designua / Shutterstock.

12.       Eric Shamus, Jennifer Shamus: Sports Injury Prevention & Rehabilitation www.accessphysiotherapy.com Copyright
          © McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved.

15.       4x6/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images.

16.       McSmit. 2006. The switch to mid-race in a 100 m freestyle [online] Available at: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/100_
          metres_freestyle This file is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-SA
          3.0) https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/deed.en [Accessed 24 March 2020]. Source adapted.

29.       EPA, n.d. What is the endocrine system? [online] Available at: https://www.epa.gov/endocrine-disruption/what-
          endocrine-system [Accessed 20 May 2020]. Source adapted.

All other texts, graphics and illustrations © International Baccalaureate Organization 2022
