Philosophy

Higher level and standard level



Specimen papers 1, 2 and 3




For first examinations in 2016
                              CONTENTS

Philosophy higher level paper 1 specimen paper


Philosophy higher level and standard level paper 1 specimen markscheme


Philosophy higher level and standard level paper 2 specimen paper


Philosophy higher level and standard level paper 2 specimen markscheme


Philosophy higher level paper 3 specimen paper


Philosophy higher level paper 3 specimen markscheme


Philosophy standard level paper 1 specimen paper
SPEC/3/PHILO/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




PHILOSOPHY
HIGHER LEVEL
PAPER 1

SPECIMEN PAPER

2 hours 30 minutes


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
Section A: answer one question.
Section B: answer two questions, each chosen from a different Optional Theme.
The maximum mark for this examination paper is [75 marks].




                                                                                                  5 pages
                                                          © International Baccalaureate Organization 2014
                                                       –2–                    SPEC/3/PHILO/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                                  SECTION A

Answer one question from this section. Each question in this section is worth [25 marks].

Core Theme: What is a human being?

1.   Read the following passage and develop your response as indicated below.

     Who or what am I? I am a living, breathing organism signified by the words “human being”. I am
     a material or physical being fairly recognizable over time to me and to others: I am a body […].
     However, there is another aspect of me not directly visible or definable. This is the aspect of me
     which thinks and feels, reflects and judges, remembers and anticipates. Words used to describe this
     aspect include “mind”, “spirit”, “heart”, “soul”, “awareness” and “consciousness”. This part of me is
     aware that I can never be fully known or understood by myself or by others; it notices that although
     there may be some unchanging essence which is “me”, this same “me” is also constantly changing
     and evolving. So I am a physical body and an emotional and psychological (or spiritual) being.
     The two together make me a person.

                      [Source: adapted from K O’Dwyer, (2011), “Who or What Am I?”, Philosophy Now 84.
                                          www.philosophynow.org accessed 1 July 2013]



     With explicit reference to the stimulus and your own knowledge, discuss a philosophical issue related
     to the question of what it means to be human.
                                                           –3–                       SPEC/3/PHILO/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

2.   Look at the following picture and develop your response as indicated below.




                    [Source: A Griffiths, (1894), Secrets of the Prison-House: Gaol Studies and Sketches.]



     With explicit reference to the stimulus and your own knowledge, discuss a philosophical issue related
     to the question of what it means to be human.




                                                                                                             Turn over
                                                    –4–                 SPEC/3/PHILO/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                                SECTION B

Answer two questions from this section, each chosen from a different Optional Theme. Each question in
this section is worth [25 marks].

Optional Theme 1: Aesthetics

3.    Evaluate the claim that the role of the artist is merely to provide entertainment.


4.    To what extent does the beauty of an object depend on how we see it, rather than the way that it
      really is?



Optional Theme 2: Epistemology

5.    Evaluate the claim that the extent to which any group can exercise power in the world is determined
      by its access to knowledge.


6.    To what extent is knowledge dependent on experience?



Optional Theme 3: Ethics

7.    With reference to one area of applied ethics, evaluate the grounds on which we should justify our
      moral judgments.


8.    To what extent do you agree with the claim that character based approaches are more useful in making
      moral decisions than consequence based approaches?



Optional Theme 4: Philosophy and contemporary society

9.    To what extent do you agree with the claim that censorship is always an unjustifiable violation of
      people’s basic freedoms?


10.   Evaluate the claim that social networking technologies are fundamentally changing the nature of
      social interactions and relationships.
                                                    –5–                  SPEC/3/PHILO/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Optional Theme 5: Philosophy of religion

11.   Evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of one argument for the existence of God.


12.   Evaluate the claim that all religious language is essentially meaningless.



Optional Theme 6: Philosophy of science

13.   Evaluate the claim that the proper goals of science are simplicity, explanation and prediction,
      not truth.


14.   Evaluate the claim that it is unfair to hold scientists responsible for the consequences of their
      scientific discoveries.



Optional Theme 7: Political philosophy

15.   Evaluate the claim that freedom and equality are not just compatible, but that for there to be comparable
      freedom for all there must first be equality.


16.   To what extent do you agree that there are some areas of human life that governments should not
      attempt to regulate?
SPEC/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                   SPECIMEN PAPER



                        PHILOSOPHY



           Higher Level and Standard Level



                                Paper 1




21 pages
    –2–         SPEC/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




Page is blank
                                                 –3–             SPEC/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Note to examiners
This markscheme outlines what members of the paper setting team had in mind when they devised
the questions. The topics listed in the bullet points indicate possible areas candidates might cover in
their answers. They are not compulsory points and not necessarily the best possible points. They are
only a framework to help examiners in their assessment. Examiners should be responsive to any other
valid points or any other valid approaches.

Paper 1 guidance (Core Theme and Optional Themes)

Candidates at both Higher Level and Standard Level answer one question on the Core Theme (Section A).
Candidates at Higher Level answer two questions on the Optional Themes (Section B), each based on a
different Optional Theme.
Candidates at Standard Level answer one question on the Optional Themes (Section B).

Answers on the Core Theme and the Optional Themes are assessed according to the markbands set out on
pages 4 and 6.
                                                        –4–                 SPEC/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 1 Section A markbands

 Marks                                                  Level descriptor


   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.


  1–5     The response is poorly structured, or where there is a recognizable essay structure there is minimal focus
           on the task.
          The philosophical issue raised by the stimulus material is implied but not explicitly identified. There is
           minimal or no explanation of how the issue relates to the stimulus material or links to the question of
           what it is to be human.
          There is little relevant knowledge demonstrated, and the explanation is superficial. Philosophical
           vocabulary is not used, or is consistently used inappropriately.
          The essay is descriptive and lacking in analysis.

  6–10    There is some attempt to follow a structured approach although it is not always clear what the answer is
           trying to convey.
          The philosophical issue raised by the stimulus material is implied but not explicitly identified. There is
           some limited explanation of how the issue relates to the stimulus material or links to the question of what
           it is to be human.
          Knowledge is demonstrated but lacks accuracy and relevance, and there is a basic explanation of the
           issue. Philosophical vocabulary is used, sometimes appropriately.
          There is some limited analysis but the response is more descriptive than analytical. There is little
           discussion of alternative interpretations or points of view. Few of the main points are justified.

 11–15    There is a clear attempt to structure the response, although there may be some repetition or a lack of
           clarity in places.
          The philosophical issue raised by the stimulus material is explicitly identified. There is a basic
           explanation of how the issue relates to the stimulus material and to the question of what it is to be human.
          Knowledge is mostly accurate and relevant, and there is a satisfactory explanation of the issue.
           Philosophical vocabulary is used, sometimes appropriately.
          The response contains analysis, but this analysis lacks development. There is some discussion of
           alternative interpretations or points of view. Many of the main points are justified.

 16–20    The response is structured and generally organised, and can be easily followed.
          The philosophical issue raised by the stimulus material is explicitly identified. There is good justification
           of how the issue relates to the stimulus material and to the question of what it is to be human.
          The response contains accurate and relevant knowledge. There is a good explanation of the issue.
           Philosophical vocabulary is mostly used appropriately.
          The response contains critical analysis. There is discussion and some assessment of alternative
           interpretations or points of view. Most of the main points are justified.

 21–25    The response is well structured, focused and effectively organised.
          The philosophical issue raised by the stimulus material is explicitly identified. There is a well developed
           justification of how the issue relates to the stimulus material and to the question of what it is to be human.
          The response contains relevant, accurate and detailed knowledge. There is a well developed explanation
           of the issue. There is appropriate use of philosophical vocabulary throughout the response.
          The response contains well developed critical analysis. There is discussion and assessment of alternative
           interpretations or points of view. All or nearly all of the main points are justified. The response argues
           from a consistently held position about the issue.
                                                  –5–             SPEC/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                             SECTION A

Core Theme: What is a human being?

1.   Article from Philosophy Now

     With explicit reference to the stimulus and your own knowledge, discuss a philosophical issue
     related to the question of what it means to be human.

     The following paragraphs provide only a framework to help examiners in their assessment of
     responses to this question. Examiners should be responsive to a variety of philosophical
     perspectives and approaches. Examiners should be aware that candidates might respond to this
     passage in a variety of ways including ones not mentioned in the summary below.

     This question requires candidates to identify and discuss philosophical issues and/or concepts in the
     set passage related to the fundamental question of what it is to be human. Responses are likely to
     focus on mind/body interaction. This could include discussion of dualist positions (eg, substance,
     property dualism) or monist positions (eg, idealistic, materialistic monism). Alternatively responses
     could focus on knowledge of the self (issues such as solipsism versus intersubjectivity), or focus on
     an exploration of the difference between terms such as human organism versus human being versus
     human person (philosophical, biological, or evolutionary perspectives).

     Responses should make explicit reference to the passage. Candidates may for example pick up on
     the author’s comment that there is “another aspect of me not directly visible or definable”
     to comment on the limitations of language for naming and describing essential characteristics of
     being human. Alternatively candidates may pick up on the references to terms such as “spiritual” or
     “soul” and make links to religious perspectives on the human person or on mind/body issues.
     They may also make reference to the discussion of “this same ‘me’ is also constantly changing
     and evolving” and link this to discussions of the human person in time (chronological time versus
     synchronic time) or personal identity over time.

     In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
      What might account for the perennial philosophical interest in the question “who or what am I?”
        Is there a right or wrong answer to this question?
      Is there an “identity” or “person” outside a network of relations with others?
      Is it possible to arrive at a notion of the self through introspection alone?
      Are the issues of personhood, personal identity and mind/body relationships simply abstractions
        or non-problems generated by various philosophical systems and perspectives?
      Brain states versus mental states. Am I more than my brain? Is my body distinct from
        my mind?
      Is it not the case that the natural and human sciences have already identified the essential
        characteristics of a human being? Have they not already resolved the mind/body problem?
      What role do emotions play in being human?
      From where does my sense of individuality stem? Is it different from my self-awareness? Is it
        different from my experience of personhood?
      How do different cultures approach the relationship between the physical and the non-physical in
        the context of understanding what it means to be a human being, a person?
      How might philosophy, science and religion cooperate in an exploration of what it means to be a
        human being?
                                                  –6–             SPEC/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   Image from “Secrets of the Prison-House: Gaol Studies and Sketches”

     With explicit reference to the stimulus and your own knowledge, discuss a philosophical issue
     related to the question of what it means to be human.

     The following paragraphs provide only a framework to help examiners in their assessment of
     responses to this question. Examiners should be responsive to a variety of philosophical
     perspectives and approaches. Examiners should be aware that candidates might respond to this
     passage in a variety of ways including ones not mentioned in the summary below.

     This question requires candidates to identify and discuss philosophical issues and/or concepts in the
     image related to the fundamental question of what it is to be human. Responses are likely for
     example to focus on the concept of pain and suffering as being defining characteristics of the
     human condition, or on the concept of freedom as being the defining feature of being human.
     These discussions could explore positive philosophical interpretations of pain, suffering, bondage,
     oppression (Stoicism, asceticism, mysticism, negative utilitarianism, etc) or negative philosophical
     interpretations of pain, suffering, bondage, oppression (nihilism, fatalism, philosophy of
     the absurd, etc). Alternatively the response may focus on the concept of individual identity,
     with discussion focusing on the relationship between the individual versus the group, or the
     individual versus the collective.

     Responses should make explicit reference to the stimulus image. They may, for example,
     make reference to the uniforms being worn in the picture, making links to issues/concepts around
     depersonalization, impersonalization, alienation, or isolation. Alternatively they may focus on the
     authority figures in the image, making reference to ideas like society as the iron cage, or the
     relationship between freedom and societal influences (social control, social conditioning,
     power, etc). Responses could also, for example, pick up on the fact that all of the figures in the
     image are male, and link this to issues of gender identity or gender equality.

     In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
      Are there any essential characteristics that define what it means to be human? Is being human
        characterized by a quest for meaning, freedom, identity?
      Does the human condition define culture or does culture define the human condition?
      Does free will play a role in overcoming the constraints of society and culture?
      Is it a characteristic of being human to constitute meaning and value?
      Even in the face of depersonalization, is my identity made meaningful by others? What are my
        responsibilities towards others? Towards myself? Which has priority, and when?
      In what way does work define the human condition?
      Is the value of personal identity threatened by routine, pointless and often painful activity?
      Is it characteristically human to struggle against the bonds which devalue life, and against values
        which are supportive of a meaningful existence?
      Is human nature defined by those in power?
      Do men and women share equal rights to all facets of the human condition?
      Can religion or spirituality bring solace in the face of pain and suffering?
      Will pain and suffering remain the major philosophical dilemma of the human condition?
      Does the need for cooperation and uniformity amongst individuals engaged in a task defeat the
        ability to establish authentic individuality?
                                                        –7–                SPEC/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 1 Section B markbands

 Mark                                                  Level descriptor


   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.


  1–5     The response is poorly structured, or where there is a recognizable essay structure there is minimal focus
           on the task. The response lacks coherence and is often unclear.
          The student demonstrates little relevant knowledge of philosophical issues arising from the optional
           theme. Philosophical vocabulary is not used, or is consistently used inappropriately.
          The essay is mostly descriptive. There is no discussion of alternative interpretations or points of view.
           Few of the main points are justified.

 6–10     There is some attempt to follow a structured approach although it is not always clear what the answer is
           trying to convey.
          The student demonstrates knowledge of philosophical issues arising from the optional theme, but this
           knowledge lacks accuracy and relevance. Philosophical vocabulary is used, sometimes appropriately.
          There is limited analysis but the response is more descriptive than analytical. There is little discussion of
           alternative interpretations or points of view. Some of the main points are justified.

 11–15    There is a clear attempt to structure the response although there may be some repetition or a lack of
           clarity in places.
          Knowledge of philosophical issues arising from the optional theme is mostly accurate and relevant.
           Philosophical vocabulary is used, sometimes appropriately.
          The response contains analysis, but this analysis lacks development. There is some discussion of
           alternative interpretations or points of view. Many of the main points are justified.

 16–20    The response is structured and generally organised, and can be easily followed.
          The response contains accurate and relevant knowledge of philosophical issues arising from the optional
           theme. Philosophical vocabulary is mostly used appropriately.
          The response contains critical analysis. There is discussion and some assessment of alternative
           interpretations or points of view. Most of the main points are justified.

 21–25    The response is well structured, focused and effectively organised.
          The response contains relevant, accurate and detailed knowledge of philosophical issues arising from the
           optional theme. There is appropriate use of philosophical vocabulary throughout the response.
          The response contains well developed critical analysis. There is discussion and assessment of alternative
           interpretations or points of view. All or nearly all of the main points are justified. The response argues
           from a consistently held position about the issue.
                                                  –8–              SPEC/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                              SECTION B

Optional Theme 1: Aesthetics

3.   Evaluate the claim that the role of the artist is merely to provide entertainment.

     This question offers candidates a chance to consider different views of the role of the artist, and to
     discuss the wider meanings and definitions of the role of art and the artist. The view in the question
     is the specific view that the role of the artist is merely to provide entertainment; this could be
     contrasted with other views; eg, the artist as keeper and perpetuator of traditional stories, images,
     and histories; the public role of the artist; the political role of the artist; etc.

     In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
      If the role of the artist is purely to entertain, could other entertainers, athletes, etc be regarded
        as artists?
      Rather than being embraced by society as entertainers, artists have sometimes been outcasts and
        sometimes ostracized. Sometimes they have simply been lone individuals asserting the
        autonomy of the creative act in opposition to the standards set by society
      Is there a purpose to art apart from its own sake?
      Is there no place for strong passion or moral outrage in art? Does this make art a purely escapist
        activity offering easy pleasures and comfort?
      What makes an “artist”? The different ways in which artists are considered by the public:
        as genius, craftsman, visionary, producer etc
      The work of the artist reflects society. People can look at themselves and at the ideas of their
        society in the artist’s mirror. The artist makes clear what people do not ordinarily see
      The idea that the artist is not just entertaining, but creating and imagining; the artist is never
        content to do what has been done before. He/she is always exploring new ground, new ideas.
        The artist uses his/her imagination to see new possibilities
      The distinctions, if any, between high art and popular culture; the tension, if any, between great
        art and popular acceptance.
                                                 –9–              SPEC/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   To what extent does the beauty of an object depend on how we see it, rather than the way that
     it really is?

     This question offers an opportunity to discuss and evaluate the extent to which the beauty of an
     object depends on how we see it, or on how it really is. This could include discussion of what we
     mean by the term “beauty”, as well as opening up more general discussion and evaluation of what
     an aesthetic experience might or should be. Responses are likely to focus on the distinction
     between objectivity and subjectivity. On a subjective view there are no objective standards to
     judge beauty. Each person is the best judge of what beauty is. A radical subjectivist view would
     be that the audience does not define but actually creates the beauty. An objective view of beauty
     holds the view that there are objective standards of some kind which beauty can be judged by,
     such as balance, proportion, forms, etc.

     In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
      What is the origin and nature of a sense of beauty? Is this sense specific to the individual or to
        the culture, or is it universal?
      Objective/subjective view of beauty
      Absolute/relative views of beauty. The absolute yet abstract idea of “pure beauty” versus the
        relativistic nature of what people understand as beauty
      Art as a representation and imitation of nature; an attempt to capture the beauty in nature
      Issues around the use of intuition as a means to appreciate beauty
      Does the descent from beauty produce a loss of ability to stimulate the human imagination?
      Is the idea of pure beauty false, and merely a feature of the beholder? If so, art is subjective
        and has no value; in contrast, if art is only subjective, then by definition it creates a unique
        individual response
      What are the relationships between pure beauty and social cause? Are they always
        irreconcilable? Can one ever think of them together?
      Is it essential, or even important, to think about art in terms of beauty? What would be gained
        (or, lost) if we did not?
      If we assume a subjectivist position, and we consider that art is in the eye of the beholder, then
        everything could be considered as a work of art.
                                                 – 10 –           SPEC/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Optional Theme 2: Epistemology

5.   Evaluate the claim that the extent to which any group can exercise power in the world is
     determined by its access to knowledge.

     This question focuses on the issue of access to knowledge, and invites an evaluation of knowledge
     around the world and the idea that knowledge is power. Answers might challenge the claim and
     focus on knowledge in relation to other epistemological issues. The value of knowledge in
     advancing the interests of a group, and the social production, ownership, and mediation of
     knowledge might be evaluated. Candidates may focus on power through the perspectives
     of class, gender, or ethnicity, and their access to knowledge; the institutions or social
     constraints that inhibit the dissemination of knowledge, eg professional bodies, universities,
     economic ownership of ideas, etc. They may also discuss the social production of knowledge,
     epistemological relativism, and the possible connection between epistemological pluralism or
     perspectivism and democracies. They may also discuss things which are obstacles to accessing
     knowledge; patents, research grants, the institutionalization of knowledge restricted to universities
     and other special educational institutions, etc.

     In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
      Language as a patriarchal construction, with generation, production and ownership of knowledge
        being a male domain
      Objective claims for knowledge based on science, or on Platonic epistemology
      The market value of knowledge; the categories of knowledge that generate economic benefits
        and power eg science versus religious knowledge
      Intrinsic values of knowledge; ethical, religious, humanist
      The dissemination of knowledge and marketing of knowledge
      Is it the case that knowledge is determined by those in power, or that knowledge bestows power
        onto those who possess it?
      Are societies or cultures without technological knowledge doomed to extinction?
      Are the factual claims of science the only ones that can have a global market value because of
        their “objectivity”?
      Is social knowledge based primarily on tastes, whims and values, rather than on strictly
        rational beliefs?
      If “real” knowledge of the world, as opposed to opinions or beliefs about it, is independent of the
        thinker, then is it the case that, with enough time, all groups can access all knowledge?
      Is it justified that private companies own patents over knowledge?
                                                – 11 –            SPEC/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


6.   To what extent is knowledge dependent on experience?

     This question creates a platform for a discussion of a number of different issues to do with
     knowledge: acquisition, possession, sources of knowledge and justifications of knowledge.
     It invites discussion of different forms of knowledge eg, deduction, induction, introspection and
     intuition and how these allow access to bodies of knowledge. The question focuses on the claim by
     the empiricist that all knowledge is based on experience, and asks candidates to evaluate the extent
     to which they agree with the empiricists’ claim. Responses are likely to explore the different types
     of knowledge that might be acquired and the state of life that is necessary for various types
     of knowledge – for example, exploring the distinction between a priori knowledge, that is
     knowledge without experience, eg, propositions of logic (tautologies, analytic propositions) and
     a posteriori knowledge.

     In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
      Rationalism and the concept of innate knowledge or ideas
      Consideration of Platonic “Forms”; the idea that knowledge can only be reached beyond the
        physical world
      The Kantian critique of empiricism and the Kantian perspective on the relation between
        knowledge and experience
      Concepts of experience; empiricism, phenomenology or other holistic views
      The idea that in some eastern traditions “imaginative mind states” are a result of knowledge prior
        to birth
      Are there different qualities of knowledge dependent upon by what means they are acquired?
        Is deduction a stronger form of knowledge than induction – knowledge gained by experience is
        better than inference?
      The problem of a tabula rasa approach to acquiring knowledge
      If knowledge can be acquired prior to birth does an embryo have the ability to acquire
        knowledge? How valid is the claim that “there is nothing in the mind that has not been in
        the senses”?
      Is consciousness and intentionality a prerequisite for gaining knowledge? Do we just absorb
        knowledge or do we personally seek it?
      The possible difference between information and knowledge and the role of “truth” as a
        possible differentiator; if so, is mere information perhaps not knowledge?
      How far does knowledge of metaphysics, morality and logic rely upon experience of the
        physical world?
                                                  – 12 –            SPEC/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Optional Theme 3: Ethics

7.   With reference to one area of applied ethics, evaluate the grounds on which we should justify
     our moral judgments.

     Answers should clearly identify an area of applied ethics from the three areas identified in the
     philosophy subject guide: bio-medical ethics, environmental ethics, and distribution of wealth.
     The question then asks candidates to discuss and evaluate the grounds on which we should justify
     our moral judgments, making explicit reference to the area of applied ethics identified.
     The question is deliberately open to the development of many different lines of argument,
     and focuses on the nature of moral judgments. When we decide on ethical issues we make explicit
     or implicit moral judgments. The question asks for the ways in which it is possible to justify
     moral judgments, and, simultaneously, whether it is possible to base morality only on a kind of
     absolute decision without any other justification. The question is also concerned with metaethics,
     which deals with ethical discourse itself. In this case the issue refers to the legitimacy of the values
     or criteria that can be established as ground for judgments on specific moral issues. Good answers
     should focus on the main issues intended in the question, which are not, for instance, whether moral
     values are relative or universal, subjective or objective. If responses introduce these issues,
     they should clearly show their relevance to the question or to the arguments developed in
     the answer.

     In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
      How can we justify our moral judgments? Can moral judgments be justified on the same
        grounds that we use to justify non-moral judgments?
      Can moral judgments be proven, justified or shown to be valid? If so, how? On what grounds?
      Ethical skepticism; is it possible to have any rational or objective justification of moral
        judgments at all? Some existentialists might argue that ethical judgments are arbitrary and
        cannot be justified
      The claim that a moral judgment is only a decision predicated on non-examined assumptions
      Ethical naturalism; can we justify moral judgments by grounding them in an appeal to the nature
        of things?
      Intuitionism; are moral judgments self-evident and intuitive?
      Religious ethics; approaches which ground the justification of moral judgments in religion
      Often we justify moral judgments by reference to ethical rules or standards
      Ethical standards are used not only for moral evaluation of the actions of individuals, but also for
        moral evaluation of the laws of governments and societies.
                                                – 13 –            SPEC/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


8.   To what extent do you agree with the claim that character based approaches are more useful
     in making moral decisions than consequence based approaches?

     This question enables an exploration of the contrasting emphasis on character and consequences in
     different ethical systems. Answers might draw on specific examples of character based approaches,
     eg, virtue ethics. Sometimes referred to as an aretaic system, Aristotle places the realization of
     “excellences” as the defining attribute of moral living and he promotes the fulfilling of human
     potential as one that leads to eudaimonia (“happiness”, “flourishing”). Answers may also draw on
     specific examples of consequence based approaches, such as utilitarianism.

     In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
      What are character based approaches to ethics? What are consequence based approaches
        to ethics?
      Should ethics be a matter of character rather than judgment?
      Why might it be important not only to focus on the moral quality of a person’s actions but also
        on the moral quality of a person’s character?
      Whether character based approaches are more individualistic, and neglect the community
      The idea that approaches such as virtue ethics observe empirically the human condition and draw
        conclusions from the way we actually live, as opposed to seeking a final rational principle to
        govern all actions
      Is there a danger of circular argument in character based approaches? eg, the question of what is
        virtuous is answered by “doing actions that are virtuous”?
      The danger of ethical elitism in character based approaches; is it easier to flourish given a good
        education or good fortune in life?
      Is the de-emphasis on the role of actions in morality acceptable?
      Do approaches such as virtue ethics suffer from the danger of relativism and too much
        consideration of an individual’s circumstances?
      Perhaps no single moral theory/approach suits all circumstances, all problems, all persons.
        Or perhaps an alternative to both character or consequence based approaches is needed?
                                               – 14 –           SPEC/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Optional Theme 4: Philosophy and contemporary society

9.   To what extent do you agree with the claim that censorship is always an unjustifiable violation
     of people’s basic freedoms?

     This question focuses on discussion of whether censorship is always an unjustifiable violation of
     people’s basic freedoms. This links to the wider questions of if, when, and on what grounds,
     the state should limit individuals’ freedom. In support of their argument candidates may make
     reference to specific examples such as: Salman Rushdie; burning the American flag;
     bans on pornography; banning or burning of books; totalitarian censorship eg, Nazi Germany;
     modern day internet censorship eg, controls on internet in China. It is important to note that
     answers given to this question need to be explicitly philosophical rather than
     sociological/anthropological in nature.

     In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
      Does the state have a duty to protect society even if it means violating individuals’ freedom?
      On what grounds might the state be justified in limiting people’s freedoms?
      How should matters of intellectual freedom be decided?
      De Tocqueville – censorship has no place in a democracy
      Mill in On Liberty – argued for freedom of opinion on all subjects, but argued that there are
        some justifications eg, harm principle for certain restrictions on the exercise of freedom
      Socrates – free discussion has a public value; charged with corrupting the youth
      Voltaire – “I disapprove of what you say, but I will defend to the death your right to say it”
      Censorship as control, a way to quash subversion, and a violation of freedom
      Plato in The Republic argues society should control what children are exposed to
      Legal moralism; legal paternalism
      Protection of minority viewpoints
      Freedom of expression.
                                                   – 15 –            SPEC/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


10.   Evaluate the claim that social networking technologies are fundamentally changing the nature
      of social interactions and relationships.

      This question focuses on the impact of social networking technologies on the nature of social
      interactions and relationships. Social networking is not a new phenomenon, as it has been seen
      previously in things such as clubs, churches, communication by letters, etc. However it is a
      particularly pressing issue in 21st century society because of internet technologies. It is important to
      note that answers given to this question need to be explicitly philosophical rather than sociological /
      anthropological in nature.

      In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
       The different social relationships impacted by networking technologies, eg, friend to friend,
         parent to child, employer to employee
       How do social networking technologies change how we present our identity? How do they
         shape our identity?
       Being multiple people online, having multiple identities
       What are the differences between social interactions using networking technologies and face to
         face social interactions?
       Borgmann’s claim in Crossing the Postmodern Divide (1992), that online social environments
         are ethically deficient and cut off the pleasure of face to face contact
       Can you have a friend you have never met? Has the internet changed the nature of friendship?
       Relationships are enhanced by the added possibilities. New ways of interacting, new possibilities
         for social relationships
       Link to authority/control
       Anonymity; privacy; ethical implications
       Technological determinism – technology as a driver of social change that is beyond our control
       Differences in commitment and consequences as compared with face to face relationships.
                                                  – 16 –           SPEC/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Optional Theme 5: Philosophy of religion

11.   Evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of one argument for the existence of God.

      This question invites an evaluation of one argument for God’s existence. Any argument for the
      existence of God may be discussed, for example: the ontological argument, the cosmological
      argument/kalam cosmological argument, the teleological argument, karma as proof of God in
      Nyaya Hindu thought, the argument from miracles, the aesthetic argument, etc.

      In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
       The view that worldly features and human reasoning offer a route to God’s existence
       Design argument: Hume’s discussion of the design argument – both for and against; the link
         between design or teleological arguments and notions like “intelligent design”; design qua
         regularity and design qua purpose; Paley’s watch maker analogy; the discussion of imperfections
         of design; is God responsible for disease and natural disasters?; is there sufficient
         epistemic distance for a human to infer design about a world of which s/he is a part?;
         Darwin’s contribution to arguments about design
       Kant’s treatment of the cosmological argument and other design arguments and his contention
         that our view of the world is shaped by the way our mind acts on it
       What counts as an observable experience in relation to God?
       Cosmological argument: goes back to Aristotle, but gets its classic statement in the famous
         “five ways” of Aquinas – in particular his arguments for a first uncaused cause, a first
         unmoved mover, and a necessary being; cosmological arguments start from some obvious and
         general but a posteriori fact about the universe – that there are contingent beings, for example,
         or that things move or change
       Ontological argument: Anselm’s formulation; Kant’s objection: “existence is not a real
         predicate”; relevance of Kant’s dictum to Anselm’s argument; what might it mean to say that
         existence is not a real property or predicate? If it is not, how is that relevant to the argument?
         Why should Anselm care whether it is or not?
       Agnosticism: the view that human reason is incapable of providing sufficient rational grounds to
         justify either the belief that God exists or the belief that God does not exist; justifying
         agnosticism as a philosophical position requires a careful investigation of the limits of our
         cognitive powers; specifically, it must be shown that human reason is simply incapable of
         reaching either affirmative or negative judgments concerning the existence of the God of
         traditional theism or any sort of divine reality responsible for the existence of the
         natural universe
       Fideism: reasoning to God’s existence is futile, pointless, doomed to failure etc
       Naturalism’s basic thesis is that the only things about which reliable knowledge can be obtained
         are things that can be investigated by the methods of science
       Aquinas’s view of reason as a gift from God, part of the order of creation and thus designed to
         point to God’s existence
       Are the traditional arguments for God’s existence only of philosophical interest? Do religious
         believers rely on them to give credibility to their beliefs or are they signs only of what Anselm
         described as “faith seeking understanding”?
                                                  – 17 –            SPEC/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


12.   Evaluate the claim that all religious language is essentially meaningless.

      This question encourages an evaluation of the philosophical issues that arise when encountering
      religious language, especially in a modern, and in many places secular, world. Candidates may
      discuss the place of religious language in different cultures/traditions; for example, storytelling as
      the route to religious experience in native cultures, eg, Hopi Indian language and belief, or the
      emphasis in some Eastern traditions of religious understanding being transmitted through action
      rather than word. Answers are likely to focus on different views of religious language (eg, as
      symbolic, metaphorical, mythological, or analogous) and the inadequacy of language in capturing
      the divine (eg, via negativa; other traditions and their reflection on the gap between worldly
      language and the divine, etc).

      In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
       Claims that religious statements are meaningless if they cannot be verified, eg, Ayer and
         verificationism
       Religious statements as verifiable after death, eg, Hick
       Artistic, imaginative, or non-literal language as a route to conveying a religious worldview
       Religion as a legitimate language game, eg, Wittgenstein
       Criticisms of verificationist approaches to meaning and religious language; the verification
         principle itself cannot be verified by its own criteria for meaning
       Cognitive versus non-cognitive approaches to religious language
       Any criticism of language uses language itself to make its point
       Can any sense be made of notions that humans cannot experience, like perfection, infinity,
         ineffability etc?
       The problem of communicating or verifying private, personal religious experience
       Metaphorical, poetic, symbolic, artistic language in relation to religion
       Problems associated with anthropomorphizing God
       Knowledge of God directly or through feeling and talking about God’s effects in the world
       Are the “problems” associated with the use of religious language similar, in some ways, to those
         encountered when reflecting on poetic, figurative or literary language? If yes, what can we infer
         from this?
                                                   – 18 –            SPEC/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Optional Theme 6: Philosophy of science

13.   Evaluate the claim that the proper goals of science are simplicity, explanation and prediction,
      not truth.

      This question invites discussion of the goals of science. Instrumentalists about science hold that
      scientific theories about unobservable phenomena (like electrons, viruses, etc) are not true
      descriptions of an unobservable world but useful instruments (at best) for generating
      observable predictions. Realists, by contrast, hold that science can, and does, discover truths about
      unobservable phenomena as well as about observable phenomena. Some question the claim that
      scientific theories are true descriptions of an independent reality by pointing to the fact that so many
      such theories have been discredited. Many naturalists have contended that the history of scientific
      theorizing attests to the fact that it is best to focus on goals like simplicity, predictive success,
      fruitfulness, etc. They do not thereby concede that the ultimate goal of science is something other
      than truth (since there is no incompatibility between focusing on those goals and the discovery
      of truth) but see those goals as easier to defend.

      In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
       What are/should be the goals of science?
       The distinction between realism and instrumentalism in science
       The relationship between scientific observation and truth
       The relationship between the methodological strategies employed in science and truth
       The Duhem-Quine thesis is often appealed to for support but it can be challenged by urging that
         even if a number of different theories are consistent with any given set of observations it does
         not follow that we cannot rationally choose between the competing theories
       Some (like Feyerabend and Kuhn) go further and claim that objective truth is not even possible
         for observable phenomena because they contend that prior theorizing influences the observations
         we make and the significance we attach to those observations
       The claim that observational data is always compatible with a number of mutually inconsistent
         theories about unobservable phenomena and thus that there can be no single compelling theory
         (that constitutes the truth)
       Even false theories may contain elements of the whole truth
       Convergence may be in evidence as succeeding theories get closer to the truth by building on
         predecessor theories.
                                                   – 19 –           SPEC/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


14.   Evaluate the claim that it is unfair to hold scientists responsible for the consequences of their
      scientific discoveries.

      This question invites a discussion and evaluation of whether scientists should be held morally
      responsible for the consequences of their scientific discoveries. It invites an evaluation that
      might address, among other issues, the extent of the responsibility of scientists for their discoveries
      and the responsibility for the predictable consequences of actions. Answers may include some
      discussion of general issues relating to holding people morally responsible for the consequences of
      their actions, such as the unpredictability of consequences, or the difficulty of measuring and
      comparing positive and negative consequences. Answers should however focus specifically on
      discussing the case of scientists.

      In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
       Can scientists be held morally responsible for not acting?
       Do scientists have special responsibilities above other persons?
       Can we hold anyone morally responsible for anything? If the world is determined is there any
         moral responsibility at all?
       Examples – eg, can we hold the inventor of the car responsible for the harmful emissions?
       Whether governments have a responsibility to regulate scientific research rather than it being the
         responsibility of individual scientists (eg, regulations concerning human cloning)
       Would holding scientists morally responsible for the consequences of their discoveries limit
         progress and risk taking in the sciences?
       How do we weigh up positive and negative consequences – eg, ammonia used in fertilizers,
         but also used by Germany to produce explosives, etc resulting in millions of deaths.
         Should Fritz Haber be held morally responsible for those deaths?
       Is there some scientific knowledge that is immoral to pursue, or is it just how scientific
         knowledge is used that can be immoral?
       Difficulty in predicting consequences of discoveries and actions, particularly long term
         consequences
       Where should we draw the line as to where the consequences stop? Should we consider the
         impact on non-human animals or the environment, or just humans? Should we include impact
         on future generations when assessing the consequences of scientific discoveries?
                                                   – 20 –           SPEC/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Optional Theme 7: Political philosophy

15.   Evaluate the claim that freedom and equality are not just compatible but that for there to be
      comparable freedom for all there must first be equality.

      This question invites an exploration of the relationship between freedom and equality. Those who
      believe that freedom and equality are incompatible generally rest their case on the contention that to
      achieve substantive equality among the members of a society requires coercive measures such as
      taxation to transfer funds from the better off to the less well off. Those who deny that freedom and
      equality are incompatible generally seek to turn the tables on their opponents by charging that
      equality is, in fact, necessary for the exercise of a comparable degree of freedom by all the members
      of a society. As well as arguing against the need for large incentive payments and the justifiability
      of claims of desert and entitlement, they point to the fact that significant inequalities in income and
      wealth lead to power being concentrated among the wealthy and that the concentration of wealth
      and power significantly obstructs the opportunity less well off individuals have to exercise their
      civil and political liberties and fulfil their life plans. In short, without substantive equality as
      between the members of a society the scope the less well off have to exercise their autonomy is
      greatly diminished as compared with the scope available to the better off.

      In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
       Is freedom best characterized negatively or positively?
       Is equality best characterized formally (procedurally) or substantively?
       The relationship (if any) between individual desert and entitlement and fairness in the
         distribution of income and wealth
       The impact of concentrations of wealth, and significant differences in incomes between the
         better off and the worse off, and the differences in opportunities and freedom available to the
         worse off
       Do coercive measures necessarily involve interfering with the civil and political liberties of
         individuals, with their capacity to exploit their talents and thus the returns they deserve for the
         exercise of those talents, and with their control over the income and wealth to which they are
         thus entitled?
       Examples of inequalities – eg, differences in the socio-economic classes into which people
         are born, and differences in their natural abilities or talents for tasks which are in demand;
         economic and educational disadvantages: some can overcome those disadvantages, but it is much
         harder than making good from a higher starting point
       Equality of opportunity and equality of outcome; some people will have a head start and will end
         up with greater benefits than others whose native talents are the same
       Might inequalities which seem wrong arise from causes which do not involve people doing
         anything wrong?
       Is equality possible? Desirable? Why might some inequalities be deliberately imposed?
                                                    – 21 –            SPEC/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


16.   To what extent do you agree that there are some areas of human life which governments
      should not attempt to regulate?

      This question invites discussion of the limits, if any, of the state’s right and authority to intervene in
      the private sphere of individual citizens. The complementary question of the limits of individual
      liberty may also be discussed. Modern liberal ideas on the limits of government are based on a
      two-fold notion: that of a private sphere to the life of an individual that is inviolate, and the ability
      of an individual to make choices within that sphere. Answers may make use of specific examples
      of different cases for government regulation, for example: physical harm from drugs, suicide,
      euthanasia, in vitro fertilisation, genetic profiling, censorship of images and ideas, a welfare state
      for the economically harmed, care of the mentally impaired, etc.

      In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
       Mill’s prescription of harm to others is often cited as a justification for state regulation
         and intervention, and as a prohibition on individual choices. It is the degree and scope of harm
         that causes debate, particularly when applied to issues involving the tastes of individuals
       The issues of “ownership” of the body and the limits of the self are central to determining the
         concepts of private/public, the rational selection of choices, and the rights and liberties of
         an individual
       The role of the state in upholding the cultural values of a society; fascism, theocracy,
         communism, and other ideologies argue that this is a legitimate concern for the state, and thus
         the state is justified in intervening in the life of an individual
       The claim that sometimes government regulation is necessary to protect humans from
         themselves because they are inherently bad
       The libertarian mistrust of government regulation and intervention
       The idea of freedom of the individual in relation to speech, ideas, etc is not absolute. In modern
         liberal democracies there are already laws that prohibit certain types of speech, images,
         and self-referential actions.
SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX




PHILOSOPHY
HIGHER LEVEL AND STANDARD LEVEL
PAPER 2

SPECIMEN PAPER

1 hour


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
Answer both parts of one question.
The maximum mark for this examination paper is [25 marks].




                                                                                                   5 pages
                                                           © International Baccalaureate Organization 2014
                                                   –2–                 SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Answer both parts (a and b) of one question. Each question is worth [25 marks].

Simone de Beauvoir: The Second Sex, Vol. 1 part 1, Vol. 2 part 1 and Vol. 2 part 4

1.   (a)   Explain de Beauvoir’s claim that “one is not born, but rather becomes, woman”.       [10 marks]

     (b)   To what extent do you agree with this claim that there is a difference between sex
           and gender?                                                                          [15 marks]


2.   (a)   Explain de Beauvoir’s distinction between immanence and transcendence.               [10 marks]

     (b)   Discuss the implications of this distinction.                                        [15 marks]




René Descartes: Meditations

3.   (a)   Explain Descartes’s concept of clear and distinct ideas.                             [10 marks]

     (b)   To what extent do you agree with Descartes’s claim that there are clear and
           distinct ideas?                                                                      [15 marks]


4.   (a)   Explain Descartes’s argument for the existence of the external world.                [10 marks]

     (b)   Evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of this argument.                              [15 marks]




David Hume: Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion

5.   (a)   Explain Demea’s argument that the nature of God can never be known.                  [10 marks]

     (b)   Evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of this argument.                              [15 marks]


6.   (a)   Explain Cleanthes’s account of the argument from design.                             [10 marks]

     (b)   To what extent do you find this argument convincing?                                 [15 marks]
                                                   –3–                  SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

John Stuart Mill: On Liberty

7.    (a)   Explain Mill’s view of the relationship between liberty and utility.                 [10 marks]

      (b)   To what extent are liberty and utility fundamentally conflicting concepts?           [15 marks]


8.    (a)   Explain Mill’s views of the value of free speech.                                    [10 marks]

      (b)   Evaluate the claim that Mill overestimates the value of free speech to individuals
            and societies.                                                                       [15 marks]




Friedrich Nietzsche: The Genealogy of Morals

9.    (a)   Explain the view that morality has a clear and traceable genealogy.                  [10 marks]

      (b)   To what extent do you agree with the genealogy Nietzsche proposes?                   [15 marks]


10.   (a)   Explain Nietzsche’s account of ascetic ideals.                                       [10 marks]

      (b)   To what extent does Nietzsche’s account of ascetic ideals sustain an idea
            of truth?                                                                            [15 marks]




Martha Nussbaum: Creating Capabilities: The Human Development Approach

11.   (a)   Explain Nussbaum’s claim that it is impossible for human beings to flourish with
            dignity if certain basic human needs and capacities are not met.                     [10 marks]

      (b)   To what extent do you agree with the claim that there is a correlation between the
            satisfaction of basic human needs and the achievement of human flourishing?          [15 marks]


12.   (a)   Explain Nussbaum’s criticisms of using gross domestic product (GDP) as a
            measure of quality of life.                                                          [10 marks]

      (b)   To what extent do you agree with Nussbaum that GDP is unsatisfactory as a
            measure of quality of life?                                                          [15 marks]




                                                                                                 Turn over
                                                     –4–                 SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Ortega y Gasset: The Origins of Philosophy

13.   (a)   Explain how Ortega interprets Thales’s assertion that “all things are full of gods”.   [10 marks]

      (b)   To what extent do you agree with Ortega’s evaluation of this assertion?                [15 marks]


14.   (a)   Explain Ortega’s view of the philosophical past.                                       [10 marks]

      (b)   Examine how Ortega’s view of the philosophical past serves the purpose of
            constructing a new philosophical synthesis.                                            [15 marks]




Plato: The Republic, Books IV – IX

15.   (a)   Explain Plato’s distinctions between knowledge, belief and ignorance.                  [10 marks]

      (b)   Discuss the viability of these distinctions.                                           [15 marks]


16.   (a)   Explain Plato’s system of education.                                                   [10 marks]

      (b)   Evaluate the claim that Plato’s system of education is crucial for preparing its
            citizens or leaders to create a just state.                                            [15 marks]




Peter Singer: The Life You Can Save

17.   (a)   Explain Singer’s “Basic Argument” that we are obligated to give to aid agencies.       [10 marks]

      (b)   Evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of this argument.                                [15 marks]


18.   (a)   Explain the common objections to giving to charity identified by Singer.               [10 marks]

      (b)   To what extent do you agree with Singer’s view on why people do not give more
            to charity?                                                                            [15 marks]
                                                   –5–                  SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Charles Taylor: The Ethics of Authenticity

19.   (a)   Explain Taylor’s argument that individuals need to find their authenticity through
            dialogue with others.                                                                [10 marks]

      (b)   To what extent do you find this argument convincing?                                 [15 marks]


20.   (a)   Explain what Taylor means by “soft despotism”.                                       [10 marks]

      (b)   Examine Taylor’s reasons for considering soft despotism as a major problem in
            contemporary society.                                                                [15 marks]




Lao Tzu: Tao Te Ching

21.   (a)   Explain the relationship between the principle of non-action (wu wei) and
            inner stillness.                                                                     [10 marks]

      (b)   Evaluate the claim that without the principle of non-action (wu wei) life will be
            competitive and unfulfilling.                                                        [15 marks]


22.   (a)   Explain the view of the state found in the Tao Te Ching.                             [10 marks]

      (b)   To what extent do you agree that adopting the political teachings of the Tao
            would improve contemporary societies?                                                [15 marks]




Zhuangzi: Zhuangzi

23.   (a)   Explain the distinction between “small knowledge” and “big knowledge” as
            described by Zhuangzi.                                                               [10 marks]

      (b)   Evaluate the claim that “big knowledge” is unattainable.                             [15 marks]


24.   (a)   Explain Zhuangzi’s view on the unity and harmony of the world.                       [10 marks]

      (b)   Discuss whether the claim that the world is a harmonious whole is inconsistent
            with our experience of evil and suffering.                                           [15 marks]
SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                          SPECIMEN



                        PHILOSOPHY



           Higher Level and Standard Level



                                Paper 2




30 pages
    –2–         SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




Page is blank
                                                 –3–             SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Note to examiners
This markscheme outlines what members of the paper setting team had in mind when they devised
the questions. The topics listed in the bullet points indicate possible areas candidates might cover in
their answers. They are not compulsory points and not necessarily the best possible points. They are
only a framework to help examiners in their assessment. Examiners should be responsive to any other
valid points or any other valid approaches.

Candidates at both Higher Level and Standard Level answer one question on the prescribed texts.
Each question consists of two parts, and candidates must answer both parts of the question (a and b).

Answers are assessed according to the markbands set out on pages 4–5.
                                                –4–               SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 2 Section A markbands

 Marks                                         Level descriptor

   0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

  1–2     There is little relevant knowledge of the specified idea/argument/concept from the text.
          The explanation is minimal.
          Philosophical vocabulary is not used, or is consistently used inappropriately.

  3–4     Some knowledge of the specified idea/argument/concept from the text is demonstrated but
           this lacks accuracy, relevance and detail.
          The explanation is basic and in need of development.
          Philosophical vocabulary is not used, or is consistently used inappropriately.

  5–6     Knowledge of the specified idea/argument/concept from the text is mostly accurate and
           relevant, but lacking in detail.
          There is a satisfactory explanation.
          Philosophical vocabulary is used, sometimes appropriately.

  7–8     The response contains accurate and relevant knowledge of the specified idea/
           argument/concept from the text.
          The explanation is clear, although may be in need of further development.
          Philosophical vocabulary is mostly used appropriately.

  9–10    The response contains relevant, accurate and detailed knowledge of the specified
           idea/argument/concept from the text.
          The explanation is clear and well developed.
          There is appropriate use of philosophical vocabulary throughout the response.
                                                  –5–               SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 2 Section B markbands

 Marks                                           Level descriptor

   0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

  1–3       There is little relevant knowledge of the text.
            Philosophical vocabulary is not used, or is consistently used inappropriately.
            The response is mostly descriptive with very little analysis.
            There is no discussion of alternative interpretations or points of view.

  4–6       Some knowledge of the text is demonstrated but this lacks accuracy and relevance.
            Philosophical vocabulary is used, sometimes appropriately.
            There is some limited analysis, but the response is more descriptive than analytical.
            There is little discussion of alternative interpretations or points of view.
            Some of the main points are justified.

  7–9       Knowledge of the text is mostly accurate and relevant.
            Philosophical vocabulary is used, sometimes appropriately.
            The response contains analysis, but this analysis lacks development.
            There is some discussion of alternative interpretations or points of view.
            Many of the main points are justified.

 10–12      The response contains accurate and relevant knowledge of the text.
            Philosophical vocabulary is mostly used appropriately.
            The response contains clear critical analysis.
            There is discussion and some assessment of alternative interpretations or points of view.
            Most of the main points are justified.

 13–15      The response contains relevant, accurate and detailed knowledge of the text.
            There is appropriate use of philosophical vocabulary throughout the response.
            The response contains clear and well developed critical analysis.
            There is discussion and assessment of alternative interpretations or points of view.
            All or nearly all of the main points are justified.
                                                 –6–              SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Simone de Beauvoir: The Second Sex, Vol. 1 part 1, Vol. 2 part 1 and Vol. 2 part 4

1.   (a)   Explain de Beauvoir’s claim that “one is not born, but rather becomes, woman.” [10 marks]

           This question focuses on the distinction between sex and gender, and the view that gender is a
           part of identity that is gradually acquired rather than something one is born with.
           The quotation comes from the opening line of Vol. 2, Part 1, Chapter 1.

           Candidates might explore:
            The female body as positive and negative; how it is perceived by society
            Men’s perception of women; woman as the Other; man as the subject and woman as
             the object
            De Beauvoir discusses female experiences such as pregnancy but says it is how they are
             seen that makes them a burden/disadvantage, not the experiences themselves
            De Beauvoir says that birth and weaning are the same for boys and girls, and that
             pre-adolescent boys and girls have “the same interests and the same pleasures” and that it
             is societal expectation and influence which changes this.


     (b)   To what extent do you agree with this claim that there is a difference between
           sex and gender?                                                                [15 marks]

           Possible discussion points include:
            If one becomes a woman, how does this “becoming” happen?
            Relationship to existentialist freedom and self-creation
            Do you agree with de Beauvoir that a child does not “grasp himself as sexually
             differentiated”?
            Whether a woman’s vocation is “imperiously breathed into her from the first years of
             her life”
            Influence of religions on girls, particularly religions dominated by male figures
            Why does de Beauvoir claim that the girl “makes her way towards the future wounded,
             shamed, worried and guilty”?
            Whether de Beauvoir is too pessimistic about the female sex, or even guilty of misogyny.
                                                 –7–          SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   (a)   Explain de Beauvoir’s distinction between immanence and transcendence.       [10 marks]

           De Beauvoir’s views on the oppression of women are based on her view that women are
           defined by men as the Other. She expands this idea with reference to the notions of
           immanence and transcendence. Society traps women in immanence and they therefore cannot
           achieve transcendence and freedom.

           Candidates might explore:
            Immanence as used to designate females, and as a passive, static realm
            Transcendence as used to designate males, and as active, powerful, etc
            Human lives should involve the interplay of both immanence and transcendence, but men
             deny women their transcendence.


     (b)   Discuss the implications of this distinction.                                [15 marks]

           Possible discussion points include:
            Relationship to freedom; is women’s freedom destroyed by being denied transcendence or
             does it remain?
            Are women oppressed by being relegated to the status of the Other?
            Are women forced to relinquish their claims to transcendence? How?
            Do women really have a passive role whereas men have an active role?
            What role do women play in their own subjection and denial of transcendence?
                                                 –8–             SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


René Descartes: Meditations

3.   (a)   Explain Descartes’s concept of clear and distinct ideas.                          [10 marks]

           Skeptical doubt is the fundamental method of enquiry. By removing from consciousness all
           images of corporeal things, then only that which is very clearly and distinctly apprehended or
           conceived is true.

           Candidates might explore:
            The rebuilding of the world begins with the discovery of the self through the cogito, a self
             knows only as a thinking thing, and it does so independently of the senses
            Within this thinking self, Descartes discovers an idea of God, an idea of something so
             perfect that it could not have been caused in us by anything with less perfection than
             God himself. From this he concluded that God must exist, which, in turn, guarantees that
             reason can be trusted
            God also guarantees the reliability of the senses, but the notion of God is clearly and
             distinctly perceived thanks to its implantation by God
            Since we are made in such a way that we cannot help holding certain beliefs – the so-called
             “clear and distinct” perceptions – God would be a deceiver, and thus imperfect, if such
             beliefs were wrong
            Any mistakes must be due to our own misuse of reason and will.


     (b)   To what extent do you agree with Descartes’s claim that there are clear and
           distinct ideas?                                                            [15 marks]

           Possible discussion points include:
            Does Descartes provide rational criteria to know when an idea is clear and distinct, or is
             this principle a general comparison or metaphor?
            Descartes takes for granted that he has a faculty, intuition, by which he is capable of
             grasping truth in some immediate way, and what he knows by intuition is worthy of trust.
             But why should we trust intuition?
            Why should we attend only to those objects of which our minds seem capable of having
             certain and indubitable cognition?
            Different conceptions of truth and ways of apprehending it
            This central argument in Descartes’s philosophy is threatened with circularity; since the
             arguments that establish the trustworthiness of reason – the cogito argument and the
             argument for the existence of God – themselves seem to depend on the trustworthiness
             of reason
            Can clear and distinct ideas stand as truths and as bases of knowledge without appeal to
             God as the guarantor of their truth?
                                                  –9–             SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   (a)   Explain Descartes’s argument for the existence of the external world.              [10 marks]

           Skeptical doubt is the fundamental method of enquiry. By removing from consciousness all
           images of corporeal things, only that which is very clearly and distinctly apprehended or
           conceived is true. Because of this doubt, the existence of the external world could be
           an illusion, or, at the least, contingent upon something else. But because Descartes is certain
           of God’s existence he anchors the reliability of our cognitions in God, who does not deceive.

           Candidates might explore:
            All ideas must be caused by something or someone different from the one who has the idea,
             and, because I am a finite being, I cannot have originally conceived of an infinite substance;
             it can only have been given to me by some being who is infinite
            The distinction Descartes makes between innate, adventitious and factitious ideas
            The idea of God is not drawn from the senses, nor is it pure production or fiction; it is
             innate in the same way as the idea of myself is, which I also received from God
            Descartes’s idea of God is a being that is eternal, infinite, all-knowing, all-powerful, and
             the creator of all things that are outside of Himself. The idea of God has in it more
             objective reality than those ideas which represent finite substances.


     (b)   Evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of this argument.                            [15 marks]

           Possible discussion points include:
            A problem for this argument is the status of the claim that “I cannot clearly and distinctly
             believe that there is no God”
            Descartes makes certain assumptions about God’s nature (as well as His existence), eg, His
             reliability in guaranteeing the correctness of our sense experiences. Are they well founded?
            Why must the idea of God be externally inspired and not a direct product of my desire
             or will?
            Descartes makes God’s existence and nature the guarantee for reality. Is he justified in
             doing this if science leaves existence contingent upon random forces and processes?
            How much of the argument about the existence of the external world holds or can be
             rescued without recourse to God? Is it still reasonable to believe in the existence of the
             external world without believing in God?
            Whether the idea of God is like the ideas of mathematics and extension (clear and distinct)?
             Is it dependent on being situated within a Christian cultural frame?
                                               – 10 –          SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


David Hume: Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion

5.   (a)   Explain Demea’s argument that the nature of God can never be known.            [10 marks]

           Demea argues that although we know that God exists, we do not and cannot know
           God’s nature. He argues that the nature and attributes of God are “mysterious to men”.

           Candidates might explore:
            Sentiments such as love, resentment, etc all “have a plain reference to the state and
             situation of man” and cannot be transferred onto God. We cannot use human qualities to
             describe the nature of God, or cannot assume that they mean the same thing
            Demea says that when we read a book we enter the mind of the author, but this is not the
             case with God
            Demea quotes authorities such as Malebranche to support his argument.


     (b)   Evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of this argument.                        [15 marks]

           Possible discussion points include:
            Whether God’s nature is beyond the limits of human understanding
            Do any attempts to know/understand God inevitably fall into the trap of
             anthropomorphism?
            Cleanthes’s argument that we can know some aspects of the nature of God, using the
             argument from design – if the world is ordered and logical we can assume that it was
             created by a similar intelligence
            Can we only imagine the finite, not the infinite?
            Does the existence of evil in the world tell us anything about God’s moral attributes?
                                                – 11 –           SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


6.   (a)   Explain Cleanthes’s account of the argument from design.                         [10 marks]

           Cleanthes is the character in the Dialogues who is often thought to represent the pragmatic
           skeptic. He states that the only rational way to argue for God’s existence is to argue from
           experience, and that the design and order found in nature demonstrate that there must be an
           intelligent designer or creator.

           Candidates might explore:
            Whether this version of the design argument is an argument from analogy
            Cleanthes argues that the fact that nature seems advantageous to humans proves the
             existence of a benevolent designer
            Cleanthes asks us to imagine a voice from the clouds “much louder and more melodious
             than any which human art could ever reach”, and argues that we would have no hesitation
             in ascribing it intelligence. He argues that nature is equally indicative of intelligence
             and design.


     (b)   To what extent do you find this argument convincing?                             [15 marks]

           Possible discussion points include:
            The criticism that the argument is based on a faulty analogy
            Argument that the universe is more like an organism than a machine
            The claim that since we did not witness the creation of the universe we have no way of
             knowing how it happened
            Counter-argument that just because we do not know whether the world is designed does
             not mean that it is not
            Philo’s arguments that we cannot validly argue by comparing what we observe in a small
             part of the universe to the universe as a whole, and that just because the world is ordered
             does not necessarily mean it is designed
            Natural selection can be argued to provide an explanation for why the universe seems well
             suited to humans
            Whether the existence of evil is compatible with the existence of a benevolent designer
            Demea’s argument that all a posteriori arguments are inconclusive anyway.
                                                  – 12 –            SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


John Stuart Mill: On Liberty

7.   (a)   Explain Mill’s view of the relationship between liberty and utility.                 [10 marks]

           Mill’s moral outlook is dominated by the notion of utility; the sole matter in consideration for
           the rightness or wrongness of any action is the amount, and quality, of the utility it produces.
           Mill’s main argument concerns the issue of liberty, in which he makes a general case that
           there is no justification for any other individual to limit the freedom of action of any
           individual except where that individual’s actions would cause harm - the harm principle.

           Candidates might explore:
            Mill’s handling of liberty – positive and negative notions of freedom
            Mill believes liberty is not afforded a high enough estimation as a necessary part of
              civilization and he believes people’s attitudes and actions should reflect respect for liberty
            Mill also looks into the issue of the best conditions for individuality to grow, and appeals
              to the full development of the whole human being; does this require stepping out of the
              narrow confines of utilitarian calculation?


     (b)   To what extent are liberty and utility fundamentally conflicting concepts?           [15 marks]

           The two principles of liberty and utility may seem to come into conflict since it is very
           possible to conceive of occasions when guaranteeing liberty would not lead to the greatest
           accumulation of pleasure or utility. However Mill disagrees, not by maintaining a right
           to freedom, but rather by appealing to the long-term consequences of restricting it,
           eg, the dangers of conformity.

           Possible discussion points include:
            How do Mill’s views on liberty fit with his views on the significance of utility?
            Generally if more utility can be produced from restricting liberty, then for a utilitarian that
             would seem to be desirable
            Sovereignty of the individual – Mill regards the effect on those around the individual of
             that individual’s self-harming activity as an “inconvenience […] which society can afford
             to bear, for the sake of the greater good of human freedom”; many would object to this and
             claim that Mill disregards the effect of self-harming activity on close friends/others,
             thereby offending his law of utility
            Mill sets the utilitarian calculation beyond individual societies and regards it as
             “the ultimate appeal on all ethical questions; but it must be utility in the largest sense,
             grounded on the permanent interests of man as a progressive being” (Chapter 1);
             when Mill talks about utility in its largest sense he talks about “the Human Race” or even
             “species” – so in his casting of the utilitarian calculation net Mill adjusts his account by
             claiming that satisfying liberty is always maximally utilitarian; is this persuasive?
            For Mill, utility is the primary rule by which other rules are judged, thus the principles of
             liberty and utility are not in direct competition because one is subordinate to, and indeed
             contained in, the other.
                                                 – 13 –            SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


8.   (a)   Explain Mill’s views of the value of free speech.                                   [10 marks]

           Mill defends absolute free speech as a benefit and necessity for a progressive and free society,
           and as a necessary element in the formation of a virtuous character in the individual.
           Mill’s defence rests on four points:

           (a)   If an opinion is silenced, it may in fact be true. This denies the majority the benefit of
                 the truth. Silencing opinion also assumes infallibility on the issue.
           (b)   Even if the new opinion contains error, it may be partially true and can act as a
                 supplement to the prevailing truth.
           (c)   If the current opinion is wholly true it still needs re-justification to the majority
                 otherwise it becomes a prejudice.
           (d)   Truths need opposing ideas to keep them alive and vital.

           Candidates might explore:
            Knowing different opinions leads to a refinement in character and in moral judgments
            Individuals are better placed to know what is more useful for themselves than for others
            The complete liberty to contradict and disprove opinions is the very condition that justifies
             us in assuming the truth
            On no other terms can a person have a rational assurance of being right
            Mill uses the example of organized religion as an example of how a noble institution can
             lead to ignorance in its followers by silencing contrary opinions.


     (b)   Evaluate the claim that Mill overestimates the value of free speech to
           individuals and societies.                                             [15 marks]

           Possible discussion points include:
            Does Mill discuss the harm and/or offence inflicted on others by speech (eg, Holocaust
             denial, racial hatred)? Are these examples legitimate criticism of Mill’s argument for
             absolute free speech, or a criticism that ignores historical context?
            With the current focus of Western governments on terrorism, are governments justified in
             silencing speech they deem as dangerous?
            Whether freedom of speech is a necessary element for the moral progress of a society.
             Is the current social alienation in Western societies caused by a lack of firm and clear
             values and beliefs that everyone can hold?
            Has the proliferation of information in the modern technological age been of any long
             lasting social benefit?
                                                 – 14 –            SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Friedrich Nietzsche: The Genealogy of Morals

9.   (a)   Explain the view that morality has a clear and traceable genealogy.                 [10 marks]

     This question asks for an explanation of the basic claim made by Nietzsche that human morality has
     an origin that can be defined and traced. The First Essay sets out to investigate the origin of moral
     values through an etymological quest for the root meanings of ethical terms. By this means the
     genealogical approach traces morals and values back to their origins, and to the instinct to dominate.

           Candidates might explore:
            Moral words in various languages are transformed from other concepts, eg, debt
            Refinement and nobility, in the sense of social standing, are fundamental concepts from
              which goodness is derived, eg, “good” in the sense of “having a refined soul”, “noble” in
              the sense of being “superior in soul”
            It is a frequent practice of those of higher rank to name themselves according to their sense
              of superiority; “masters”, “nobles”, “those who command”
            The noble, the powerful, the superior, and the high-minded were the ones who felt
              themselves and their actions to be good in contrast to everyone low, low-minded, common,
              and plebeian. These high-minded people claimed the right to create values and to coin the
              names of values
            The “will to power” of the nobles is the source of their claimed right to determine good
              and bad.


     (b)   To what extent do you agree with the genealogy Nietzsche proposes?                  [15 marks]

           Possible discussion points include:
            The assertion that language originates from the “will to power” could be an exaggeration
            Language has different functions. Exerting power is only one possible function
             of language
            Nietzsche’s analysis is based on an alleged historical reconstruction, whereas it is only a
             record of semantic changes
            Nietzsche’s genealogy could be seen to divide society in an overly simplistic way,
             namely into nobles and members of the herd
            There are significant implications for the foundations of morality given that Nietzsche
             rejects conventional morality
            Should moral discussion go beyond an analysis of language?
                                                   – 15 –            SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


10.   (a)   Explain Nietzsche’s account of ascetic ideals.                                        [10 marks]

            Nietzsche views the ascetic ideal (see the Third Essay) both as a preserver of life and as a
            denier of life. The restricted conditions of morality literally protect and preserve life, and set
            up a clear distinction and appreciation of the values that make life bearable. The ascetic ideal
            is an expression of the human horror of a moral vacuum, thus the ascetic ideal is an
            expression of a “will to power”.

            Candidates might explore:
             Examples of ascetic ideals including atheism, philosophy, religion and science
             The form of the ascetic ideal comes in types or guises. In ancient cultures, this was
              the priest, and in contemporary cultures it is the philosophers, scientists, etc. Characteristic
              of both types is their denial or rejection of the sensual aspects of life, and the creation of an
              ideal impossible for humanity to achieve
             The “will to power” is an amoral drive that seeks out the best conditions to enhance life.
              What distinguishes humanity is its ability to exploit advantage. It is not to be understood as
              being driven by pleasure or hedonism, as it has no specific goal except to express itself
             Nietzsche identifies the desire for the “kernel of truth” as responsible for not only the death
              of God but as the motivation for adopting the ascetic ideal
             The three great catchphrases of the ascetic ideal are poverty, humility, and chastity. If we
              look closely at the lives of all “great, prolific, inventive spirits” we always discover these
              three to a certain degree.


      (b)   To what extent does Nietzsche’s account of ascetic ideals sustain an idea
            of truth?                                                                 [15 marks]

            Possible discussion points include:
             Nietzsche proposes the search for truth as a counter to the will to power
             It is debatable whether Nietzsche’s negation of the truth as an absolute value means a
              complete surpassing of it or his position opens a possible new or different conception
              of truth
             Objective truth is the claim and promise of the ascetic ideal and this is the motive and
              source for the attenuation of the will to power
             The extent to which it is legitimate to reduce truth and knowledge to basic beliefs
             A belief in an absolute truth or an absolute anything is to give in to one particular meaning,
              one particular interpretation of a thing
             Does Nietzsche’s perspectivism necessarily deny the individual the concept of an authentic
              set of moral values?
                                                  – 16 –           SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Martha Nussbaum: Creating Capabilities: The Human Development Approach

11.   (a)   Explain Nussbaum’s claim that it is impossible for human beings to flourish
            with dignity if certain basic human needs and capacities are not met.       [10 marks]

            Nussbaum’s capabilities approach draws on Aristotle and Marx. She seeks an approach
            where humans can fully express their human powers, and argues that we have an intuition of a
            dignified life in which people have the capability to pursue the good. A life of dignity
            requires as a minimum ten central capabilities: life; bodily health; bodily integrity; senses,
            imagination and thought; emotions; practical reason; affiliation; concern for other species;
            play; and control over one’s environment.

            Candidates might explore:
             We should treat people as ends; key question should be: “What is each person able to do
              and to be?” (Chapter 2)
             Dignity: a focus on dignity is very different from a focus on other things such
              as satisfaction
             Dignity is closely related to the concept of “active striving”
             There are some freedoms “so central that their removal makes a life not worthy of human
              dignity” (Chapter 2)
             Begins from a commitment to equal dignity of all human beings; people should be
              guaranteed a social minimum which will allow their capabilities to be realized.


      (b)   To what extent do you agree with the claim that there is a correlation
            between the satisfaction of basic human needs and the achievement of
            human flourishing?                                                     [15 marks]

            Possible discussion points include:
             Do theories of development tend to ignore basic human needs for dignity and self-respect?
             Are there certain basic needs, such as bodily integrity, which are crucial to
              human flourishing?
             The capabilities approach as a more complex and sophisticated approach
             Capabilities as being cross cultural
             Are the ten central capabilities the right capabilities to enable human flourishing?
              Are there things which are missing?
             Should people be regarded only as ends?
             What is the relationship between capabilities and freedoms?
                                                 – 17 –           SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


12.   (a)   Explain Nussbaum's criticisms of using gross domestic product (GDP) as a
            measure of quality of life.                                              [10 marks]

            Nussbaum argues that theories of development which focus on GDP have been dominant, but
            are unsatisfactory because they ignore key things such as dignity and self-respect.
            She suggests the capabilities approach as an alternative.

            Candidates might explore:
             Whether GDP is too crude a measure of development
             “Leaders of countries often focus on national economic growth alone, but their people,
              meanwhile, are striving for something different: meaningful lives” (Chapter 1)
             “Increased GDP has not always made a difference to the quality of people’s lives”
              (Chapter 1)
             Individual human examples, eg, Vasanti, to highlight the personal human element of
              development rather than the statistics
             The need to look at quality of life.


      (b)   To what extent do you agree with Nussbaum that GDP is unsatisfactory as a
            measure of quality of life?                                               [15 marks]

            Possible discussion points include:
             Whether GDP is sufficient as a measure of development? Is progress more than just an
              increase in GDP?
             Can conventional economic measurements such as GDP tell us about individual
              human lives?
             What real opportunities are available to people?
             GDP does have advantages, eg, comparatively it is easier to measure
             Approaches such as GDP look at the aggregate, not at the distribution; which does not tell
              us if there are marginalized groups who are particularly deprived, etc.
             Nussbaum proposes the capabilities approach as the most attractive alternative to GDP
              based approaches. Other possible approaches include a utilitarian approach (which
              Nussbaum rejects, as it too “aggregates across lives”)
             What would be the implications for political life and for government of adopting
              Nussbaum’s views? What challenges would there be for existing dominant models of
              political life of adopting her views?
                                                   – 18 –            SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Ortega y Gasset: The Origins of Philosophy

13.   (a)   Explain how Ortega interprets Thales’s assertion that “all things are full of
            gods”.                                                                                [10 marks]

            Thales’s assertion, “All things are full of gods”, identifies a central concern of the last chapter
            of Ortega’s text: the historical and conceptual origins of philosophy. This explanation might
            be seen as a case of the application of “vital reason” as method in which the narration of
            historical causes and circumstances is central.

            Candidates might explore:
             During the 6th century BCE, in some enclaves in Greece, religion ceased to be a possible
              way of life, something which was particularly evident in the use of the term “god” for
              entities very different to the popular gods of Greek religion. Conceptually, in this context,
              deities had ceased to represent the exceptional and the extraordinary and had become
              ubiquitous and commonplace; “The gods were downgraded into causes”
             Thales’s assertion is contrasted with the enunciation of a geometrical theorem, which is
              directed to no one in particular, but to men in general, to the rational being. A theorem
              never conveys the impression of forming part of a dialogue. On the contrary, Thales’s
              assertion is essentially dialogic. He is rectifying, correcting a preexistent opinion – to be
              precise, a “public opinion”, or common doxa, according to which gods reside only in
              certain privileged phenomena
             Thales’s assertion ought not to be interpreted as implying that his ubiquitous gods are
              “divine” in nature, exactly the opposite
             The truth of beings is inherently concealed and must be revealed. The same thing
              happened to the gods, though the latter revealed themselves of their own free will and there
              was no means to control the authenticity of their epiphanies. Philosophy, in contrast,
              appeared as a methodical procedure for obtaining revelation (aletheia).


      (b)   To what extent do you agree with Ortega’s evaluation of this assertion?               [15 marks]

            Possible discussion points include:
             Does understanding textual meaning involve the integration of the two dimensions
              Ortega identifies? (What the text appears to be saying, and the fact that an individual is
              addressing his statement to another individual or group?)
             Why is it “unlikely” that Thales in this context refers to the term “gods” in “its usual
              direct sense”?
             Does philosophy consist of this “free choice of principles”?
             The figure of the thinker
             How does Ortega link Thales’s assertion to the historical origin of the profession
              of philosophy?
             Thales’s assertion as “mildly ironic and euphemistic”?
             The implications of Ortega’s approach for philosophical methodology. How successful is
              his approach methodologically?
                                                   – 19 –            SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


14.   (a)   Explain Ortega’s view of the philosophical past.                                      [10 marks]

            Ortega’s text poses the problem of what philosophy is, its essential unity, in a similar way that
            historic reason is discovered through a retrospective contemplation of its total past and
            through the attempt to reconstruct the dramatic occasion of its origin.

            Candidates might explore:
             After finishing reading a history of philosophy, the first thing is to cast a final retrospective
              gaze at the sweeping vista of philosophical doctrines
             Anyone who adopts a philosophy of the past does not leave it intact but must, in order to
              adopt it, remove and add to it
             Two ways of approaching the philosophical past: analytically and synthetically.
              Analytically: a series of thoughts develops from an initial thought by virtue of
              progressive analysis. Synthetically: each thought presents a complication and impels one
              on to the next thought. The connection between them is thus much stronger than in
              analytic thought
             The dialectic is the obligation to continue thinking, and this is not merely a
              manner of speaking, but an actual reality. It is the very fact of the human condition.
              Man genuinely has no recourse but to continue thinking
             Ways of understanding the philosophical past: as a series of errors and as errors that contain
              some truth and help to discover the truth.


      (b) Examine how Ortega’s view of the philosophical past serves the purpose of
          constructing a new philosophical synthesis.                               [15 marks]

            Possible discussion points include:
             Ortega’s very simple answer would be that we reflect on the philosophical past in order to
              act in the future
             Does historical reason explain decision-making? History as the discipline which will orient
              human beings in the universe through narrative by clarifying their beliefs, defining them
              and instructing them in the past
             Whether historic reason is in operation the root and historical justification of philosophy
             One of the many tasks in which man has engaged is that of doing philosophy; an
              occupation that has not been a permanent one for humanity, but “came about one fine day
              in Greece”
             The past borders on the future. The present, which theoretically separates them, is such a
              tenuous line that it merely serves to join and unite them
             A final backward gaze invariably stimulates an alternate forward one
             Unable to find understanding in the philosophies of the past, we have no choice but to
              attempt to construct one of our own
             The history of the philosophical past catapults us into the still empty spaces of the future,
              toward a philosophy yet to come.
                                                   – 20 –            SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Plato: The Republic, Books IV – IX

15.   (a)   Explain Plato’s distinctions between knowledge, belief and ignorance.                 [10 marks]

            This question asks candidates to explain the epistemological system on which Plato’s
            argument in The Republic is based. Responses may make reference to the idea that it is in the
            distinction between knowledge and opinion that Plato justifies his promotion of the
            philosopher and the relegation of those without knowledge. They may also refer to the idea
            that knowledge and belief are different faculties and attach themselves to different objects –
            knowledge attaches to the real (existence or quality) while belief attaches to that which is
            neither fully real nor fully unreal.

            Candidates might explore:
             Plato’s view of belief being neither ignorance nor knowledge, being clearer than ignorance
              but vaguer than knowledge; a transition state
             The Similes of the Divided Line, the Cave, and the Sun or the analogy with mathematics
             Belief having two aspects; opinion (pistis) and illusion (eikasia) and being concerned with
              the physical world
             Knowledge is concerned with the intelligible world and is made up of mathematical
              reasoning, abstract thought (dianoia) and intelligence, and pure thought (noesis)
             The inferiority of the senses – which gives rise to belief – in comparison with knowledge.
              The objects of the senses, and thus belief, suffer from being what is-and-is-not at the
              same time; eg, an object may be beautiful and not beautiful at the same time, or at
              different times
             The philosopher as the lover of truth via a knowledge of Forms, as opposed to being a lover
              of things via belief or “sight” – the illustration of the painting and lovers of beautiful things
              as opposed to beauty-in-itself.
                                            – 21 –            SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   Discuss the viability of these distinctions.                                        [15 marks]

      Possible discussion points include:
       Plato’s distinction is hard to sustain; for most people, belief in something is not a process
        that can develop into knowledge of that something by further contemplation – ie, are not
        belief and knowledge different aspects of the same cognitive faculty?
       While it is easy to understand us believing something mistakenly, can we know something
        mistakenly?
       Could knowledge just be a belief that happens to correspond to the truth ie, being an
        extension of the same faculty?
       Does Plato’s distinction rely too heavily on his metaphysical distinction between the world
        of the Forms and the world of things/objects? If true knowledge only attaches to the world
        of the Forms “above”, how does – or can – it relate to experience of the world “below”?
       Do Plato’s similes do enough work philosophically? They do not prove the existence of the
        distinction between the worlds and the faculties, rather they are illustrations which
        presuppose that distinction
       Can the universal truths of mathematics be applied to concepts such as truth or beauty
        or justice? Can the universal truths of mathematics be applied to physical objects
        like chairs?
       Do these distinctions rest on all objects having opposites?
       Can Plato rebut relativism with this distinction?
       Whether knowledge is really unchanging. In our rapidly changing world is knowledge as
        fixed as Plato argues?
       If all knowledge is already in our minds why does Plato entertain the idea of belief?
       Is Plato’s division of the intelligible world and the physical world really a division between
        direct perception and interpretation, judgment?
                                                 – 22 –           SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


16.   (a)   Explain Plato’s system of education.                                              [10 marks]

            The basis for Plato’s education is the distinction between two types of perception: those that
            stimulate thought and those that do not. Mathematics is the prime example of “perceptions”
            that instigate abstract thinking; Plato rejects astronomy and harmonics because they rely on
            empirical methods.

            Candidates might explore:
             Plato devotes a section of the dialogue to the qualities of a philosopher: loves learning,
              is honest, intellectually and morally courageous, etc. Although character is necessary for a
              philosopher’s education, it is not the only thing
             The last step in the education of the philosopher is the dialectic; this is when the mind is
              turned to the Forms and Plato suggests this occurs after eighteen years of age;
              it corresponds to the last part of the Cave when the prisoner looks directly at the Sun
             For those not fit to be philosopher kings, their education is still necessary as all must be
              able to contribute in some way to the state; women are also to be educated to be of value to
              the state, and they are not precluded from becoming philosophers.


      (b)   Evaluate the claim that Plato’s system of education is crucial for preparing
            its citizens or leaders to create a just state.                              [15 marks]

            Possible discussion points include:
             To what extent should the education of the individual be determined by the needs of
              the state? Should I not be allowed to learn purely out of interest?
             How can mathematics be a suitable framework for understanding or finding the truth on
              moral questions?
             Does Plato’s general approach ie, an emphasis on physical activity in the early years, and
              the freedom to learn, make for a sound education for a philosopher? As a general
              programme for education?
             Are the virtues and education described by Plato all that are necessary for a successful
              leader? cf, Machiavelli: that a leader must be like a lion (courageous and terrifying) and
              like a fox (cunning and prepared wilfully to deceive)
             How can you properly assess the effectiveness of such a regime?
             Whether Plato is too simplistic in classifying only two types of perception
             Positive aspects of Plato’s education: its inclusiveness, and that the pace of the programme
              is based on the intellectual and psychological maturity of the individual
             Negative aspects: emphasis on elitism; individual needs are subordinated to those
              of the state.
                                                 – 23 –           SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Peter Singer: The Life You Can Save

17.   (a)   Explain Singer’s “Basic Argument” that we are obligated to give to aid
            agencies.                                                                        [10 marks]

            Singer argues that there is a clear imperative for people in developed countries to give to
            aid agencies. He gives the example of a child drowning in a pond, and says that if you could
            easily save the child, despite it ruining your clothes and new shoes, or making you late
            for work, then you should do so.

            Candidates might explore:
             Why suffering and death from lack of food, shelter, and medical care are bad
             Why if it is in your power to prevent something bad from happening, without sacrificing
              anything nearly as important, it is wrong not to do so
             How by donating to aid agencies you can prevent suffering without sacrificing anything
              nearly as important
             Why if you do not donate to aid agencies, you are doing something wrong.


      (b)   Evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of this argument.                          [15 marks]

            Possible discussion points include:
             Where do the boundaries of responsibility lie? Can we be responsible for refraining
              from acting?
             Property rights – some would argue that if our wealth is obtained legally and morally then
              we have a right to it
             What about cars and airplanes? They cause preventable, foreseeable deaths, but we do not
              hold the creators morally responsible for those deaths
             Giving to charity is not generosity, it is our duty; traditional views on helping the poor
              (for example in Christian, Jewish and Islamic teachings) agree with Singer’s conclusion
              that helping the poor is a duty
             Singer himself gives away about a quarter of his income, but acknowledges that he should
              give more. If even he cannot meet the demands of his own system, is it too demanding?
             Does giving to aid agencies limit our freedom to make our own decisions about what to do
              with our own money?
             Does the basic argument require us to act against our own self-interest?
             Do we have a duty to look after those close to us before trying to help people far away?
                                                   – 24 –            SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


18.   (a)   Explain the common objections to giving to charity identified by Singer.              [10 marks]

            Singer identifies six major reasons why we do not give more to charity.

             “The Identifiable Victim” (people give less if there is no emotional tie to an identifiable
              victim)
             “Parochialism” (people are more likely to help their own families, etc, than those far away)
             “Futility” (the smaller the proportion of people at risk who can be saved, the less willing
              people are to send aid)
             “Diffusion of Responsibility” (people are less likely to help people if others who could help
              are not doing so)
             “Sense of Fairness” (people are less likely to help if they think it would mean doing more
              than their fair share)
             “Money” (even thinking about money makes people less likely to give it away).


      (b)   To what extent do you agree with Singer’s view on why people do not give
            more to charity?                                                         [15 marks]

            Possible discussion points include:
             Are people less likely to give to charity if there is no emotional tie to an identifiable victim?
              Success of advertising campaigns with emotive pictures, etc.
             Is it fair to criticize people for wanting to help their own families and friends before other
              people they do not know? Is this human instinct?
             Are there other reasons people do not give to aid organizations, such as concerns about the
              efficiency of those organizations, corruption etc? Are people frustrated by the
              ineffectiveness of aid?
             Do people see foreign aid as a duty of governments rather than of individuals?
             Does giving aid foster dependency?
                                                   – 25 –           SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Charles Taylor: The Ethics of Authenticity

19.   (a)   Explain Taylor’s argument that individuals need to find their authenticity
            through dialogue with others.                                              [10 marks]

            Taylor is reacting against the Enlightenment atomistic direction in understanding
            human beings; for Taylor we become individuals through our contact with others – we are
            only individuals in so far as we are social. He argues that being authentic – being faithful to
            ourselves – is being faithful to something which was produced in collaboration with others.

            Candidates might explore:
             “Authenticity” as a way of life that has a purpose and feels right because one is true
              to oneself
             The value which most threatens to destroy us is our worship of the “me” separate from our
              dialogue with others; my beliefs, values, attitudes, loves, etc do not come from within,
              says Taylor, but in our public life together
             Modern social atomism encourages everyone to claim a right to hold any belief free from
              outside interference; in this system, authenticity takes the form of a “soft relativism” which
              disallows the claim that any way of being is better or “higher” than any other
             Because we are shaped by our contact with others, we do not stand and assess other
              cultures just because they are there; respect for difference does not require respect for every
              human and culture
             For the modern human the good life is whatever the individual feels subjectively
              good about; but this is no moral position, for morality becomes merely what you define it
              as and Taylor rails against choice as some inherent good in what he calls a “liberalism
              of neutrality”.


      (b)   To what extent do you find this argument convincing?                                 [15 marks]

            Possible discussion points include:
             By creating a dichotomy of “self-centred narcissism” and authenticity based on “horizons
              of significance” does Taylor ignore the possibility that a life that for him seems narcissistic
              may be authentic and well justified to the person who is leading that life?
             Taylor criticizes modern people who claim to live authentic lives but are, in his judgment,
              self-centered narcissists. Their authenticity is not rooted in any “horizon of significance”
              but on fleeting feelings. He also criticizes “instrumental reason” whereby social decisions
              are made on economic motivations alone
             Taylor fails to re-conceptualize authenticity in reference to “horizons of significance”
              because it is impossible for someone else to judge what being true to oneself means,
              only the person can make that judgment
             Whether individual choice is liberating (eg, the continental existentialist response which
              venerates freedom in the individual)
             Could different frames of reference really enable a common morality to be “discovered”?
             Does Taylor ignore the possibility that somebody may lead an authentic life in which ideas
              of “horizons of significance” or “narcissism” have no conceptual value?
             A discussion of the value that Taylor’s perspective offers to our understanding of
              authenticity, given that all our judgments can be interpreted to have some “horizon of
              significance”.
                                                 – 26 –           SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


20.   (a)   Explain what Taylor means by “soft despotism”.                                    [10 marks]

            The problems of contemporary society: flattened individualism, instrumental reason,
            soft despotism and loss of effective political consciousness and action.

            Candidates might explore:
             Definition of soft despotism; soft despotism as a major illness deriving from and dependent
              upon flattened individualism and instrumental reason
             Effective political action versus ineffective political inaction
             The patronizing nature of governmental and political institutions and organizations
             Soft despotism and the minimization and/or absence of rational discourse, dialogue, and
              horizons of significance
             Small group versus large group approaches to political issues
             The search for and recovery of the ideal of authenticity and the contemporary
              political environment
             The place and role of the individual in the political arena: disenchantment within the
              “iron cage”.


      (b)   Examine Taylor’s reasons for considering soft despotism as a major problem
            in contemporary society.                                                   [15 marks]

            Possible discussion points include:
             Whether Taylor’s assessment of the contemporary situation convincing is convincing, and
              whether it is justifiable
             Are the political aspects of Taylor’s argument convincing? Justifiable?
             Does Taylor’s view of what he describes as “soft despotism” fit well into his assessment of
              flattened individualism and instrumental reason?
             How can the ideal of authenticity find expression in the political environment Taylor
              describes?
             Whether Taylor’s argument regarding “soft despotism” is relevant to the 21st century
             Can individuals come together in the way Taylor describes and can they effect
              political change?
             How can effective political activity be brought about in an authentic manner without falling
              into the confines of flattened individualism and instrumental modes of reasoning?
             What is the relation between the political aspects of Taylor’s views and his views on the
              dialogical character of life and relations with significant others?
                                                  – 27 –           SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Lao Tzu: Tao Te Ching

21.   (a)   Explain the relationship between the principle of non-action (wu wei) and
            inner stillness.                                                          [10 marks]

            The question asks for an explanation of the central principle of wu wei and its relationship to
            inner stillness, within the framework of the Tao. Wu wei means “non-action” or “no action”.
            It provides a principle for human behaviour. This might result in “acting naturally”,
            “effortless action”, or “non-intentional action”. It directs human behaviour towards
            non-interference with the flow of reality. Inner stillness results from humans being in
            harmony with nature, which could be the result of acting wisely and not interfering.

            Candidates might explore:
             Those who follow the principle of non-action (wu wei) may become one with the Tao
             Tao means “the Way”, the process of reality itself; the way things come together, and the
               way things are transformed. This reflects the deep belief that change is the most basic
               character of things
             Inner stillness is a state of being which can result from adopting wu wei. This awareness
               allows you to pursue the path to becoming a sage, as sages appreciate the value
               of emptiness.


      (b) Evaluate the claim that without the principle of non-action (wu wei) life will
          be competitive and unfulfilling.                                               [15 marks]

            Possible discussion points include:
             Might wu wei produce passivity? Might it result in humans who are uninvolved in
              their societies?
             Competition, interference and aggression prevent inner stillness and the appreciation
              of contentment
             Balance and harmony can only be achieved by less self-interest and ambition, less striving
              and more seeking of inner stillness
             The Tao points to an ideal of naturalness specific to humans and society. This ideal
              presents a way in which to approach the problem of achieving harmony in the universe,
              in communities, and between and within individuals without recourse to external schemes,
              coercion, and oppression
             Are humans naturally competitive? How much is “one-upmanship” a permanent trait
              of society?
             Can people in a materialistic society give up possessions and be content? Can humans do
              without the idea of “more is better”?
                                                  – 28 –            SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


22.   (a)   Explain the view of the state found in the Tao Te Ching.                            [10 marks]

            The question asks candidates to explain the view of the state in the Tao. Candidates may refer
            to ideas in the text such as a great state being like a low-lying, down-flowing stream
            (Chapter 61), which becomes the centre which small states tend towards. They may identify
            the idea that the state has a responsibility to unite and to nourish its members, freeing them
            from unnecessary action.

            Candidates might explore:
             The state led by a sage has responsibilities towards its members
             The great state only wishes to unite men together and nourish them (Chapter 61)
             A state is made one’s own only by freedom from action and purpose (Chapter 57)
             Minimal interference of the state in people’s lives will produce more harmony between
               people and the state, and between people
             The state will not discriminate between male and female. Female behaviour actually
               illustrates how the state should behave (Chapter 61).


      (b) To what extent do you agree that adopting the political teachings of the Tao
          would improve contemporary societies?                                        [15 marks]

            Possible discussion points include:
             Could the removal of personal ambition and materialism result in greater contentment and
               social harmony?
             Would eliminating passion and self-interest result in a lack of progress?
             Whether moderation (Chapter 59) is a central precept in general and in political life, and
               whether it is achievable or realistic considering the passions and interests involved in the
               political life
             How appropriate is non-action as a political principle within an industrial or post-industrial
               society?
             Does the inactivity of the state (and its supposed consequence of harmony) assume an
               overly positive view of human nature?
             Parallels might be drawn with Plato’s philosopher king, in that rulers might not seek power
               or wealth for themselves. Contrasts could be drawn with the more directive state and
               leadership imagined by Machiavelli.
                                                  – 29 –           SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Zhuangzi: Zhuangzi

23.   (a)   Explain the distinction between “small knowledge” and “big knowledge” as
            described by Zhuangzi.                                                   [10 marks]

            This question focuses on the distinction between small/lesser knowledge (xiao zhi) and
            big/greater knowledge (da zhi) in the Zhuangzi. Candidates may include comments on the
            wider epistemological stance of the book, which is generally held to take a skeptical position
            on knowledge and to adopt a perspectivist position. However, the focus of the response
            should be specifically on the distinction between small and big knowledge. There is some
            ambiguity and thus scope for differing interpretations.

            Candidates might explore:
             Big knowledge is wider and more encompassing; big knowledge is “wide and
              comprehensive” whereas small knowledge is “partial and restricted” (Chapter 2)
             Example of the contrast between the mushroom and the cricket. (“Small knowledge
              does not measure up to big knowledge, or few years to many. How do I know this?
              The morning mushroom does not know the waxing and waning of the moon, and the
              cricket does not know spring and fall. This is because they are short-lived.”)
             Example of the breeze and the quail
             Big knowledge encompasses small knowledge because it includes the perspectives of
              small knowledge
             Distinction between the kind of knowledge we can hope to attain and the kind we should
              be skeptical about.


      (b)   Evaluate the claim that “big knowledge” is unattainable.                          [15 marks]

            Possible discussion points include:
             Whether big knowledge is unattainable and why
             Whether there is a tension between the two types of knowledge
             Should people seek big knowledge, or be content with the amount of knowledge that
              they have?
             Knowledge is unlimited but life is limited, so we shouldn’t waste our lives pursuing the
              unlimited
             Whether big knowledge is preferable to small knowledge.
                                                  – 30 –           SPEC/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


24.   (a)   Explain Zhuangzi’s view on the unity and harmony of the world.                    [10 marks]

            The term harmony (he) is used frequently in the Zhuangzi. It is a central principle of Taoism
            that all life is part of an interconnected whole. Tao is an organic holistic process, of which
            man is just a part.

            Candidates might explore:
             Harmony as made up of universal change (“In the transformation and growth of all things,
              every bud and feature has its proper form. In this we have their gradual maturing
              and decay, the constant flow of transformation and change.”)
             Harmony as pre-determined
             We tend to separate things and put boundaries between them when there are not any,
              which causes problems; “Everything can be a ‘that’; everything can be a ‘this’. Therefore,
              ‘that’ comes from ‘this’ and ‘this’ comes from ‘that’– which means ‘that’ and ‘this’ give
              birth to one another. When there is no more separation between ‘that’ and ‘this’, it is
              called being one with the Tao.”
             Tian as the underlying unity in the world.


      (b)   Discuss whether the claim that the world is a harmonious whole is
            inconsistent with our experience of evil and suffering.           [15 marks]

            Possible discussion points include:
             Reality itself as being harmonious, even if this harmony is hidden
             Nature as being amoral
             Suffering should not be labelled as suffering, but instead seen as a natural part of life;
              death as part of the natural cycle of life; death and illness as inevitable aspects of human
              life rather than as evil or punishment
             Suffering is often discussed on an individual level, rather than being seen as part of the
              bigger whole
             The idea that we should free ourselves from the world, and therefore from its suffering
              and evil.
SPEC/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX




PHILOSOPHY
HIGHER LEVEL
PAPER 3

SPECIMEN PAPER

1 hour 15 minutes


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

Do not turn over this examination paper until instructed to do so.
Read the text and write a response.
The maximum mark for this examination paper is [25 marks].




                                                                                                    2 pages
                                                            © International Baccalaureate Organization 2014
                                                         –2–                      SPEC/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX

Unseen text – exploring philosophical activity

Compare and contrast the view(s) of philosophical activity presented in the text below, with your own
experience and understanding of what is involved in doing philosophy [25 marks].


     We asked a range of our interviewees for our Philosophy Bites podcast the simple question “What is
     Philosophy?” They had no warning of the question … Here are some responses.

     Janet Radcliffe Richards: I regard philosophy as a mode of enquiry rather than a particular set
     of subjects. I regard it as involving the kind of questions where you’re not trying to find out how
 5   your ideas latch on to the world, whether your ideas are true or not, in the way that science is doing,
     but more about how your ideas hang together. This means that philosophical questions will arise
     in a lot of subjects. And if you haven’t got philosophical training you may well misunderstand the
     nature of a lot of those questions. So that’s how I prefer to think of philosophy – as a method, a kind
     of enquiry rather than a particular set of questions. Although of course there are some questions that
10   can only be answered by that sort of enquiry.

     Julian Savulescu: Philosophy is in my view gaining knowledge through the use of reason and
     conceptual tools, a priori reason, and by reflecting about oneself and the state of the world. It employs
     the empirical sciences, but it’s not a version of science. It’s gaining knowledge through rational
     reflection. And in my own area philosophy is about understanding what people should do, what sort
15   of person people should be, how people should act, by rationally reflecting on the courses of action
     or the nature of human beings. I also think philosophy should encourage people to gain knowledge,
     and reflect and to try to seek to understand the world and themselves through their capacity as
     rational animals.

     Tony Coady: Oh, well I’m an analytic philosopher, so I’m committed to the view that philosophy
20   involves a lot of analytic work: a lot of analysis of concepts. But I think some people think philosophy
     only involves analyzing concepts and getting clear about things. They also think you should have
     arguments for everything – it’s a very argumentative profession. These are all features of philosophy.
     But philosophy should also be aiming to do rather more synthetic large-scale sorts of things.
     Philosophy should be concerned with issues to do with meaning of life, ethical and political issues,
25   and should be scrutinizing the basic assumptions of our society. Philosophy has always been something
     of a science of presuppositions; but it shouldn’t just expose them and say “there they are”. It should
     say something further about them that can help people. As I get older and older I’m more and more
     concerned that there should be more imagination in philosophy than there is. At one stage it was all
     very clever, but rather dry. Although I would never want to get quite as imaginative as the various
30   post-structuralist philosophers who put such a premium on imagination that the analysis and argument
     drop out, I still think that there’s something in offering a big picture about our circumstances, and I
     think that that’s something that should be encouraged in philosophy.

                        [Source: D Edmonds and N Warburton, (2010), Philosophy Bites, pages xi, xxi, xxii]
SPEC/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                          SPECIMEN



                        PHILOSOPHY



                         Higher Level



                                Paper 3




6 pages
    –2–         SPEC/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




Page is blank
                                                 –3–             SPEC/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Note to examiners
This markscheme outlines what members of the paper setting team had in mind when they devised
the questions. The topics listed in the bullet points indicate possible areas candidates might cover in
their answers. They are not compulsory points and not necessarily the best possible points. They are
only a framework to help examiners in their assessment. Examiners should be responsive to any other
valid points or any other valid approaches.

Answers on Paper 3 are assessed according to the markbands set out on page 4.
                                                  –4–              SPEC/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 3 markbands

 Marks                                          Level descriptor

   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

  1–5     The response is poorly structured, or where there is a recognizable structure there is minimal
           focus on the task. Philosophical vocabulary is not used, or is consistently used
           inappropriately.
          There is a very basic understanding of the view of philosophical activity raised by the
           unseen text. Few, if any, references are made to the text.
          There is limited reference to the student’s personal experience of philosophical activity but
           no comparison or contrast of this experience with the view(s) raised by the text.
          The essay is descriptive and lacking in analysis. Few of the main points are justified.

  6–10    There is some attempt to follow a structured approach although it is not always clear what
           the answer is trying to convey.
          There is a limited understanding of the view(s) of philosophical activity raised by the text.
           Few, if any, references are made to the text.
          There is some evidence that the student has drawn on their personal experience of
           philosophical activity.
          The response identifies similarities and differences between the student’s personal
           experience of philosophical activity and the view(s) of philosophical activity presented in
           the text, although the analysis of these similarities and differences is superficial.
          The response contains some analysis but is more descriptive than analytical. Some of the
           main points are justified.

 11–15  There is a clear attempt to structure the response, although there may be some repetition or a
         lack of clarity in places. Philosophical vocabulary is used, sometimes appropriately.
        There is a satisfactory understanding of the view(s) of philosophical activity raised by the
         text. Some references are made to the text.
        There is some evidence that the student has drawn on their personal experience of
         philosophical activity, with examples or illustrations used to support their points.
        There is some analysis of the similarities and differences between the student’s personal
         experience of philosophical activity and the view(s) of philosophical activity presented in
         the text, although this analysis needs further development.
        The response contains critical analysis rather than just description. Many of the main points
         are justified.

 16–20  The response is well organized and can be easily followed. Philosophical vocabulary is
         used, mostly appropriately.
        There is clear identification of the view(s) of philosophical activity presented in the unseen
         text. Some references are made to the text.
        The student draws on their personal experience of philosophical activity, using examples or
         illustrations to support their points.
        There is clear analysis of both similarities and differences between the student’s personal
         experience of philosophical activity and the view(s) of philosophical activity presented in
         the text, although this analysis needs further development.
        The response contains critical analysis rather than just description. Most of the main points
                                                –5–             SPEC/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


          are justified. The response argues to a reasoned conclusion.

21–25  The response is well structured, focused and effectively organized. There is appropriate use
        of philosophical vocabulary throughout the response.
       There is clear identification of the view(s) of philosophical activity presented in the unseen
        text. Effective references are made to the text.
       The student draws explicitly on their personal experience of philosophical activity, using
        well chosen examples or illustrations to support their points.
       There is clear analysis of both similarities and differences between the student’s personal
        experience of philosophical activity and the view(s) of philosophical activity presented.
       The response contains well developed critical analysis. All or nearly all of the main points
        are justified. The response argues to a reasoned conclusion.
                                                  –6–             SPEC/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Unseen text – exploring philosophical activity

When responding to this extract candidates should focus on the activity of philosophy. In the course of
analysing and evaluating the ideas in the extract candidates should reflect on their own experience of
doing philosophy, and should therefore make explicit comparisons/contrasts between their experience of
studying the HL Philosophy course and what the extract is saying about doing philosophy.
Candidates should make explicit reference to the ideas and arguments in the text in their response.

Candidates might consider the following:
 The differences between philosophy and other academic disciplines, for example, by referring to
  Radcliffe Richards’s comparison between philosophy and science, or Savulescu’s comment that
  philosophy “employs the empirical sciences, but it’s not a version of science”
 The role of questions in philosophy, for example, making reference to Radcliffe Richards’s comment
  that “philosophical questions will arise in a lot of subjects”, or discussing whether philosophy is
  rightly/wrongly characterized as being more concerned with questions than answers
 The nature of philosophy, for example, by making reference to Radcliffe Richards’s comment that she
  thinks of philosophy more as a “kind of enquiry rather than a particular set of questions”
 The scope of philosophy, for example, by picking up on Radcliffe Richards’s comment that
  “there are some questions that can only be answered by that sort of enquiry”, and discuss whether there
  are some questions that only philosophy can answer
 The place of conceptual thought in philosophy (including examples such as empiricism versus
  rationalism; the contribution of key classical thinkers like Aristotle, Hume and Kant on examples such
  as causation, reason, etc) and making reference, for example, to Savulescu’s comment that philosophy
  is about “gaining knowledge through the use of reason and conceptual tools”; are there limitations to
  conceptual thought? Are there limits to rational and analytic approaches to philosophical issues?
 The scope of philosophy in terms of the normative element of many philosophical discussions – for
  example making reference to Savulescu’s comment that philosophy focuses not only on understanding
  the world, but also on “what people should do” and “how people should act”.
  They might also discuss the scope of philosophy by discussing Coady’s comment that philosophy
  should engage in “scrutinizing the basic assumptions of our society”
 The role of argumentation in philosophy; framing arguments and the appropriateness of argumentation
  in various spheres; for example making reference to Coady’s comment that philosophy is “a very
  argumentative profession”
 Analysis as a philosophical tool; the contribution of language to philosophical activity
 Imagination and philosophical activity; the possibility of philosophy “offering a big picture”
  (N.B. there is no need for an account of what post-structuralism has contributed, but of course students
  might want to explore this in their response)
 The pursuit of meaning in the world and how philosophy contributes to the pursuit of meaning;
  eg, Coady’s comment that “philosophy should be concerned with issues to do with meaning
  of life”.
SPEC/3/PHILO/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




PHILOSOPHY
STANDARD LEVEL
PAPER 1

SPECIMEN PAPER

1 hour 45 minutes


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
Section A: answer one question.
Section B: answer one question.
The maximum mark for this examination paper is [50 marks].




                                                                                                  5 pages
                                                          © International Baccalaureate Organization 2014
                                                       –2–                     SPEC/3/PHILO/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                                  SECTION A

Answer one question from this section. Each question in this section is worth [25 marks].

Core Theme: What is a human being?

1.   Read the following passage and develop your response as indicated below.

     Who or what am I? I am a living, breathing organism signified by the words “human being”. I am
     a material or physical being fairly recognizable over time to me and to others: I am a body […].
     However, there is another aspect of me not directly visible or definable. This is the aspect of me
     which thinks and feels, reflects and judges, remembers and anticipates. Words used to describe this
     aspect include “mind”, “spirit”, “heart”, “soul”, “awareness” and “consciousness”. This part of me is
     aware that I can never be fully known or understood by myself or by others; it notices that although
     there may be some unchanging essence which is “me”, this same “me” is also constantly changing
     and evolving. So I am a physical body and an emotional and psychological (or spiritual) being.
     The two together make me a person.

                      [Source: adapted from K O’Dwyer, (2011), “Who or What Am I?”, Philosophy Now 84.
                                          www.philosophynow.org accessed 1 July 2013]



     With explicit reference to the stimulus and your own knowledge, discuss a philosophical issue related
     to the question of what it means to be human.
                                                           –3–                        SPEC/3/PHILO/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

2.   Look at the following picture and develop your response as indicated below.




                    [Source: A Griffiths, (1894), Secrets of the Prison-House: Gaol Studies and Sketches.]



     With explicit reference to the stimulus and your own knowledge, discuss a philosophical issue related
     to the question of what it means to be human.




                                                                                                             Turn over
                                                    –4–                  SPEC/3/PHILO/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                                SECTION B

Answer one question from this section. Each question in this section is worth [25 marks].

Optional Theme 1: Aesthetics

3.    Evaluate the claim that the role of the artist is merely to provide entertainment.


4.    To what extent does the beauty of an object depend on how we see it, rather than the way that it
      really is?



Optional Theme 2: Epistemology

5.    Evaluate the claim that the extent to which any group can exercise power in the world is determined
      by its access to knowledge.


6.    To what extent is knowledge dependent on experience?



Optional Theme 3: Ethics

7.    With reference to one area of applied ethics, evaluate the grounds on which we should justify our
      moral judgments.


8.    To what extent do you agree with the claim that character based approaches are more useful in making
      moral decisions than consequence based approaches?



Optional Theme 4: Philosophy and contemporary society

9.    To what extent do you agree with the claim that censorship is always an unjustifiable violation of
      people’s basic freedoms?


10.   Evaluate the claim that social networking technologies are fundamentally changing the nature of
      social interactions and relationships.
                                                    –5–                  SPEC/3/PHILO/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Optional Theme 5: Philosophy of religion

11.   Evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of one argument for the existence of God.


12.   Evaluate the claim that all religious language is essentially meaningless.



Optional Theme 6: Philosophy of science

13.   Evaluate the claim that the proper goals of science are simplicity, explanation and prediction,
      not truth.


14.   Evaluate the claim that it is unfair to hold scientists responsible for the consequences of their
      scientific discoveries.



Optional Theme 7: Political philosophy

15.   Evaluate the claim that freedom and equality are not just compatible, but that for there to be comparable
      freedom for all there must first be equality.


16.   To what extent do you agree that there are some areas of human life that governments should not
      attempt to regulate?
