M17/1/AXENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX




English A: literature – Standard level – Paper 2
Anglais A : littérature – Niveau moyen – Épreuve 2
Inglés A: literatura – Nivel medio – Prueba 2

Thursday 4 May 2017 (morning)
Jeudi 4 mai 2017 (matin)
Jueves 4 de mayo de 2017 (mañana)

1 hour 30 minutes / 1 heure 30 minutes / 1 hora 30 minutos


Instructions to candidates
 Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on at least two of the part 3
  works you have studied and compare and contrast these works in response to the question.
  Answers which are not based on a discussion of at least two part 3 works will not score
  high marks.
 You are not permitted to bring copies of the works you have studied into the examination room.
 The maximum mark for this examination paper is [25 marks].

Instructions destinées aux candidats
 N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
 Traitez un seul sujet de composition. En basant votre réponse sur au moins deux des œuvres
  de la troisième partie que vous avez étudiées, vous devez comparer et opposer ces œuvres
  dans le cadre du sujet. Les réponses qui ne sont pas basées sur au moins deux des œuvres
  de la troisième partie n’obtiendront pas une note élevée.
 Vous n’êtes pas autorisé(e) à apporter des exemplaires des œuvres que vous avez étudiées
  dans la salle d’examen.
 Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est de [25 points].

Instrucciones para los alumnos
 No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
 Conteste una sola pregunta de redacción. Base su respuesta en al menos dos de las obras
  estudiadas de la parte 3, comparándolas y contrastándolas en relación con la pregunta.
  Las respuestas que no se basen en al menos dos obras de la parte 3 no recibirán una
  puntuación alta.
 No está permitido traer copias de las obras estudiadas a la sala de examen.
 La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [25 puntos].




                                                                                               2217 – 0068
     3 pages/páginas                                       © International Baccalaureate Organization 2017
                                                   –2–                    M17/1/AXENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX

Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on at least two of the part 3 works you
have studied and compare and contrast these works in response to the question. Answers which are
not based on a discussion of at least two part 3 works will not score high marks.

Drama

1.   With reference to the works of at least two playwrights you have studied, compare the techniques
     used to reveal information about character or situation that is not shown on stage, and the
     significance of this information.


2.   A realistic or a non-realistic presentation, or a combination of the two, can provide perceptive
     insight. Compare how, and to what extent, the techniques used in the works of at least two
     playwrights you have studied help to create a presentation that provides such insight.


3.   A character may appear only briefly in a play, but have a significant impact on action and/or
     ideas. With reference to at least two plays you have studied, compare how effectively different
     playwrights have managed to give enduring impact to less prominent characters.



Poetry

4.   Some poets employ standard poetic forms (for example, sonnet, stanza, couplet) while others
     value freedom of form. Compare how at least two poets you have studied handle standard or
     free forms, and the effects achieved.


5.   With reference to the work of at least two poets you have studied, compare how they evoke
     specific emotional responses, and the nature of those responses.


6.   Poems with urban settings may be just as lyrical as those set in the countryside. Comparing the
     work of at least two poets you have studied, consider to what extent you have found lyricism in
     either or both settings and how it has been achieved.



Prose: novel and short story

7.   The impact of a work is affected by the reliability or otherwise of its narrator. With reference to the
     works of at least two writers you have studied, compare the techniques used to enable readers to
     assess narrator reliability, and how far it matters.


8.   In some works of fiction characters undergo change or even transformation. Compare how,
     and with what effect, the works of at least two writers you have studied depict such alterations.


9.   Events in a plot elicit a variety of reactions from characters. With reference to the works of at least
     two writers you have studied, compare how they have highlighted, and made important to the
     works as a whole, reactions by different characters to certain events.
                                                   –3–                   M17/1/AXENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX

Prose other than fiction

10.   Writers of prose other than fiction may produce works that amuse, inform, convince or arouse
      strong feeling. Compare the techniques used by at least two writers you have studied to achieve
      one or more of these effects.


11.   With reference to works by at least two writers of prose other than fiction, consider in what ways,
      and to what effect, description is used to evoke a sense of place.


12.   Conflict in a work can arise from a number of sources. With reference to works by at least
      two writers of prose other than fiction, compare the techniques used to present such conflict,
      and the effects of conflict on the works as a whole.
