M17/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                    May / Mai / Mayo 2017


              English / Anglais / Inglés
        A: literature / littérature / literatura


                         Standard level
                         Niveau moyen
                          Nivel medio

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




5 pages/páginas
                              –2–           M17/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use
of examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Global Centre, Cardiff.



Ces remarques pour la notation sont confidentielles. Leur
usage est réservé exclusivement aux examinateurs participant à
cette session.

Ces remarques sont la propriété du Baccalauréat International.
Toute reproduction ou distribution à de tierces personnes sans
l’autorisation préalable du centre mondial de l’IB à Cardiff
est interdite.



Estas notas para la corrección son confidenciales y para el uso
exclusivo de los examinadores en esta convocatoria de
exámenes.

Son propiedad del Bachillerato Internacional y no deben
reproducirse ni distribuirse a ninguna otra persona sin la
autorización del centro global del IB en Cardiff.
                                           –3–            M17/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


The following are the annotations available to use when marking responses.

                                                                          Associated
       Annotation                       Explanation
                                                                           shortcut

                       Caret – indicates omission.                           Alt+1

                       Incorrect point – indicates factual inaccuracies
                                                                             Alt+2
                       or misinterpretations.

                       Ellipse that can be expanded.                         Alt+3

                       Horizontal wavy line that can be expanded –
                                                                             Alt+4
                       indicates language errors / incoherence.

                       Highlight tool that can be expanded.                  Alt+5

                       On page comment – justifies application of
                                                                             Alt+6
                       assessment criteria.

                       Unclear content or language.                          Alt+7

                       SEEN - every scanned page must be
                                                                             Alt+8
                       annotated or marked as SEEN.

                       Good Response/Good Point.                             Alt+9

                       Vertical wavy line that can be expanded –
                                                                             Alt+0
                       indicates irrelevance / going off the point.

You must make sure you have looked at all pages. Please put the           annotation on any
blank page, to indicate that you have seen it.

When using the On Page Comments annotation, please keep the following in mind:
 • Avoid covering the candidate’s own writing. This can be done by writing your
    comments in the margins then running the arrow attached to the ‘on-page comment’
    annotation to the appropriate place.
 • Provide all comments in the target language.
 • You may provide summative comments at the end of the script, but please do NOT
    record numerical marks on the scripts.
                                               –4–             M17/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


General marking instructions

 These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking. They are not
 offered as an exhaustive and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must
 rigidly adhere.
 Good ideas or angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate.
 Similarly, answers which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here should be
 rewarded appropriately.

 Of course, some of the points listed will appear in weaker papers, but are unlikely to be
 developed.


Instructions générales pour la notation

  Ces notes ne sont que simples lignes directrices pour aider les examinateurs lors de la notation.
  Elles ne peuvent en aucun cas être considérées ni comme un ensemble de réponses fixe et
  exhaustif, ni comme des approches de notations auxquelles les réponses doivent strictement
  correspondre.
  Les idées ou angles valables qui n’ont pas été proposés ici doivent être reconnus et
  récompensés de manière appropriée.
  De même, les réponses qui ne comprennent pas toutes les idées ou approches mentionnées ici
  doivent être récompensées de manière appropriée.

  Naturellement, certains des points mentionnés apparaîtront dans les épreuves les moins bonnes
  mais n’y seront probablement pas développés.


Instrucciones generales para la corrección

  El objetivo de estas notas para los examinadores es servir de directrices para ayudar en la
  corrección. Por lo tanto, no deben considerarse una colección de respuestas y enfoques fijos y
  detallados por la que deban regirse estrictamente todas las respuestas.
  Los buenos enfoques e ideas que no se mencionen en las notas para la corrección deben recibir
  el reconocimiento y la valoración que les corresponda.
  De igual manera, las respuestas que no incluyan todas las ideas o los enfoques que se sugieren
  en las notas deben valorarse en su justa medida.

  Por supuesto, algunos de los puntos que se incluyen en las notas aparecerán en exámenes
  más flojos, pero probablemente no se habrán desarrollado.
                                              –5–              M17/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


1.   An adequate to good guided literary analysis will:
     • understand the situation of a general and his aide running the gauntlet of civilian refugees
       in a tent city
     • have something to say about shifting sympathies in the passage
     • consider the use of weapons by civilians to humiliate military figures
     • appreciate the emotional changes that the General has undergone
     • consider the means by which drama is created in the passage.

     A very good to excellent guided literary analysis may also:
     • show a more confident understanding of the situation and some implied aspects of it, such
        as the recent military defeat, political turmoil and personal loss
     • analyse in more detail our shifting sympathies and how they are influenced
     • comment with some sophistication on how any of the following are presented: cowardice,
        bravery, shame, humiliation, horror, heroism, anger, reflection in the mirror
     • explore the subtleties of the presentation of the narrator.


2.   An adequate to good guided literary analysis will:
     • understand the premise of the poem: a woman addressing her younger self
     • appreciate the different perspectives of the older and younger selves
     • comment on some of the imagery associated with the childhood self
     • offer some comment on the poem’s mood
     • make some comment on the structure of the poem.

     A very good to excellent guided literary analysis may also:
     • discuss how the adult voice is used, (for example, the end of stanzas four and five)
     • explore the differences between age and youth, the separation between the older and
        younger self
     • explore the use of “I”, “you” and “we”
     • discuss in more depth the imagery, and how it develops the contrast between the nature
        of the two selves
     • further explore the complexity of mood – identifying for example that childhood may be
        less than idyllic and the slightly ominous mood throughout
     • comment in more depth on the structure of the poem, for example, sentence structure, the
        effect of the short last stanza.
