M17/1/AYENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                     May / Mai / Mayo 2017


                  English / Anglais / Inglés A:
                   language and literature /
                     langue et littérature /
                       lengua y literatura


                         Standard level
                         Niveau moyen
                          Nivel medio

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1


6 pages/páginas
                              –2–          M17/1/AYENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use
of examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.



Ces remarques pour la notation sont confidentielles. Leur
usage est réservé exclusivement aux examinateurs participant
à cette session.

Ces remarques sont la propriété de l’Organisation du
Baccalauréat International. Toute reproduction ou distribution à
de tierces personnes sans l’autorisation préalable du centre de
l’évaluation de l’IB est interdite.



Estas notas para la corrección son confidenciales y para el uso
exclusivo de los examinadores en esta convocatoria de
exámenes.

Son propiedad del Bachillerato Internacional y no se pueden
reproducir ni distribuir a ninguna otra persona sin la
autorización previa del centro de evaluación del IB.
                                               –3–              M17/1/AYENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The following are the annotations available to use when marking responses.

                                                                                Associated
        Annotation                          Explanation
                                                                                 shortcut

                         Caret – indicates omission.                               Alt+1

                         Incorrect point – indicates factual inaccuracies or
                                                                                   Alt+2
                         misinterpretations.

                         Ellipse that can be expanded.                             Alt+3

                         Horizontal wavy line that can be expanded –
                                                                                   Alt+4
                         indicates language errors / incoherence.

                         Highlight tool that can be expanded.                      Alt+5

                         On page comment – justifies application of
                                                                                   Alt+6
                         assessment criteria.

                         Unclear content or language.                              Alt+7

                         SEEN - every scanned page must be annotated
                                                                                   Alt+8
                         or marked as SEEN.

                         Good Response/Good Point.                                 Alt+9

                         Vertical wavy line that can be expanded –
                                                                                   Alt+0
                         indicates irrelevance / going off the point.

You must make sure you have looked at all pages. Please put the           annotation on any blank
page, to indicate that you have seen it.

When using the On Page Comments annotation, please keep the following in mind:
  • Avoid covering the candidate’s own writing. This can be done by writing your comments in
    the margins then running the arrow attached to the ‘on-page comment’ annotation to the
    appropriate place.
  • Provide all comments in the target language.
  • You may provide summative comments at the end of the script, but please do NOT record
    numerical marks on the scripts.
                                                –4–             M17/1/AYENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


General marking instructions

 These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking. They are not
 offered as an exhaustive and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must
 rigidly adhere.
 Good ideas or angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate.
 Similarly, answers which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here should be
 rewarded appropriately.

 Of course, some of the points listed will appear in weaker papers, but are unlikely to be
 developed.


Instructions générales pour la notation

 Ces remarques sont de simples lignes directrices destinées à aider les examinateurs lors de la
 notation. Elles ne peuvent en aucun cas être considérées comme un ensemble fixe et exhaustif
 de réponses ou d’approches de notation auxquelles les réponses doivent strictement
 correspondre.
 Les idées ou angles valables qui n’ont pas été proposés ici doivent être reconnus et
 récompensés de manière appropriée.
 De même, les réponses qui ne comprennent pas toutes les idées ou approches mentionnées ici
 doivent être récompensées de manière appropriée.

 Naturellement, certains des points mentionnés apparaîtront dans les épreuves les moins bonnes
 mais n’y seront probablement pas développés.


Instrucciones generales para la corrección

 El objetivo de estas notas para los examinadores es servir de directrices para ayudar en la
 corrección. Por lo tanto, no deben considerarse una colección fija y exhaustiva de respuestas y
 enfoques por la que deban regirse estrictamente todas las respuestas.
 Los buenos enfoques e ideas que no se mencionen en las notas para la corrección deben recibir
 el reconocimiento y la valoración que les corresponda.
 De igual manera, las respuestas que no incluyan todas las ideas o los enfoques que se sugieren
 en las notas deben valorarse en su justa medida.

 Por supuesto, algunos de los puntos que se incluyen en las notas aparecerán en exámenes
 más flojos, pero probablemente no se habrán desarrollado.
                                              –5–             M17/1/AYENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Text 1

An article from New Scientist magazine describing the “journey” of a water molecule from the
creation of the universe to the present.

An adequate to good analysis will:
• identify the type of article and the sort of audience for whom it is intended
• make some comment on the appeal to imagination and to science fiction
• notice and comment on the direct address to the reader
• comment more generally on the diction, style or tone, noticing for example the use of
  personification or anthropomorphism, of sensationalism, hyperbole, humour
• make some reference to the extended metaphor of a journey
• make some comment on the way the text is presented (the headings, the layout of the
  illustration, the illustration itself).

A good to very good analysis may also:
• show fuller understanding of the type of publication and its readership
• supplement the above by showing an understanding of context such as: enthusiasm for popular
   science, contemporary fascination with the cosmos, the creation of the universe, with molecular
   science, nanotechnology, even with storytelling
• comment more fully on the storytelling style of the text; on, for example, the direct address to
   the reader, narrative description and the use of the narrative present
• analyse in more detail the diction and style of the text, identifying examples of rhetorical and
   stylistic features, particularly the combination of the imaginative and the scientific
• comment more fully on the extended metaphor of a journey
• comment in more detail on what the image represents (the individual as integral part of the
   cosmos) and its relevance to the content of the article.
                                                –6–             M17/1/AYENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Text 2

An article from the website of Justice Hub including an infographic explaining how the judges of the
International Criminal Court are elected.



An adequate to good analysis will:
• identify the context in which the text is written and its primary purpose
• identify the potential target audience
• comment on the form in which the explanation of the selection of judges is presented to the
  reader
• identify and comment on some of the written and visual techniques used to explain the process
• identify and comment on some of the ways in which the infographic illustrates the issues
  referred to in the introduction
• draw attention to some of the stereotypes and symbols represented and also to some of the
  more humorous cartoon details
• identify particularly why judges need replacing and how this is conveyed.

A good to very good analysis may also:
• comment more fully on the nature of the website, the context and the purpose of the text
• comment on the fact that the website is in English and what this implies about audience
• further identify and comment on the explanatory techniques, giving more detail about those that
   both inform and entertain the reader
• analyse more closely and using terminology appropriate to the text type, the ways in which the
   images in the text highlight the issues involved in the selection of judges
• comment more fully on the representation of stereotypes and symbols and on the humorous
   pictorial details
• comment on any implicit criticisms of the ICC
• comment on how effectively the infographic achieves the aims set out in the article’s introduction.
