M17/1/AYENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX




English A: language and literature – Standard level – Paper 2
Anglais A : langue et littérature – Niveau moyen – Épreuve 2
Inglés A: lengua y literatura – Nivel medio – Prueba 2

Thursday 4 May 2017 (morning)
Jeudi 4 mai 2017 (matin)
Jueves 4 de mayo de 2017 (mañana)

1 hour 30 minutes / 1 heure 30 minutes / 1 hora 30 minutos


Instructions to candidates
• Do not turn over this examination paper until instructed to do so.
• Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on both of the part 3 works you
  have studied.
• You are not permitted to bring copies of the works you have studied into the examination room.
• The maximum mark for this examination paper is [25 marks].

Instructions destinées aux candidats
• Ne retournez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
• Traitez un seul sujet de composition. Vous devez baser votre réponse sur les deux œuvres de
  la troisième partie que vous avez étudiées.
• Vous n’êtes pas autorisé(e) à apporter des exemplaires des œuvres que vous avez étudiées
  dans la salle d’examen.
• Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est de [25 points].

Instrucciones para los alumnos
• No dé la vuelta al examen hasta que se lo autoricen.
• Conteste una sola pregunta de redacción. Base su respuesta en las dos obras estudiadas de
  la parte 3.
• No está permitido traer copias de las obras estudiadas a la sala de examen.
• La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [25 puntos].




                                                                                              2217 – 2016
     2 pages/páginas                                      © International Baccalaureate Organization 2017
                                                 –2–                   M17/1/AYENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on both of the part 3 works you have
studied. Answers which are not based on a discussion of both part 3 works will not score high marks.
Your answer should address the ways in which language and context contribute to your reading of each
work.

1.   How and why might the two works you have studied be considered inspirational?


2.   How do the writers of the two works you have studied convey a sense of place to their readers and
     to what purpose?


3.   To what extent do the two works you have studied show that an individual is in control of his or her
     own destiny?


4.   How can examining a literary work from different perspectives enrich our understanding of both
     the work and the techniques used by the writer? Base your answer on the two works you have
     studied.


5.   Analyse the role non-human elements play in the two works you have studied.


6.   Some say ignorance is bliss. How is “not knowing” presented in the two works you have studied
     and to what effect?
