© International Baccalaureate Organization 2022

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2022

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2022

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Business management
Higher level
Paper 1

Monday 24 October 2022 (afternoon)


1 hour 15 minutes


Instructions to candidates
y   Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y   A clean copy of the business management case study is required for this examination paper.
y   Read the case study carefully.
y   A clean copy of the business management formulae sheet is required for this examination
    paper.
y   Section A: a
                nswer two questions.
y   Section B: a
                nswer question 4.
y   A calculator is required for this examination paper.
y   The maximum mark for this examination paper is [40 marks].




                                                                                             8822 – 5011
      3 pages                                            © International Baccalaureate Organization 2022
                                                 –2–                                              8822 – 5011


                                             Section A

Answer two questions from this section.

1.   (a) 	Outline two ways in which the “place” element of the four Ps of the marketing mix is
           relevant to ELE.                                                                              [4]

     (b) 	Explain the advantages and disadvantages of the methods ELE uses to appraise
           employees in its car rentals division (lines 73–80).                                          [6]


2.   (a) 	Outline one advantage and one disadvantage for ELE of changing to cellular
           manufacturing in the Zeat factory (line 34).                                                  [4]

     (b)   Explain the importance to ELE of e-commerce.                                                  [6]


3.   (a) 	Outline one advantage and one disadvantage for ELE of internal recruitment
           (lines 69–72).                                                                                [4]

     (b) 	Explain suitable internal sources of finance that ELE could have used to take over
           Zeat PLC (line 19).                                                                           [6]
                                                    –3–                                            8822 – 5011


                                                  Section B

Answer the following question.

4.    In 2010, ELE owned 4.5 % of the European Union (EU) car rental market. In 2019, ELE’s
      car rental division had revenues of EUR 0.9 billion in a market worth EUR 16.8 billion.
      Initially, ELE only provided car rentals in its gasoline stations in Belgium. By 2014, ELE had
      expanded the service to its stations in France, Spain and the UK.

      In 2016, Giselle also reorganized ELE’s car rental offices so that each office operated as a
      profit centre. An entrepreneurial approach was adopted. Office teams received substantial
      bonuses if they exceeded profit targets, but only offices that met their targets qualified for
      these bonuses. These targets were set, without consultation, by Giselle. Over a five-year
      period, targets were met by 85 % of offices. Giselle’s reorganization was not welcomed
      by employees.

      In 2021, Monica recommended that ELE trial the business model she had proposed for the
      new In3T brand in two major cities in the EU for one year: if successful, the brand and its
      model could then be launched in all major cities in the EU. Monica said, “We must do it. I’m
      convinced that our rivals will adopt this business model within two years. If we don’t act now,
      we will be left behind and our rivals will beat us to it.”

      Giselle, however, disagreed strongly. She had built the car rental division from its inception.
      She believed high levels of customer service and well-trained staff were two reasons why the
      car rental division remained successful. She was also unhappy with the EUR 100 million cost
      and payback of three years.

      (a)     Define the term profit centre.[2]

      (b)     (i)    Calculate ELE’s market share for car rentals in 2019 (show all your working).[2]

              (ii)   Explain one reason why ELE’s market share has grown.                                 [2]

      (c)	Explain two reasons why ELE’s employees may have resisted the reorganization
           implemented by Giselle.                                                                        [4]

      (d)	Using information from the case study and the additional information above, discuss
           Monica’s proposal to launch In3T.                                                            [10]








References:
© International Baccalaureate Organization 2022
