N22/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                       Markscheme


                        November 2022


                               Geography


                           Higher level


                                Paper 3




12 pages
                                            –2–                 N22/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2022

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2022

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2022

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                       –3–                  N22/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 3 part (a) markbands

 Marks   Level descriptor
         AO1: Knowledge and understanding of                 AO3: Synthesis       AO4: Selection, use and
         specified content                                   and evaluation       application of a variety of
                                                                                  appropriate skills and techniques
         AO2: Application and analysis of knowledge
         and understanding
   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
  1–3    The response is general, not focused on the question, and lacks detail and structure.
         • The response is very brief or general, listing a • No evidence of • Information is listed but is not
            series of unconnected comments or largely         synthesis or     grouped together in paragraphs,
            irrelevant information. Evidence is general or    evaluation is    or paragraphing is erratic.
            relevant to the topic, but not to the question.   expected.      • If present, the conclusion is brief,
         • Evidence (that is, facts, statistics, examples or                   does not summarize the argument
            theories) is listed, lacks detail, and the                         and/or does not address the
            relevance to the question is unclear.                              question.
         • Evidence is not used to formulate an argument
            or an analysis.
         • Everyday language is used; there is little use
            of geographical terminology or it is used with
            errors in understanding.
  4–6    The response only partially addresses the question; evidence is both relevant and irrelevant and is
         largely unstructured.
         • The response partially addresses the question • No evidence of • Paragraphs do not reflect
           and/or does not meet the requirements of the      synthesis or    grouping of information that
           command term. Key evidence is not included.       evaluation is   addresses a specific element of
         • A mix of relevant and irrelevant evidence is      expected.       the question.
           outlined (that is, facts, statistics, examples or               • If present, the conclusion is one-
           theories) and any links to the question are only                  sided, addressing only part of the
           listed.                                                           question.
         • The evidence presented supports only one
           element or interpretation of the question.
         • Key geographical terms are defined briefly.
           The terminology used is both relevant and
           irrelevant to the question.
  7–9    The response addresses most parts of the question and outlines an analysis supported by relevant
         evidence but may lack clear links between paragraphs.
         • The question is broken down into parts and        • No evidence of     • A series of standalone paragraphs
           most parts of the question are addressed in         synthesis or         each addressing a specific
           the response, with supporting evidence for          evaluation is        element of the question but
           each aspect of the question. The response           expected.            lacking clear links connecting
           meets the requirements of the command term.                              them all into a coherent whole.
         • Relevant evidence (that is, facts, statistics,                         • The conclusion repeats and
           examples or theories) is described, focused                              summarizes the analysis or
           on the question and mostly correct. Links with                           argument, but may contain new
           the question are described.                                              information as well.
         • The analysis outlines a two-sided argument
           briefly (if appropriate) and is mostly
           descriptive, using examples as explanation.
         • Correct definitions are given, and relevant and
           irrelevant specialist geographical terms are
           used with occasional errors; or everyday
           language is used.
                                                           –4–                N22/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


10–12   The response addresses all aspects of the question; the analysis is explained using evidence
        integrated in the paragraphs, and it is well structured.
        • All aspects of the question are addressed        • No evidence of    • Paragraphs focus on a relevant point
          and the response meets the requirements            synthesis or        of the argument and integrate the
          of the command term.                               evaluation is       supporting evidence. Paragraphs
        • Detailed evidence (that is, facts, statistics,     expected.           are linked and support the logical
          examples or theories) are integrated in                                flow of the argument and response.
          sentences and paragraphs, and links made                             • The conclusion summarizes the
          between evidence and the question are                                  evidence and argument, and links all
          explained and relevant.                                                back to the question.
        • The response explains how the two sides
          of the argument (if appropriate) are
          supported by detailed evidence that is
          integrated in sentences.
        • Clear, correct definitions and use of
          geographical language is integrated in the
          sentences and throughout the response.
                                                        –5–                 N22/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 3 part (b) markbands

 Marks   Level descriptor
         AO1: Knowledge and understanding of            AO3: Synthesis and           AO4: Selection, use and
         specified content                              evaluation                   application of a variety of
                                                                                     appropriate skills and
         AO2: Application and analysis of
                                                                                     techniques
         knowledge and understanding
   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
  1–4    The response is general, not focused on the question, and lacks detail and structure.
         • The response is very brief or general,        • No synthesis or           • Information is listed but is
            listing a series of unconnected comments       evaluation is expected at   not grouped together in
            or largely irrelevant information. Evidence    this level.                 paragraphs, or paragraphing
            is general or relevant to the topic, but not • No links are presented      is erratic.
            the question.                                  between the response      • If present, the conclusion is
         • Evidence (that is, facts, statistics,           and (sub)topics in the      brief, does not summarize
            examples or theories) is listed, lacks         guide.                      the argument and/or does
            detail, and the relevance to the question is • No valid opinion or         not address the question.
            unclear.                                       perspective on the issue
         • Evidence is not used to formulate an            is formulated.
            argument or an analysis.
         • Everyday language is used; there is little
            use of geographical terminology or it is
            used with errors in understanding.
  5–8    The response only partially addresses the question with limited links to the guide; evidence is both
         relevant and irrelevant and is largely unstructured.
         • The response partially addresses the         • No synthesis or             • Paragraphs do not reflect
           question and/or does not meet the              evaluation is expected at     grouping of information that
           requirements of the command term. Key          this level.                   addresses a specific element
           evidence is not included.                    • The link(s) between the       of the question.
         • A mix of relevant and irrelevant evidence      response and the guide      • If present, the conclusion is
           is outlined (that is, facts, statistics,       focus on one topic; other     one-sided, addressing only
           examples or theories) and any links to the     potential links are listed.   part of the question.
           question are only listed.                    • A valid but limited opinion
         • The evidence presented supports only one       or perspective on the
           element or interpretation of the question.     issue is formulated.
         • Key geographical terms are defined
           briefly. Terminology used is both relevant
           and irrelevant to the question.
                                                      –6–                  N22/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


9–12    The response addresses most parts of the question with developed links to the guide and outlines
        an analysis supported by relevant evidence but may lack clear links between paragraphs.
        • The question is broken down    • Synthesis or evaluation is required at • A series of standalone
          into parts and most parts of     this level.                               paragraphs each addressing
          the question are addressed in • Links between the response and the         a specific element of the
          the response, with supporting    guide refer to multiple topics and are    question but lacking clear
          evidence for each aspect of      described.                                links connecting them all into
          the question. The response     • Opinion or perspective presented is       a coherent whole.
          meets the requirements of the    aligned with the response but the       • The conclusion repeats and
          command term.                    links are not made explicit or the link   summarizes the analysis or
        • Relevant evidence (that is,      is a general statement.                   argument, but may contain
          facts, statistics, examples or   Other perspectives or interpretations     new information as well.
          theories) is described,          are listed without details.
          focused on the question and
          mostly correct. Links with the
          question are described.
        • The analysis outlines a two-
          sided argument briefly (if
          appropriate) and is mostly
          descriptive, using examples
          as explanation.
        • Correct definitions are given,
          and relevant and irrelevant
          specialist geographical terms
          are used with occasional
          errors; or everyday language
          is used.
13–16   The response addresses all aspects of the question; the analysis is explained and evaluated using
        evidence integrated in the paragraphs, and it is well structured.
        • All aspects of the question are   •   Synthesis and evaluation is           • Paragraphs focus on a
          addressed and the response            required at this level.                 relevant point of the
          meets the requirements of the     •   Links between the response and          argument and integrate the
          command term.                         (sub)topics from the guide are          supporting evidence.
        • Detailed evidence (that is,           explained and supported by the          Paragraphs are linked and
          facts, statistics, examples or        evidence in the response.               support the logical flow of
          theories) are integrated in       •   The opinion or perspective              the argument and response.
          sentences and paragraphs,             presented is explicitly linked to the • The conclusion summarizes
          and links made between                range of evidence included in the       the evidence and argument,
          evidence and the question are         response, including critical analysis   and links all back to the
          explained and relevant.               of the relative certainty of evidence   question.
        • The response explains how             used, describing other perspectives
          the two sides of the argument         or interpretations of evidence.
          (if appropriate) are supported
          by detailed evidence that is
          integrated in sentences.
        • Clear, correct definitions and
          use of geographical language
          is integrated in the sentences
          and throughout the response.
                                                  –7–                N22/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.   (a)   Analyse reasons why glocalization has become an increasingly important strategy for
           many transnational corporations (TNCs).                                                     [12]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on pages 3 to 4.

           Glocalization involves tailoring a product to the cultural preferences, purchasing power and
           legal requirements of a specific local market. It may also involve adapting a product’s design
           in line with what local supply chains can provide.
           Glocalization is increasingly important: Many TNCs, especially branded commodity makers
           and media companies, have been presented with new opportunities to grow market share in
           emerging and developing economies. At the same time, there are often considerable
           obstacles to overcome in order to make a success of these markets. Together, these are two
           key reasons why glocalization matters – global economic growth has opened up new
           potential markets, but differences in cultural and political geography present challenges for
           global players seeking to exploit those markets.

           Possible themes and reasons why glocalization is increasingly important include:
           • the over-arching drive for profits and market success
           • re-making of popular reality, comedy and drama TV shows to better reflect local audience
             demographics, language, religion and customs
           • the role of religion in diet or other cultural preferences, requiring the adaptation of global
             products to accommodate local market sensitivity
           • local/political issues, including laws governing product design and advertising
           • economic issues, including the proportion of people on lower incomes, which may result in
             TNCs introducing cheaper/simpler/plainer products
           • difficulties TNCs may have in sourcing products (eg grain for brewing beer), leading to
             changes in product taste/composition
           • increasing numbers of people classified as “middle class” and their increased
             consumption of non-essential goods, products and services.

           Good answers may apply (AO2) a wider range of knowledge and understanding (AO1) in
           a well-structured way (AO4). One approach might be to provide a structured analysis of the
           global demand/markets and different/new sales opportunities, applying the general idea that
           suppliers must take account of specific local/cultural contexts. Another approach might be to
           analyse the way different types/categories of TNC increasingly make use of glocalization,
           and reasons why.

           For 4–6 marks, expect some weakly evidenced outlining of one or two reasons why the
           glocalization of products/services happens.

           For 7–9 marks, expect a structured, evidenced analysis of:
           • either a range of reasons (two or more) why glocalization helps TNCs to maximize sales in
             particular contexts
           • or the increasing importance of glocalization (for example, to access new markets in ever-
             wider cultural settings; or to increase share in a more competitive market)

           For 10–12 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                              –8–                N22/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   “The global interactions that matter most are increasingly happening online.” To what
      extent do you agree with this statement?                                                     [16]

      Credit all content in line with the markbands. Marks should be allocated according to the
      markbands on pages 5 to 6. Credit unexpected approaches wherever relevant.

      Global interactions/flows include trade, services (including global providers of healthcare
      and education – such as IBO), capital movements, aid and debt payments, remittances,
      exchanges of culture and ideas, international political agreements, etc. Some of these
      interactions/flows cannot happen online – eg trade in oil, gas, food and raw materials – but
      others can, using video-conferencing services. Views about which flows matter most can of
      course be debated, with the issues seen from diverse perspectives.

      Possible applied themes (AO2) include knowledge and understanding (AO1) of:
      • the development and growth over time of the “shrinking world”: data flows linked with
        trading, finance and media and their increasing importance (4.3)
      • global networks linking together national communications infrastructure (4.3)
      • financial flows that increasingly happen online eg remittance flows (4.2) and also the real-
        world migration flows / diasporas that generate remittances (5.2)
      • illegal global flows and interactions (4.2) may be viewed as a matter for concern because
        of their criminal nature – and much happens online eg risks of hacking, identity theft (6.1)
      • civil society efforts to protect online freedom of speech around the world (5.3)
      • TNC supply chains supported by “just-in-time” online systems, although much trade
        remains physical (food, commodities) (4.2)

      Good answers may synthesize (AO3a) three or more of the above (or other) themes in a
      well-structured way (AO4).

      Good answers may additionally offer a critical evaluation (AO3b) of the statement, which
      discusses how different places can now be connected online in ways which were impossible
      in the past. Another approach might be to discuss the extent to which certain interactions
      matter most is a matter of perspective. Another approach might be to critically discuss
      whether certain interactions are truly global or are in fact more regional or national in scale. A
      good discussion may conclude with a substantiated final judgement on which interactions
      matter most and the extent to which they can – and increasingly are – happening online.

      Do not over-credit a detailed yet generalized discussion of the importance of online
      activities/the internet in domestic/national life/the everyday life of ‘people’. Knowledge should
      be logically applied to interactions/issues at an international scale (see guidance above).

      For 5–8 marks, expect weakly evidenced and/or imbalanced outlining of two or three
      relevant themes.

      For 9–12 marks, expect:
      • either a structured synthesis that links together several well-evidenced themes from the
        Guide
      • or a critical conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) informed by geographical concepts and/or
        perspectives.

      For 13–16 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                 –9–                N22/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   (a)   Analyse ways in which civil society organizations have influenced people’s views on
           different types of global interactions.                                                   [12]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on pages 3 to 4.

           Progressive civil society organizations (CSOs) try to raise awareness of environmental or
           social harm (climate change, poverty) that may be linked with trade or other global
           interactions. At the other end of the political spectrum, reactionary or populist CSOs
           promote negative views about migration, international aid, or other global flows and issues.
           CSOs try to influence people’s views in many ways, using different media and actions,
           including awareness-raising, protesting, advocacy and working in partnership with other
           local, national and international stakeholders

           CSO campaigns related to global interactions include:
           • civil society / local community use of social media to promote local shopping and local
             sourcing in opposition to global chain stores / clone towns
           • civil society use of social media to raise awareness of global issues linked with global
             consumer culture eg plastic in the oceans
           • civil society / NGO “name and shame” campaigns against specific forms of global
             interaction eg TNCs responsible for degradation of rainforests in South America or
             Indonesia
           • civil society anti-immigration and renewed nationalist movements, eg use of Twitter and
             other social media by US right-wing political movements.

           Do not over-credit material dealing with campaigns against local issues if those issues do not
           relate in any clear way to larger-scale global interactions or issues. A CSO campaign to
           support democracy in a particular country, for example, is not a wholly appropriate case
           study choice, although some credit should still be given.

           Some credit can be given to material dealing with non-CSO stakeholders (eg
           multigovernmental organisations or TNCs) provided the account furthers geographical
           analysis of how people’s views about global interactions are influenced. In such cases, valid
           subject knowledge, terminology and conceptual understanding may all be present, along with
           evidence of AO4 organisational skills.

           Full marks can be awarded to a single case study of one CSO if there is analysis of a range
           of different influencing / advocacy actions carried out by the CSO.

           Good answers may apply (AO2) a wider range of knowledge and understanding (AO1) in a
           well-structured way (AO4). One approach might be to systematically analyse several different
           types of global interaction (trade, migration, TNC activities). Another approach might be a
           structured systematic analysis of the different ways in which CSOs can try to inform people
           about these global issues (awareness-raising, peaceful protest, advocacy, lobbying).

           For 4–6 marks, expect some weakly evidenced outlining of one or two examples of civil
           society actions/organizations (may not be focused on global interactions or issues)

           For 7–9 marks, expect a structured, evidenced analysis of:
           • either two detailed ways in which one or more CSOs have used the internet to promote
             and/or resist particular global interactions
           • or a more varied range of global interactions and civil society responses.

           For 10–12 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                             – 10 –              N22/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   “Access to technology is the best way for societies to manage the most serious
      environmental challenges the world is facing.” To what extent do you agree with
      this statement?                                                                              [16]

      Credit all content in line with the markbands. Marks should be allocated according to the
      markbands on pages 5 to 6. Credit unexpected approaches wherever relevant.

      Environmental challenges include climate change, ocean pollution, biodiversity loss, oil
      spills, agroindustry impacts (eutrophication). These challenges have been mounting for
      centuries in some cases. One view is that adaptive technology (including new and near-
      future solutions) is essential because states are unlikely to surrender economic growth and
      development. Whether the entire global community of sovereign states and countries have
      equal access to technology to manage the challenges is debatable. Full mitigation of
      challenges, and restoration of losses, is unlikely (in relation to climate change, for example).

      Possible applied themes (AO2) include knowledge and understanding (AO1) of:
      • ways in which different global interactions affect the environment (6.2)
      • polluting industries and global agribusiness issues (6.2)
      • civil society solutions for environmental risks linked with global interactions (6.3)
      • climate change and its varied geographic impacts (2.1, 2.2)
      • climate change adaptation, mitigation and carbon footprint reduction (2.3, 6.2)
      • the role of technology in managing the COVID-19 pandemic
      • problems created by some technologies, such as e-waste, which may undermine the
        claim that technology is the ‘best way’ to manage challenges.

      Good answers may synthesize (AO3a) three or more of the above (or other) themes in a
      well-structured way (AO4).

      Good answers may additionally offer a critical evaluation (AO3b) of the statement, which
      discusses whether processes of environmental change are now unpreventable in any case
      (due to feedback mechanism) or whether there is a possibility of actually restoring
      environments. Another approach might be to critically discuss how far the entire global
      community will have access to adaptive technology, or only particular places/states due to
      differences in power and wealth. A good discussion may conclude with a substantiated final
      judgement on whether adaptation using technology has really become humanity’s best
      course in relation to a wide range of potentially existential challenges.

      For 5–8 marks, expect weakly evidenced and/or imbalanced outlining of two or three
      relevant themes.

      For 9–12 marks, expect:
      • either a structured synthesis that links together several well-evidenced themes from the
        Guide
      • or a critical conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) informed by geographical concepts and/or
        perspectives.

      For 13–16 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                 – 11 –              N22/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   (a)   Analyse how powerful countries are able to sustain their global influence over time.        [12]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on pages 3 to 4.

           Powerful countries (so-called “superpower” countries) project influence on a global or world
           region scale. Examples include the USA, China, Russia and some European countries. Accept
           the view that the EU is a superpower; or that some individual EU states, eg Germany and
           France, have maintained significant global influence over time. Also credit other examples –
           such as Japan, the UK, Qatar – provided supporting evidence is presented that supports their
           inclusion in the analysis. Types of global influence include forms of hard power (military might
           and economic sanctions) and soft power (cultural influence, international aid and diplomacy).
           These strategies may need to change over time in order to sustain power and influence (eg
           adopting soft power strategies, mastering new technologies such as the internet/cyberspace,
           gaining influence and control of global energy supplies and pathways).

           Maintenance of global influence over time is achieved in varied ways:
           • Economic strength is key to geopolitical success in any era, eg European empires in the
             18th century, the rise of the USA as a hyper-power in the 20th century and China’s
             expected arrival as the largest economy by 2030 (China has gained increased global
             influence via loans and debt).
           • Soft (hegemonic) power has arguably provided both the UK and the USA with leverage in
             the post-war era (popularity of Western music, Hollywood, etc), with non-Western media
             becoming more influential in recent decades (eg Al Jazeera, Russia Today).
           • Some states have lost but later regained influence but by different means, eg Russia’s
             transition from USSR to its present-day role as an “energy superpower” and supporter of
             client states that have been sidelined by Western powers.
           • The USA and Russia have maintained formidable military power since the early 1900s
             and have adapted their hard-power strategy in line with each new technology (eg naval
             power, nuclear weapons, space race, cyber-espionage etc). In recent years, China’s blue-
             water navy has shown formidable strength.
           • Middle Eastern oil-rich states have pursued a diverse power strategy – seeking global
             power band influence as sporting and cultural patrons.
           • Role of powerful states in funding proxy wars / supporting other regimes.
           • Influence of powerful states over international organizations and groups.

           Good answers may apply (AO2) a wider range of knowledge and understanding (AO1) in a
           well-structured way (AO4). One approach might be to provide a structured systematic analysis
           of the way global-scale influence is sustained over time in dynamic ways by adapting to change
           (for example, the recent importance of maintaining a lead in cyber-security). Another approach
           might be to analyse the way different strategies can reinforce, complement and sustain one
           another over time (eg financial assistance to client states).

           For 4–6 marks, expect some weakly evidenced outlining of one or two ways in which
           countries can exert power/influence.

           For 7–9 marks, expect a structured, evidenced analysis of:
           • either a detailed range of different ways (two or more) in which some countries exert
             global power/influence
           • or how power/influence has been sustained over time by one or more countries.

           For 10–12 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                              – 12 –               N22/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   “All countries will eventually lose their distinctive identity and sovereignty as a result of
      globalization.” To what extent do you agree with this statement?                                [16]

      Credit all content in line with the markbands. Marks should be allocated according to
      the markbands on pages 5 to 6. Credit unexpected approaches wherever relevant.

      A country’s distinctive identity may refer to its cultural character and the extent to which an
      indigenous cultural landscape has been “over-written” by signifiers of a global culture, for
      example the loss of indigenous diet, clothes, languages and the arrival of more secular
      thinking. Alternatively, the statement could refer to the country’s physical environment (its
      natural and built environment, including landscapes and vernacular architecture).
      Sovereignty refers to a state’s ability to act independently, unhindered by obligations under
      international agreements, or membership of multigovernmental organizations (MGOs).
      Globalization is a set of economic, political and sociocultural processes, leading to
      increased connections and flows between different places. Certain types of flow and
      connection may pose a greater threat to identity and sovereignty than others.

      Possible applied themes (AO2) include knowledge and understanding (AO1) of:
      • the global spectrum of cultures and cultural traits (5.2)
      • cultural changes linked with glocalization, hybridity and changes in the cultural landscape /
        built environment (5.2)
      • new and emerging threats to the political and economic sovereignty of states (6.1)
      • international migration and place interconnectivity (4.3)
      • local and civil society resistance to global interactions in support of national sovereignty
        and identity (5.3)
      • national trade restrictions, including protectionism and resource nationalism (5.3)
      • the correlation between increased globalization and renewed nationalism/tribalization (6.1)
      • the re-shoring of economic activity (6.3).

      Answers which focus on cultural identity but ignore sovereignty may access the 9-12 band if
      they use argument and evidence well, but are unlikely to progress far within that band.

      Good answers may synthesize (AO3a) three or more of the above (or other) themes in a
      well-structured way (AO4).

      Good answers may additionally offer a critical evaluation (AO3b) of the statement, which
      discusses how far particular aspects of globalization (eg trade, migration, social media) may
      pose the greatest threat to identity and sovereignty. Another approach might be to critically
      discuss how perspectives may differ on the nature and severity of cultural changes and
      sovereignty pressures – and whether these changes truly constitute a threat/loss or are just
      part of an ongoing historical process of change. Another approach might be to discuss
      identity changes at different scales, eg different local areas in a country may not experience
      cultural change to the same extent. A good discussion may conclude with a substantiated
      final judgement on whether the suggested changes are inevitable and unpreventable – or
      not.

      For 5–8 marks, expect weakly evidenced and/or imbalanced outlining of two or three
      relevant themes.

      For 9–12 marks, expect:
      • either a structured synthesis that links together several well-evidenced themes from the
        Guide
      • or a critical conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) informed by geographical concepts and/or
        perspectives.

      For 13–16 marks, expect both of these traits.
