© International Baccalaureate Organization 2022

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2022

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2022

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Information technology in a global society
Case study: Our social media lives

For use in November 2021, May 2022 and November 2022




Instructions to candidates
y Case study booklet required for higher level paper 3 information technology in a global society
   examinations.




     6 pages                                               © International Baccalaureate Organization 2021
                                                   –2–

Foreword

The ITGS case study, Our social media lives, is the stimulus material for the research investigation
required for November 2021, May 2022 and November 2022 higher level paper 3. All of the work related
to the case study should reflect the integrated approach explained on pages 15–17 of the ITGS guide.

Candidates should consider Our social media lives with respect to:
y relevant IT systems in a social context
y both local and global areas of impact
y social and ethical impacts on individuals and societies
y current challenges and solutions
y future developments.

Candidates are expected to research real-life situations similar to Our social media lives and relate their
findings to first-hand experiences wherever possible. Information may be collected through a range of
activities: secondary and primary research, field trips, guest speakers, personal interviews and email
correspondence.

Responses to examination questions must reflect the synthesis of knowledge and experiences that
the candidates have gained from their investigations. In some instances, additional information may be
provided in examination questions to allow candidates to generate new ideas.
                                               –3–

     Overview

     In 2010, the Journal for a Global Sustainable Information Society published a seminal paper by
     Gunilla Bradley, The convergence theory on ICT, society and human beings – towards the good
     ICT society, that stated, “… many conferences world wide are not paying much attention to the
 5   fact that all technology is for humans and should facilitate and improve our wellbeing and quality
     of life”.

     Over the last fifteen years, social media has become an integral part of society. This case
     study explores the extent to which social media has improved our wellbeing and considers the
     challenges that it poses.

10   The Bradley convergence model shown in Figure 1 is based on the idea that our digital lives
     have four interacting constituents – ICT, life environment, globalization, and life role – with
     each being addressed on an individual, organizational, community or global level. The two
     underlying principles of this model are convergence – the blurring of roles largely as a result of
     the increasingly ubiquitous nature of digital technologies – and acceleration. In the convergence
15   model, interaction between the various constituents and their parts is shown by the arrows. It
     also shows how humans influence, and are influenced by, each constituent of the model.

     This model can be applied to many uses of digital technologies. However, in this case study it
     is used to investigate the impacts of social media. It will examine this new way of life using the
     example of one family before engaging in a wider discussion that explores the opportunities and
20   costs of social media on a number of levels.




                                                                                             Turn over
                                               –4–

                             Figure 1: The Bradley convergence model




                                                                                           Life
         ICT                                                                               environment
                          Tele                                     Work
                       technology                               environment



                 Computer          Media                  Public               Home
                technology       technology            environment          environment



                   Ubiquitous embedded                             Virtual
                        technology                              environments
                                              Eﬀects
                                                on
                                              humans


                        Technology                              Professional
                                                                    role



                 Values,           Labour                 Private              Citizen
                 norms             markets                 role                 role



Globalization         Virtual worlds                                Virtual roles         Life role




      Scenario
      The Ramos family consists of Jaime and Maria and their three children, Laura, Daniela and
      Hugo. They are from a large city in South America.
      Jaime is the principal at a local high school. He uses social media platforms for both
 25   professional and personal purposes. He maintains his professional learning network (PLN) on
      these platforms, while in his personal life he uses them to promote his motorbike racing club
      and to discuss and plan activities for its members.
      Maria has recently retired and is time-rich. She uses social media to interact with people who
      share her interests and to follow her many relatives. Some of her social media activities use
 30   private communication platforms, while others are public and allow her to interact with the
      wider community.
                                                 –5–

     Laura, the eldest child, is a millennial, and currently lives in a city in Asia. Her work requires her
     to travel extensively and she uses company-approved social media platforms to collaborate
     with her global team. However, she has faced challenges in accessing these platforms in some
35   countries. Laura is trying to achieve a healthy work–life balance by keeping her work and
     personal online environments separate. She is in the process of detoxing from using social
     media in her personal life in order to control her digital footprint.
     Daniela, the middle child, is a university student studying in North America and is a
     singer‑songwriter. She promotes her work through social media and regularly collaborates
40   with other musicians, who in turn promote her through their own social media channels. So far,
     reviews of her work have generally been very good. Daniela is time-poor and rarely watches the
     news on television or reads newspapers. She usually uses her social media platforms to keep
     up with the news and express her opinions.
     Hugo, the youngest child, is an IB Diploma student and the editor of his school’s magazine. He
45   uses social media and communication tools in all aspects of his life. This includes writing for the
     school magazine, keeping in touch with his friends and managing his digital footprint to help with
     his applications for university.
     The evolution of digital technologies and the increasing use of social media has created many
     opportunities and challenges on individual, organizational, community and global levels.

50   Challenges faced
     The ubiquitous nature of social media can be seen as one of the main reasons for the
     convergence of the various parts of our digital lives. The Bradley convergence model in
     Figure 1 should be used in conjunction with the challenges identified in this case study to
     explore the positive and negative impacts of social media on a variety of stakeholders and a
55   range of levels.
     y   The impact of social media on the health and wellbeing of individuals.
     y   The management of an individual’s digital footprint.
     y   The tendency for individuals to obtain news from social media.
     y   The subcultures that exist on social media.
60   y   The equality of access to, and within, digital spaces.
     y   Balancing the available bandwidth with the increasing demand for social media services.
     y   The use of ethical practices by both producers and consumers.
     y   Social media companies’ use of customer data for marketing purposes.
     y   Technical challenges encountered on individual, organizational, community and global levels.
65   y   Governments, citizens and social media companies needing to address issues like privacy
         and data sharing.


     The 2021 case study has taken a different approach to previous years. These differences are
     outlined below.

     Technological background

70   The underlying technology involved with social media is usually, and intentionally, not apparent
     to the user other than the devices that connect to the internet. It is not necessary to go beyond
     an understanding of the technical terms in the additional terminology section.

     Additional terminology
     Many of these terms are not explicitly stated in the case study but are included to provide
75   teachers and students with areas to explore within the contexts of the challenges faced.

                                                                                                 Turn over
                                                    –6–

Additional terminology

Algorithmic bias
Bandwidth
Behavioural and profile data
Bradley convergence model
Data monetization
Digital detox
Digital footprint – active and passive
Digital subcultures
Echo chamber
Fear of missing out (FOMO)
Filter bubble
Hash tags
Influencer
Morals vs ethics
Net neutrality
Professional learning network (PLN)
Privacy principles
Privacy settings
Right to be forgotten
Single sign-on
Social media addiction
Targeted advertising
Tele-technology – use of digital technology to communicate and interact over distance
Ubiquitous (ubiquity) computing


Any individuals named in this case study are fictitious and any similarities with actual entities are purely
coincidental.
Disclaimer:

Content used in IB assessments is taken from authentic, third-party sources. The views expressed within them belong to their
individual authors and/or publishers and do not necessarily reflect the views of the IB.



References:

Quotation     Bradley, G., 2010. The convergence theory on ICT, society and human beings – towards the good ICT
              society. Journal for a Global Sustainable Information Society, 8(2), pp. 183–192. The convergence model is
              fully described in Gunilla Bradley´s latest book “THE GOOD ICT SOCIETY - From Theory to Actions” (2017)
              138 pp. hard cover, paper back, e-book with 27 colored illustrations! (Routledge).

Figure 1      Bradley, G., 2001. Information and communication technology (ICT) and humans: how we will live, learn
              and work. In G. Bradley ed. 2001. Humans on the net: information and communication technology (ICT)
              work organization and human beings. Stockholm: Prevent. pp. 22–44. The convergence model is fully
              described in Gunilla Bradley´s latest book “THE GOOD ICT SOCIETY - From Theory to Actions” (2017)
              138 pp. hard cover, paper back, e-book with 27 colored illustrations! (Routledge).
All other texts, graphics and illustrations © International Baccalaureate Organization 2021
