© International Baccalaureate Organization 2022

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2022

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2022

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Information technology in a global society
Higher level
Paper 1

Friday 4 November 2022 (afternoon)


2 hours 15 minutes


Instructions to candidates
y   Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y   Section A: a
                nswer two questions.
y   Section B: a
                nswer one question.
y   Each question is worth [20 marks].
y   The maximum mark for this examination paper is [60 marks].




                                                                                               8822 – 5511
      8 pages                                              © International Baccalaureate Organization 2022
                                                   –2–                                            8822 – 5511


                                               Section A

Answer two questions. Each question is worth [20 marks].

1.   Virtual learning environments

     A new university is being developed to offer online degree courses through a virtual learning
     environment (VLE) (see Figure 1). This initiative will enable students from anywhere in the
     country to access higher education.

     Each university lecturer records their lectures and transfers them to the cloud for remote
     access by the students.

                                Figure 1: A virtual learning environment




     (a)   (i)	Identify two hardware devices that a university lecturer could use to record
                a lecture.                                                                               [2]

           (ii)   Identify the steps that a university lecturer may use to upload course material to
                  the virtual learning environment (VLE).                                                [4]

     (b)   The university needs to choose between open-source software and proprietary
           software to develop the virtual learning environment (VLE).

           Analyse these two options.                                                                    [6]

     (c)   Students are in the process of selecting a university to complete their degree. They
           have two options:

           y Option 1: A traditional university using face-to-face environments.
           y Option 2: A university only offering online courses using a virtual learning environment
             (VLE) platform.

           Evaluate these two options.                                                                   [8]
                                                    –3–                                               8822 – 5511


2.   The use of simulators to train military personnel

     An army has developed a simulator to train its soldiers (see Figure 2). The simulator uses
     high-resolution images to represent the local environment. It allows a soldier to click on any
     region on a virtual globe and train in that environment.

     To restrict access to the simulator, the army requires soldiers to use biometric authentication.

     Each soldier is also provided with documentation that explains how to use the simulator.

                                   Figure 2: Simulation-based training




     (a)   (i)     Identify two file formats that could be used to save an image in the simulator.           [2]

           (ii)    Define the term image resolution.[2]

           (iii)   Identify two biometric authentication methods that could be used to access
                   the simulator.                                                                            [2]

     (b)   (i)     Distinguish between a model and a simulation.                                             [2]

           (ii)    Explain why the quality of user documentation is important for the success of
                   the simulator.                                                                            [4]

     (c)   To what extent do the benefits of using simulators for training soldiers outweigh
           the concerns?                                                                                     [8]




                                                                                                   Turn over
                                                  –4–                                           8822 – 5511


3.   Messaging apps*

     Tap2Talk is a messaging app with over two billion users worldwide. The app lets users chat,
     text, make voice calls and video calls, share media and receive notifications. The data that is
     shared between users is encrypted.

     Tap2Talk frequently reviews and updates its terms of service and privacy policy. To continue
     to use Tap2Talk services, users must agree to the changes (see Figure 3).

                                     Figure 3: The Tap2Talk app




                                                   T2T


                                           Tap2Talk
                                      Connecting People
                                  Email address
                                   author@myemail.com

                                  Password

                                  **********

                                      We have updated our Terms of
                                      Service and Privacy Policy. By
                                      continuing to use our service, you
                                      accept these terms and policies.


                                                  Login




     Users can choose whether to store their data, such as logs of their chats, audio files, video
     files, and documents, on their mobile device or on a Tap2Talk cloud-based server.



* apps: small specialized programs run on mobile devices, the internet, a computer or
  other electronic devices

(This question continues on the following page)
                                                    –5–                                          8822 – 5511


(Question 3 continued)

     (a)   (i)     Identify two disadvantages of a user’s data being stored on their mobile device.     [2]

           (ii)    Identify two characteristics of encrypted data.                                      [2]

           (iii)   Identify one advantage for Tap2Talk users of receiving notifications.                [1]

           (iv)    Identify one disadvantage for Tap2Talk users of receiving notifications.             [1]

     (b)   A number of Tap2Talk users are concerned about ticking a single check box to agree to
           the new terms of service and privacy policy (see Figure 3).

           Explain why Tap2Talk users might be concerned about ticking a single check box to
           agree to the new terms of service and privacy policy.                                        [6]

     (c)   Tap2Talk has decided to share its users’ data with a third party, GlobalConnect. This
           will mean that all user data, such as text messages, locational information and media,
           will be held in GlobalConnect’s database.

           Discuss the impacts of this decision for Tap2Talk users.                                     [8]




                                                                                                 Turn over
                                                    –6–                                           8822 – 5511


                                                Section B

Answer one question. Each question is worth [20 marks].

4.   Artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning help detect fraud

     Coco Financial, a company specializing in financial advice, is concerned that the growth of
     online shopping has led to more opportunities for fraud such as identity theft and credit card
     details being illegally accessed. Coco Financial currently uses expert systems to detect fraud.

     Another way in which fraud may be detected is the use of an artificial neural network (ANN)
     that can use either supervised learning or unsupervised learning. An ANN is an example of
     machine learning.

     A new ANN for fraud detection is being developed for Coco Financial. It will be developed
     following the system development life cycle (SDLC). A feasibility study and stakeholder
     analysis have been completed.

     (a)   (i)	Identify two methods of data collection that could have been used in the
                stakeholder analysis.                                                                    [2]

           (ii)    Identify two components of a feasibility study.                                       [2]

           (iii)   Describe the difference between supervised machine learning and unsupervised
                   machine learning.                                                                     [2]

     (b)   Explain the difference between an artificial neural network (ANN) and an expert system.       [6]

     (c)   Discuss the impact on Coco Financial of using artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms to
           detect fraud.                                                                                 [8]
                                                       –7–                                         8822 – 5511


5.   Cybersecurity: software testing

     Organizations use penetration testing to identify and correct security weaknesses in their
     systems, networks and applications. Penetration testing is an example of software testing
     (see Figure 4).

                              Figure 4: A visualization of penetration testing




     TSE Global is concerned about the security of its customers’ accounts. To test the security
     of these accounts, it uses black-box penetration testing. The testing is carried out by artificial
     intelligence (AI) using deep-learning algorithms.

     (a)   (i)     Identify two features of artificial intelligence (AI).                                 [2]

           (ii)    Outline one benefit of using deep learning.                                            [2]

           (iii)   Identify two features of an algorithm.                                                 [2]

     (b)   TSE Global needs to decide whether to use black-box or white-box testing.

           Analyse these two options.                                                                     [6]

     (c)   Discuss whether TSE Global should incorporate ethical design at each stage of
           software development.                                                                          [8]




                                                                                                   Turn over
                                                    –8–                                            8822 – 5511


6.   Autonomous underwater robots

     Coral reefs are fragile ecosystems and have been seriously affected by climate change. One
     way of monitoring the effects of climate change is to use autonomous underwater robots
     (see Figure 5).

                   Figure 5: An example of a swarm of underwater autonomous robots




     Octoworld is a company that plans to use autonomous underwater robots to monitor the
     condition of coral reefs worldwide. The robots will be equipped with sensors so they can
     measure their own motion relative to the coral reefs and the surrounding water.

     The prototype of the Octoworld autonomous robot will use a navigation system that is
     capable of avoiding obstacles. The navigation system will use fuzzy logic embedded in the
     underwater autonomous robot to train the robot’s behaviour.

     The autonomous robots will use artificial intelligence (AI) to process information gathered
     about the coral reef and make decisions, such as whether to restore it.

     (a)   (i)      Identify two sensors required by the autonomous underwater robots.                    [2]

           (ii)     Identify two items of data that could be collected by the autonomous
                    underwater robots.                                                                    [2]

           (iii)    Identify two advantages of fuzzy logic compared to inference rules.                   [2]

     (b)   (i)	Explain one reason why an agile project development (scrum) methodology
                would be used for the development of the underwater robots.                               [2]

           (ii)     Explain two reasons why prototyping would be used in the development of the
                    autonomous underwater robots.                                                         [4]

     (c)   Discuss whether autonomous underwater robots instead of humans should be used
           to monitor the condition of coral reefs and make decisions, such as whether to
           restore them.                                                                                  [8]

Disclaimer:
Content used in IB assessments is taken from authentic, third-party sources. The views expressed within them belong to their
individual authors and/or publishers and do not necessarily reflect the views of the IB.

References:

Figure 2.     Berner, A., 2013. Virtual reality training. [image online] Available at: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
              File:Virtual_reality_training_130417-A-BZ540-114.jpg [Accessed 8 July 2021].

Figure 5.     © Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, T. Silva.

All other texts, graphics and illustrations © International Baccalaureate Organization 2022
