N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                         November 2022


                               Philosophy


           Higher level and standard level


                                Paper 2




44 pages
                                            –2–                   N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2022

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2022

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2022

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                     –3–                  N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


   I. QIG availability
The following QIGs are usually available for qualification, but this will be confirmed at the start of the
marking session:

     QIG number                        Text/author                       English QIG       Spanish QIG
                                                                         availability       availability
                      Simone de Beauvoir The Second Sex, Vol. 1
           01
                      part 1, Vol. 2 part 1 and Vol. 2 part 4

           02         René Descartes Meditations

                      David Hume Dialogues Concerning Natural
           03
                      Religion

           04         John Stuart Mill On Liberty

           05         Friedrich Nietzsche The Genealogy of Morals

                      Martha Nussbaum Creating Capabilities:
           06
                      The Human Development Approach

           07         Ortega y Gasset The Origin of Philosophy

           08         Plato The Republic, Books IV–IX

           09         Peter Singer The Life You Can Save

           10         Charles Taylor The Ethics of Authenticity

           11         Lao Tzu Tao Te Ching

           12         Zhuangzi Zhuangzi, Inner Chapters


   II. Candidates who overlook the Paper 2 rubric of answering both parts a and b of
       one question

However clearly the IB sets out its expectations on how candidates should answer exam questions,
there are occasions when we receive work that does not match what we asked for. There is a specific
case in exams where we ask students to select particular questions to answer and they fail to follow
these rules (rubrics).

This note is intended to clarify how we deal with these situations through a series of scenarios.
The actions have been checked to ensure that they are supported by RM Assessor.

Overarching principles
The following statements underpin our decisions below:
   1. No candidate should be disadvantaged for following the rules.
   2. Whenever possible candidates should receive credit for what they know.
                                                     –4–                  N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Example
To help understand the different scenarios we will make reference to an example assessment.
Instruction: candidates must respond to both parts of one question.
Q7. (a)     Explain Mill’s view of the relationship between liberty and utility.                  (10 marks)
      (b)   To what extent are liberty and utility fundamentally conflicting concepts?            (15 marks)

Q9. (a)     Explain the view that morality has a clear and traceable genealogy.                   (10 marks)
      (b)   To what extent do you agree with the genealogy Nietzsche proposes?                    (15 marks)

Scenario 1. Candidate answers parts from two different questions.
Example: Candidate answers 7(a) and 9(a) or answers 7(b) and 9(a)
Action:
Mark all of the candidate’s answers. The student will receive their best mark from one question.
In the second example this means the best mark for either 7(b) or 9(a).
This requires that examiners assign each mark to the correct question part (ie: gives the mark for 9(a) to
9(a) and not 7(a) – if question is QIGed this will happen automatically).

Scenario 2. Candidate does not split their answer according to the sub-parts.
Example: Candidate writes one answer which they label as question 7 or they indicate they have only
answered 9(a) but actually answer both 9(a) and 9(b) in that answer.
Action:
Examiners use their best judgement to award marks for all sub-parts as if the candidate has correctly
labelled their answer.
In the example this means the candidate would be able to gain up to 25 marks despite only labelling the
answer as 9(a).
Exception – where the nature of the two parts of the question means it is important to differentiate
between the two answers, for example the first part should be done before the second part (in maths) or
the candidate needs to show they understand the difference between the two parts of the question then
examiners should use their judgement and only award marks if it is clear that the candidate has simply
made a mistake in numbering their answers.
Scenario 3. Candidate duplicates their answer to the first part in the second part.
Example: Candidate answers 7(a) and the repeats the same text as part of 7(b)
Action:
Only give credit for the answer once (in the first part of the question). The assessment criteria should
assess distinct skills when there are parts to a question so this problem should not occur.

Scenario 4. Candidate provides the wrong question number for their answer.
Example: Candidate states they are answering 7(a) and 7(b) but their response clearly talks about
Nietzsche (Q9) rather than Mill’s (Q7).
Action:
Mark the answer according to the mark scheme for the question that they should have indicated.
Exception – this only applies when there is no ambiguity as to which question the student has
attempted, for example if they have rephrased the question in their opening paragraph. It is not the role
of the examiner to identify which question is the best fit for their answer (ie: which questions their answer
would get most marks for). If the given question number is a plausible match with their answer then the
student should be marked according to that question. Only in exceptional circumstances should this rule
be applied to sub-questions (ie: assuming the candidate had mistakenly swapped their answers for
Q7(a) and Q7(b).
                                                   –5–                  N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


How to use the Diploma Programme Philosophy markscheme

The assessment markbands constitute the formal tool for marking examination scripts, and in these
assessment markbands examiners can see the skills being assessed in the examinations. The
markschemes are designed to assist examiners in possible routes taken by candidates in terms of the
content of their answers when demonstrating their skills of doing philosophy through their responses.
The points listed are not compulsory points, and not necessarily the best possible points. They are a
framework to help examiners contextualize the requirements of the question, and to facilitate the
application of marks according to the assessment markbands listed on page 8 for part A responses,
and page 9 for part B responses.

It is important that examiners understand that the main idea of the course is to promote doing
philosophy, and this involves activity and engagement throughout a two-year programme, as opposed
to emphasizing the chance to display knowledge in a terminal set of examination papers. Even in the
examinations, responses should not be assessed on how much candidates know as much as how they
are able to use their knowledge in support of an argument, using the skills referred to in the various
assessment markbands published in the subject guide, reflecting an engagement with philosophical
activity throughout the course. As a tool intended to help examiners in assessing responses, the
following points should be kept in mind when using a markscheme:

• The Diploma Programme Philosophy course is designed to encourage the skills of doing philosophy
  in the candidates. These skills can be accessed through reading the assessment markbands in the
  subject guide
• The markscheme does not intend to outline a model/correct answer
• The markscheme has an introductory paragraph which contextualizes the emphasis of the question
  being asked
• The bullet points below the paragraph are suggested possible points of development that should not
  be considered a prescriptive list but rather an indicative list where they might appear in the answer
• If there are names of philosophers and references to their work incorporated into the markscheme,
  this should help to give context for the examiners and does not reflect a requirement that such
  philosophers and references should appear in an answer: they are possible lines of development.
• Candidates can legitimately select from a wide range of ideas, arguments and concepts in service of
  the question they are answering, and it is possible that candidates will use material effectively that is
  not mentioned in the markscheme
• Examiners should be aware of the command terms for Philosophy as published on page 54 of the
  Philosophy subject guide when assessing responses
• In markschemes for Paper 2 there is a greater requirement for specific content as the Paper requires
  the study of a text by the candidates and the questions set will derive from that text. The markscheme
  will show what is relevant for both part A and part B answers. In part B responses, candidates may
  select other material they deem as relevant
• Responses for part A and part B should be assessed using the distinct assessment markbands.


Note to examiners

Candidates at both Higher Level and Standard Level answer one question on the prescribed texts.
Each question consists of two parts, and candidates must answer both parts of the question (a and b).
                                                –6–                  N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 2 part A markbands

 Marks                                         Level descriptor

   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

          There is little relevant knowledge of the specified idea/argument/concept from the text.
  1–2     The explanation is minimal.
          Philosophical vocabulary is not used, or is consistently used inappropriately.

          Some knowledge of the specified idea/argument/concept from the text is demonstrated but
           this lacks accuracy, relevance and detail.
  3–4
          The explanation is basic and in need of development.
          Philosophical vocabulary is not used, or is consistently used inappropriately.

          Knowledge of the specified idea/argument/concept from the text is mostly accurate and
           relevant, but lacking in detail.
  5–6
          There is a satisfactory explanation.
          Philosophical vocabulary is used, sometimes appropriately.

          The response contains accurate and relevant knowledge of the specified idea/
           argument/concept from the text.
  7–8
          The explanation is clear, although may be in need of further development.
          Philosophical vocabulary is mostly used appropriately.

          The response contains relevant, accurate and detailed knowledge of the specified
           idea/argument/concept from the text.
  9–10
          The explanation is clear and well developed.
          There is appropriate use of philosophical vocabulary throughout the response.
                                                  –7–                  N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 2 part B markbands

 Marks                                           Level descriptor

   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

            There is little relevant knowledge of the text.
            Philosophical vocabulary is not used, or is consistently used inappropriately.
  1–3
            The response is mostly descriptive with very little analysis.
            There is no discussion of alternative interpretations or points of view.

            Some knowledge of the text is demonstrated but this lacks accuracy and relevance.
            Philosophical vocabulary is used, sometimes appropriately.
  4–6       There is some limited analysis, but the response is more descriptive than analytical.
            There is little discussion of alternative interpretations or points of view.
            Some of the main points are justified.

            Knowledge of the text is mostly accurate and relevant.
            Philosophical vocabulary is used, sometimes appropriately.
  7–9       The response contains analysis, but this analysis lacks development.
            There is some discussion of alternative interpretations or points of view.
            Many of the main points are justified.

            The response contains accurate and relevant knowledge of the text.
            Philosophical vocabulary is mostly used appropriately.
 10–12      The response contains clear critical analysis.
            There is discussion and some assessment of alternative interpretations or points of view.
            Most of the main points are justified.

            The response contains relevant, accurate and detailed knowledge of the text.
            There is appropriate use of philosophical vocabulary throughout the response.
 13–15      The response contains clear and well-developed critical analysis.
            There is discussion and assessment of alternative interpretations or points of view.
            All or nearly all of the main points are justified.
                                                 –8–                  N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Simone de Beauvoir: The Second Sex, Vol. 1 part 1, Vol. 2 part 1 and Vol. 2 part 4

1.   (a)   Explain de Beauvoir’s claim that “men are the Subject and women the Other”.                [10]

     (b)   Evaluate de Beauvoir’s claim that “men are the Subject and women the Other”.                [15]
           The question invites candidates to engage with the situation of a woman, as described by de
           Beauvoir as that of the inessential Other compared to man as "the Subject". Responses might
           demonstrate that de Beauvoir makes clear that the Other is also the label of those groups
           who are marginalized by society. Responses might identify de Beauvoir’s argument that
           society views women as the Other, because they are viewed only in relation to men; they are
           treated as objects of desire for men; as mothers to their future heirs; or as the ones who look
           after everyone else. Denying women their own subjectivity (the right to view themselves as
           individuals) with their own perspective is dehumanizing and leaves them powerless.
           Candidates might discuss de Beauvoir’s use of historical materialism (specifically Marxist) to
           explain why women occupy the position of Other. Discussion about the structure of the
           Subject and the Other being universal and inevitable whilst women being positioned as the
           Other is not the case might be explored. Also, Simone de Beauvoir’s argument on how the
           division into the Subject and the Other becomes manifest and is itself a product of specific
           material circumstances. Responses might develop a line of engagement demonstrating
           de Beauvoir’s argument that advocates the historical contingency of any given manifestation
           of the Subject and the Other.

           Candidates might explore (part A):
           • The ontological concept of the Subject and the Other
           • Division into the Subject (dominant) and the Other (dominated) as a feature of
             consciousness
           • An outline of de Beauvoir’s notion of woman as Other
           • Historical materialist perspectives to explain why women occupy the position of Other
           • The structures of the Subject and the Other may be universal, but women positioned as
             the Other is historically contingent
           • The extent to which the Other is subordinate to the Subject
           • Woman as Other, in a number of ways such as: cultural representation; existential
             recognition etc
           • The context of society structures and its whole organizational framework around the male
             norm
           • Woman as Other to Herself.


           Possible discussion points include (part B):
           • Why is woman always in the position of Other?
           • Why are the dialectical shifts whereby which group counts as the Subject and which as
             the Other is not apparent for women and men?
           • Why for de Beauvoir, did this domination take the form of patriarchy, where men became
             the Subject and women the Other?
           • Is this submission of women another source of tension between existence as historically
             contingent, and essence as a universal structure?
           • How far is who counts as the Subject and who counts as the Other open to change?
           • Why does the historical account emphasizing capitalism and patriarchy fail to explain,
             even with the addition of the existential ontology of the Subject and the Other, why men
             are still the Subject, and women are still the Other?
                                      –9–                   N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


• Does de Beauvoir succeed in combining Hegelian existential concepts, which focus on
  relations between consciousnesses, together with Marx’s picture of material, social
  structures, in positioning women as Other existentially, materially and culturally?
• How far does de Beauvoir’s interest in arguing that woman is regarded as an object and
  consequently socially inferior imply that the suffering of women is analogous to the
  suffering of slaves due to their oppression?
• Haslanger’s contention that gender is a social status within a hierarchical social structure
  rather than a biological category
• Witt’s account of the metaphysics of gender
• Meyer’s assertion that the cultural imagery of women is a fundamental threat to female
  autonomy.
                                                  – 10 –                N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   (a)   Explain de Beauvoir’s view of the biological body.                                           [10]

     (b)   Evaluate de Beauvoir’s view of the biological body.                                           [15]
           The opening sentences of Vol. 2 part 1 around one not being born woman, but becoming
           woman, reflect embodiment as a central feature of de Beauvoir’s theory, which is bound
           irrevocably with concepts of sexual difference, and which emphasizes both the constraints of
           biology and the way societies shape what nature can become. Responses can be expected
           to address de Beauvoir’s view of the biological body. This is important for de Beauvoir as the
           material body is of particular significance for a woman and her relation to the world.
           Candidates might also address de Beauvoir’s view of the lived body and explore
           de Beauvoir’s development of Marx’s concept of woman’s biology as not determinative of her
           current subordinate social position. This develops a view of the lived body by gender
           orientation, which stresses that male and female bodies are lived differently. Candidates
           might demonstrate that de Beauvoir offers biological data with regard to differences between
           male and female bodies and explore her claim that stresses that different biological bodies
           will experience the world in different ways and so our biology is a fundamental part of our
           existence. For de Beauvoir, it cannot be denied that woman is "weaker" than man. However,
           despite this fragility, de Beauvoir insists that woman has a relationship with her biological
           body that is difficult to ignore. For de Beauvoir a woman’s body is interconnected not only
           with her choices but with the possibilities that society offers, and with the choices that she
           views as possibilities. Candidates might reflect on the significance of this in relation to
           practical concerns and political struggles over women’s bodies, and over biology and its
           meaning.

           Candidates might explore (part A):
           • De Beauvoir’s view that biology is fundamental; this is particularly relevant to a woman’s
             biology as she experiences biological constraints; she is prey to the species.
           • Biology cannot define a woman; biology only becomes fundamental within a cultural
             context
           • Issues surrounding the claim that biological facts, de Beauvoir argues, are only significant
             because of the meanings that society attaches to them
           • The body for a woman is experienced as alien as it is viewed as a biological function
           • Understanding of biology is mediated; understanding of reproduction is also mediated and
             socially arranged to prioritize heterosexuality
           • De Beauvoir’s awareness of the way in which images describing biological processes are
             laden with cultural meaning
           • That biological facts have been described to effectively equate activity and passivity with
             man and woman
           • De Beauvoir’s argument that actually within the sexual act and subsequent reproduction,
             both male and female play an equally important and inter-dependent role
           • De Beauvoir insists that woman has a relationship with her biological body that is difficult
             to ignore
           • The struggle for woman to maintain her subjectivity
           • De Beauvoir’s view that the strength of alienation of woman from her body is felt most
             strenuously.
                                       – 11 –               N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Possible discussion points include (part B):
• The development of the female body into the maternal body is described as a crisis by de
  Beauvoir; how does de Beauvoir resolve this perceived crisis?
• The idea that women have been tied and trapped by their biological bodies and cycles of
  reproduction, pregnancy, childbirth, rearing children, caring for others, and the social
  significance attached to biology
• The claim that de Beauvoir’s language is excessive, in the sense that many women might
  not recognize themselves and their experience; it is unfamiliar, strange and disturbing
• Might such negative rhetoric actually serve a function; its purpose being to draw attention
  to the way a woman’s biology is lived under oppressive circumstances, and the difficulty in
  maintaining any sense of self within that
• The implications might be explored as some would argue that what de Beauvoir is doing is
  to argue against biological determinism
• Issues surrounding the claim that biological facts, de Beauvoir argues, are only significant
  because of the meanings that society attaches to them
• How crucial is materiality of the body, as well as the materiality of social structures and the
  effects they have on individuals and their possibilities to de Beauvoir?
• Might de Beauvoir’s concept of bodily alienation be fruitfully extended in a more materialist
  or Marxist-inspired analysis of the continuation of patriarchy
• How successful is de Beauvoir in drawing attention to patriarchal ideology as the source of
  a portrayal of woman’s situation?
• Does the distinction which de Beauvoir makes between the data of biology and the lived
  body suggest that she endorses the sex/gender distinction?
• Sally Haslanger’s contention that gender is a social status within a hierarchical social
  structure rather than a biological category
• Julia Serano on the connection between gender, feminism, biology, and sexuality.
                                                  – 12 –                N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


René Descartes: Meditations

3.   (a)   Explain Descartes’s use of philosophical doubt in his search for knowledge.                   [10]

     (b)   Evaluate Descartes’s use of philosophical doubt in his search for knowledge.                   [15]
           The question arises from Descartes’s attempt to achieve indubitable knowledge and, as he
           states at the beginning of the First Meditation, the need to rid himself of opinions and start
           anew. The intended to cast doubt upon everything formerly believed, and culminating in, the
           hypothesis of an all-deceiving evil genius and the cogito. Candidates might argue that
           Descartes is considered a foundationalist philosopher, looking for something that needs no
           further justification, and cannot be doubted and thus, as indicated in his introduction, he is
           writing for both the skeptics and the scholastics of his day. If even one thing can be proved for
           certain, he can prove the sceptics wrong because as a rationalist philosopher he will base his
           entire project on reason alone. According to Descartes, empirical knowledge is always
           uncertain: our senses deceive us. True knowledge can accordingly come only from reason.
           The role of reason is therefore to take doubt to its extreme in order to find something that
           reason cannot doubt, which can then become the basis for constructing an accurate
           representation of reality. Candidates might explore the progressive nature of the three “waves
           of doubt” and the fact that doubt is a kind of thinking, so if he attempts to doubt that he is
           thinking, he is in fact thinking. Hence there is one thing that cannot be doubted – “I think,
           therefore I am”. With this argument, Descartes believed that he had demonstrated that he
           was a thing (res cogitans) whose sole essence was thinking (or consciousness). Candidates
           might explore the criticism that Descartes’s epistemology relies on a confused understanding
           of Leibniz’s Law of Identity. Some candidates might argue that it is illogical for Descartes to
           claim that just because something can be doubted in one instance, we can doubt it in all
           instances (quantifier shift fallacy). Responses might claim that the use of philosophical doubt
           is carried out through the use of language, but what are the presuppositions of doing this?
           Counter arguments might feature private rules and/or definitions, public criteria, whether
           expressions have a use, and thus, a meaning (Wittgenstein). Descartes, it might be argued, is
           inconsistent because he fails to doubt his memory and consequently fails to consider the
           implications of this, especially in regard to the cogito.

           Candidates might explore (part A):
           • Descartes’s purpose as indicated at the start of the First Meditation
           • Descartes’s understanding of his claim to “withhold assent”
           • What does it mean to be certain?
           • Descartes’s concept of knowledge
           • Philosophical doubt as a tool to achieve certainty
           • Descartes’s foundationalism; Descartes’s house built on a foundation analogy
           • The stages of doubt: senses, dreaming and the malevolent demon
           • Illustrations of the stages of doubt
           • How Descartes links each stage of doubt to its successor within the context of his overall
             purpose
           • How Descartes arrives at the cogito
           • Descartes’s use of philosophical doubt results in the discovery the “self” as an indubitable
             certainty.
                                      – 13 –                N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Possible discussion points include (part B):
• Whether Descartes’s claim, that he was certain that nothing certain could be known, is
  paradoxical
• Equating knowledge with logical certainty is mistaken
• If Descartes’s philosophical doubt had been more thorough, then he should have explored
  the idea of a deceptive memory; Descartes refers to this but he did not develop it
• The argument that Descartes’s method results in an isolated “self” and therefore we are
  unable to go beyond this to construct a theory of knowledge even though Descartes
  implicitly admits this when he states that his arguments for the existence of body are
  “probable”
• Descartes’s concept of knowledge is limited in that logical certainty is too stringent a
  condition and invokes the problem of narrow content; basic foundational certainties do not
  have sufficient content to generate systems of knowledge
• The exclusion of a priori principles from Descartes’s doubting process as a central
  weakness in his method
• Empiricists’ critiques regarding the impossibility of deducing a priori truths about the world
  in relation to Descartes’s rationalism and the emphasis he attaches to absolute certainty
• Whether the validity of the cogito might be questioned
• Leibniz’s Law of Identity as a critique of Descartes’s method
• Criticism of the stages of doubt such as the view that just because the senses have let us
  down sometimes does not permit the inference that they may always do; there needs to
  be a concept of reality in order to articulate the concept of a dream; is the malignant
  demon hypothesis meaningful? Doubt needs a background or context and not the
  elimination of all possible ones
• The use of the film The Matrix to critique Descartes insofar as if deceptions are allowed
  within a deception, then those who control The Matrix could be deceived and therefore the
  issue of infinite regress arises
• Wittgensteinian arguments with reference to the presuppositions and language that
  Descartes employs
• William James’ claim that genuine Cartesian doubt is psychologically unrealistic.
                                                  – 14 –                N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   (a)   Explain Descartes’s reasons for assuming that mind and body are separate and
           distinct substances.                                                                          [10]

     (b)   Evaluate Descartes’s reasons for assuming that mind and body are separate
           and distinct substances.                                                                       [15]
           The question invites responses to focus on the reasons for Descartes’s claim that the mind
           and body are separate substances. Whilst the distinctions between mind and body are
           peppered throughout the text, Descartes proves his own existence as a mind or thinking thing
           (res cogitans) in the Second Meditation; he proves the existence of his body
           (res extensa) in his broader proof of material things by the end of the Sixth Meditation. The
           essential principle of Cartesian dualism is that mind and body are not identical but quite
           distinct, separate substances. Responses might identify Descartes’s epistemological
           argument, self-evidence of consciousness, (the cogito); matter, or body is the necessary
           medium for extension but what cannot be concluded is that there is any particular body which
           is extended (Descartes’s own body therefore is not self-evident); mind is boundless in that it
           can understand and apply a priori truths without limit whereas body is finite. Responses might
           consider the argument from clear and distinct ideas. Candidates might discuss the main
           conclusion of the wax analogy showing that there is a distinction between mind and body.
           Candidates might explore problems with Descartes’s reasoning such as the interaction
           between mind and body, his appeal to the pineal gland, occasionalism where interaction
           between mind and body is caused by God etc. Candidates might discuss the misapplication
           of Leibniz’s Law of Identity in intentional contexts, eg: “doubting”. Or they might refer to
           Kripke, who holds the idea that identity is a necessary relation in his work Naming and
           Necessity. Epistemological priority does not imply ontological priority or causal independence.
           Candidates might contend that some form of dualism is needed in order to accommodate
           undeniable features of consciousness, qualia, intentionality, subjectivity, the possibility of
           ordered and structured meaningful experience.

           Candidates might explore (part A):
           • Descartes’s view that “substance”, existing in its own right, can only be destroyed by God
           • Descartes’s arguments for the distinction between mind and body; different essential
             natures; Cartesian dualism
           • What is meant by “essence” of mind – “thinking” and “essence” of body – “extension”
           • Issues surrounding Descartes’s appeal to God’s omnipotence
           • Indivisibility argument
           • The wax analogy as a means of arguing that we can use our reason to reach conclusions
             about the identity of something
           • Interaction in reference to Descartes’s understanding of the role of the pineal gland
           • Intermingling argument, as opposed to the pilot in a ship example
           • Descartes’s reasons that intended to show that mind is not identified with body, it is
             separate and distinct, not causally dependent
           • Detail of the arguments, eg: indubitability of mind, God can do whatever is logically
             conceivable
           • Divisibility/indivisibility and Descartes’s treatment of the faculty’s response.
                                    – 15 –              N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Possible discussion points include (part B):
• Descartes’s arguments for separateness and distinctness are not consistent with the
  intermingling proposition
• Viewing the mind as essentially an immaterial substance is inconsistent with the usual
  way of talking about persons
• Dualism is inconsistent with the concept of ontological simplicity as epistemological
  priority does not imply ontological priority or causal independence
• The unsolvable problem of interaction and the failure of the pineal gland explanation
• The mind cannot be spatially located
• The concept of an immaterial substance is counterintuitive because ‘substance’ infers
  materiality; materialism might be explored
• Problems accounting for how brain changes affect the mind; resultant problems for the
  materialist, how the mental can produce physical effects
• Leibniz’s Law of Identity; Masked Man Fallacy
• Kripke’s Naming and Necessity
• Descartes’s appeal to God’s omnipotence fails to establish that God has used that power
• Split/multiple personality counterexamples
• Freud’s tri-partite division of the mind as a counterargument against Descartes’s
  indivisibility argument
• Descartes’s position contrasted with other theories of mind, eg: identity theory, Ryle’s
  behaviourism, epiphenomenalism
• Descartes’s probable responses to these theories of mind
• Various forms of dualism in order to accommodate indisputable aspects of consciousness.
                                                – 16 –               N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


David Hume: Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion

5.   (a)   Explain the claim that the Dialogues are about the essence of God rather than
           God’s existence.                                                                         [10]

     (b)   Evaluate the claim that the Dialogues are about the essence of God rather than God’s
           existence.                                                                           [15] The
           question arises from Parts 2 and 3 of the Dialogues and invites candidates to focus on why
           Philo, Demea, and Cleanthes appear to accept that God’s existence is self-evident and
           undeniable and therefore their discussion revolves around the issue of God’s essence. Their
           dialogue is focused more on whether God’s attributes can be known, and if they can be
           known, what are these traits. Cleanthes implies (according to Demea) that the existence of
           God is a “fundamental principle”. Demea claims that the existence of God is "certain and self-
           evident". Philo asserts that the existence of God is "unquestionable". While all three do not
           question the 'being of God', each of them has a different take about the 'nature of God', as
           confirmed by Demea and Philo in Part 2, paragraphs 1 and 3. Candidates might be expected
           to develop their responses by exploring Demea’s claim that God’s essence, while it is
           mysterious, can be affirmed a priori (ie: cause and effect argument); Cleanthes’s assertion
           that God’s presence can be known a posteriori (ie: design argument); Philo’s stance that
           God’s essence cannot be comprehended at all.

           Candidates might explore (part A):
           • Can God’s existence be proven? Is belief in God valid even with the absence of proof?
           • Is the essence of God knowable?
           • Demea’s affirmation of God’s nature through the a priori argument which he argues
             removes doubt and difficulty
           • Cleanthes contention that we can know God’s essence or nature through our experience
             of the world (design argument)
           • Cleanthes’ use of analogy (machine, watch, house)
           • Divine attributes/characteristics
           • Philo’s assertion that all we know about God is that he exists (qua causa of the universe)
             but beyond this we have no idea or understanding of his nature or attributes
           • Philo rejects the arguments of Cleanthes because they reduce God to anthropomorphic
             ideas
           • Philo’s claim that a dysfunctional and problematic universe makes the idea of a perfectly
             good, loving, wise, and powerful deity doubtful.


           Possible discussion points include (part B):
           • Issues surrounding the question of God’s existence being outside the realm of proof
           • Is it even possible to know what God is like? Can we know God as per se? Is God
             benevolent or malicious? Is he powerful or limited? Is he an intelligent designer?
           • Are attempts to define God’s nature based on human finite experiences, emotions, or
             explanations simply reducing this unfathomable, inexplicable, infinite God to nothing but a
             man-made illusion?
           • Are divine attributes such as goodness, mercy, justice, and religious affirmations such as
             an all-loving, all-knowing, all-powerful God nothing but mere imaginations of the frail
             human mind?
                                     – 17 –               N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


• Is Philo correct when he argues that human perception is limited and has no access to
  what God is like?
• Any attempts to describe divine essence through human language and human ideas tend
  to become illusory assumptions thus reflecting that human experience is limited by its
  sensory perception of the world
• Is Hume right (as he appears to be arguing through Demas, Cleanthes and Philo) when
  he particularly warns against, in respect of the issue of God’s perfection, that we cannot
  begin from the assumption that God is perfect, then assume that his creation is worthy of
  him, and then argue, on this basis, that we have evidence that God is perfect?
• Candidates might critique inferences about the causes of unique effects; the universe is a
  unique effect; hence it is difficult to make inferences about its cause
• Wood’s contention that Hume is not necessarily arguing against the existence of God in
  the Dialogues, but instead on whether anything can be known about the nature of God
• Gaskin’s contention that Hume’s approach is problematic in that he seeks to impute
  anthropomorphic characteristics that reflects essence, onto an incomprehensible God.
                                                  – 18 –                N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


6.   (a)   Explain Philo’s regress objection to the design argument.                                    [10]

     (b)   Evaluate Philo’s regress objection to the design argument.                                  [15]
           The question arises from Part 4 of the Dialogues and invites candidates to explore Philo’s
           objection to the design argument on the basis that it leads to an infinite regress of causes.
           Philo’s objection targets problems with attempts that try to explain order and purpose in the
           universe. Philo contends that if an intelligent agent was needed to explain order in nature
           then the intelligent agent in turn needs to be explained. Responses might consider whether
           Philo’s regress objection addresses the motivation behind the design argument that seeks to
           explain order/purpose in terms of a divine agency. Candidates might identify the infinite
           regress objection as that the existence of an intelligent designer requires explanation every
           bit as much as the existence of the world does. This explanation must have some central
           origin or source for the order/purpose in the world otherwise infinite regression occurs.
           Candidates might counter the regress objection by noting that theists want the explanation to
           result in God who they consider to be the ground of all being but their problem is they do not
           have good grounds for doing so. If order itself needs to be explained then there needs to be
           an explanation for God and thus infinite regress ensues.

           Candidates might explore (part A):
           • Philo’s regress objection appeals to the principle that everything that exists has a cause for
             its existence
           • Issues surrounding the claim that the cause is God
           • Philo’s attempt to cast doubt on Cleanthes’s theory of an intelligent creator
           • The inference of a divine mind as the cause of the order of the universe brings about a
             cause of a cause of a cause etc and eventually to infinity
           • Existence of an intelligent designer needs an explanation as does the existence of the
             world
           • Philo’s aim in the dialogue is Cleanthes’s anthropomorphic notion of God as evidenced by
             his comment: “…The inconveniences of that anthropomorphism, which you have
             embraced” (Part 4 para 5)
           • Philo’s regress objection depending on Cleanthes’s rejection of the traditional theological
             doctrine of divine simplicity
           • Philo’s concession that his regress objection is only successful against theists like
             Cleanthes’s that reject the doctrine of God’s absolute simplicity but maintain that God’s
             existence is capable of a priori reasoning
           • That the regress of causes envisioned by Philo is an infinite series of minds.


           Possible discussion points include (part B):
           • Does there have to be some fundamental origin of the order/purpose we see in the
             universe and does that origin have to be God?
           • Is it logical to appeal to God to explain one type of order in terms of another type of
             order?If so, then, if order itself needs to be explained, there will be a need to find some
             explanation for God
           • If it is accepted that there cannot be an infinite regress of explanations, to what extent will
             it be necessary then to justify going beyond the laws of nature in explaining the
             order/purpose found in the universe? (ie: Philo's questioning of why we should not stop at
             the material world)
           • How far can it be justified in seeking a further explanation for the laws of nature if the
             explanation posited provides greater insight and understanding of those laws when Philo
             argues that God does not provide the additional insight?
                                      – 19 –               N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


• To what extent are appeals to the God as an explanation little more than an attempt to
  explain one mystery in terms of something even more mysterious?
• Does it necessarily follow that to infer a divine intelligence as a cause of the order of the
  material universe commits one to an infinite regress of causes?
• To what extent does Philo’s regress objection depend upon Cleanthes’s rejection of the
  traditional doctrine of divine simplicity?
• How far does Philo’s regress objection show that the divine mind must have a cause that
  is itself a mind similar to the human mind?
• Following on from the previous point does Philo’s regress of causes envisage an infinite
  series of minds?
• Aiken’s assertion that Philo’s regression argument is a decisive element of Hume’s overall
  purpose
• Pike’s discussion surrounding Philo’s regress argument failing on the grounds of Philo’s
  inconsistency with the use of the word “order”.
                                                  – 20 –                N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


John Stuart Mill: On Liberty

7.   (a)   Explain Mill’s claim that “there should be different experiments of living”.                  [10]

     (b)   Evaluate Mill’s claim that “there should be different experiments of living”.                 [15]

           In Chapter III On Individuality, as one of the elements of wellbeing, Mill talks about the
           contribution of liberty to individual and societal flourishing. One claim is that allowing people
           to choose their own ways of living maximizes wellbeing. This is qualified by the Harm
           Principle, which stipulates that such experimentation is only permissible if it does not harm
           others. Conversely, intervention in someone’s lifestyle is only permissible if that person’s
           lifestyle is itself causing harm. Mill says that “in things which do not primarily concern others,
           individuality should assert itself”. This is because “the free development of individuality is one
           of the leading essentials of well-being”. Like the importance of free speech as a method of
           ensuring societal progress, freedom to experiment with ways of living also contributes to
           societal progress. It encourages originality, and allows for genius to express itself.

           Candidates might explore (part A):
           • Mill’s Harm Principle
           • Mill’s arguments for freedom of expression
           • What Mill might mean by “experiments of living”
           • The idea of societal progress as driven by liberty
           • The link between liberty and well-being
           • The claim that there is a danger of a tyranny of the majority over the minority
           • The limits of the idea that there should be different experiments of living
           • Mill’s view that people only possess small aspects of the truth, and that it is only through
             experimentation that we can discover more.

           Possible discussion points include (part B):
           • Whether certain ways of living are harmful to others and how we can know whether they
             are, eg: considerations about consumption and climate change
           • Restrictions imposed on lifestyle, eg: laws against homosexuality
           • The Covid-19 crisis in relation to liberty and harm
           • The relationship between experiments in ways of living and societal progress
           • The strengths and weaknesses of paternalism. Perhaps there are some ways of living
             which are known to be better than others, and so it might be a good thing to promote them
           • The limits of freedom, eg: whether alcoholism is a way of living which harms others
           • Whether the state can or should define acceptable styles of living
           • Examples of ethical systems which disagree with Mill, eg: Christian ethics, Kantian ethics
           • The importance of accommodating many different life choices eg: Rawls.
                                                    – 21 –                N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


8.   (a)   Explain Mill’s view about the liberty of children.                                               [10]

     (b)   Evaluate Mill’s view about the liberty of children.                                               [15]
           Mill argues that liberty is of central importance to both individuals and society. Mill claims that
           the state should not intervene in the lives of its citizens, and that citizens should be free to act,
           speak and live as they wish. The exception is if their liberty causes harm to others. However,
           Mill does not think that children should be given the same degree of liberty because they lack
           the capacity to make the right decisions for themselves. The state has the right to intervene to
           prevent children from coming to harm. This means that the state can mandate that children go
           to school, do not drink alcohol, and so on. Mill explains the importance of "maturity of faculties"
           when understanding who the doctrine should apply to. More controversially, Mill also says
           that “barbarians” may legitimately be coerced into “their improvement” by the state. The
           question invites a discussion of this paternalistic strand of Mill’s thinking.

           Candidates might explore (part A):
           • The concept of liberty
           • The view that the individual is sovereign
           • Mill’s view that children should not have the liberty afforded to adults
           • The role of the Harm Principle in this decision
           • How children are different from adults with respect to harm and liberty
           • The implications of restricting children’s liberty, eg: compulsory education
           • Other groups of people who might be considered lacking “maturity of their faculties”.


           Possible discussion points include (part B):
           • The difficulties of denying liberty to some members of society but not others
           • How to judge when someone lacks “maturity of their faculties”
           • Who might make such decisions?
           • Advantages of restricting the liberty of children, eg: preventing alcohol drinking,
             compulsory education, providing care and basic needs
           • Whether adults are also at risk of harm and need protection, regardless of their maturity
             and rationality
           • Mill’s claims about “barbarians” and the implied lack of respect for other cultures and
             societies
           • The concept of paternalism
           • The concept of childhood, ideas about its value
           • The idea that people should be treated equally, and what this might be with regard to
             liberty and children
           • How to balance liberty with harm
           • Discussions of justice in society and how to balance equality and liberty with care and
             protection, eg: Rawls, Nozick
           • Other accounts of childhood, eg: Kantian ethics, which would not treat young children as
             moral agents, or Christian ethics, which sees all life as sacred.
                                                  – 22 –               N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Friedrich Nietzsche: The Genealogy of Morals

9.   (a)   Explain Nietzsche’s idea of justice.                                                        [10]

     (b)   Evaluate Nietzsche’s idea of justice.                                                       [15]

           This question invites an investigation of how Nietzsche sees the origins and nature of justice
           and its relationship to ressentiment. He considers justice to be the last to be affected by both
           revenge and ressentiment. The two groups of humans that Nietzsche defines, ie: the nobles
           and the slaves, have different ideas of justice. The noble will react and seek revenge and
           retribution in a ruthless way, considering the protection of his self-interest to be more
           important. In contrast, the man of ressentiment, the slave will be considerate and reflective.
           Justice within the slave morality is removed from the individual and the group and is guided
           by laws and therefore has become institutionalized. Nietzsche links the ideas of justice to
           that of punishment and to the relationship between guilt and debt. He argues that a society
           that is strong does not need justice so much as weak society, one that is morally weak. A
           strong noble society does not need a strict judicial system, and mercy can be exercised
           when appropriate. For Nietzsche there are links between justice and punishment and the
           notion of paying the debt to society because of the guilty. Consequently, there are links to his
           idea of bad conscience and remorse. Within a complex society Nietzsche argues justice is
           rarely swift as the exercise of justice is in the hands of the powers within such a society, and
           it must be seen to be more objective and not reflective of revenge. The aim of the justice
           system is to keep stability and the vengeful act might lead to instability. The rights and
           wrongs of human action are not established in a state of nature but are defined and
           understood within a legal system. These rights and wrongs could be perhaps arbitrary in
           contrast to other views on justice.

           Candidates might explore (part A):
           • The link between justice and punishment
           • The idea of ressentiment
           • The way Nietzsche argues for the links between the organs of a justice system and
             commercial activity; debt payment, and guilt and punishment
           • The difference between nobles and slaves and their views of morality
           • Cultural interpretations of guilt
           • Bad conscience
           • Nietzsche’s seeming preference for a justice based on war of every man against every
             man.

           Possible discussion points include (part B):
           • Differing interpretations of justice, eg: Plato, Rawls
           • Whether the action of mercy is within the nature of a strong societal system
           • Perceived primitive justice systems and complex systems with links between justice and
             character reform
           • The relationship of murder and capital punishment and guilt, eg: Rée, Mill
           • Debt payment, eg: within some Islamic justice systems, and whether debt payment
             removes guilt
           • Links between morality and religion, and religion and justice
           • Whether justice suppresses human animal instincts
           • Whether justice can be positive
           • Utility and justice
           • Possible links between free will, suffering and justice.
                                                   – 23 –                N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


10.   (a)   Explain Nietzsche’s understanding of the idea of sin.                                        [10]

      (b)   Evaluate Nietzsche’s understanding of the idea of sin.                                       [15]

            This question seeks an explanation of Nietzsche’s view of sin. For Nietzsche humans were
            divided into two groups, the nobles and the slaves. The slaves were sick and suffered and
            were seen by Nietzsche as sinners. The slaves were sinners because they had bad
            conscience and were guilty. In Essay 3 section 20 it is the ascetic priest that justifies the
            suffering of the slave because of their sin (ie, “the animal’s bad conscience”). Nietzsche
            equates guilt with indebtedness. In section 15 of the third essay the ideas of self-discipline
            and self-surveillance are presented as the consequence of being indebted, of being sinful.
            This sinfulness produces pain which is seen as a characteristic of slave nature. The ascetic
            priest presents redemption of sin through Christian faith (in particular), but for Nietzsche this
            route is not seen as an escape. For him it is merely a reinforcement of the indebtedness.
            The sin – suffering – becomes internalized and becomes a neurosis, and the sense of guilt
            (schuld, which arises and is explained in the Second Essay Section 4) is exploited. This sin
            could be self-destructive but is in fact the driver behind the development of morality. For
            Nietzsche, the seven deadly sins are fundamentally part of human nature, when humans are
            “nobles”, and therefore any associated acceptance of sin would prevent self-affirmation and
            self-esteem. The sickness of sin which Nietzsche called a nausea undervalued positive
            qualities of power, strength and dominance (qualities of the masters/nobles). This might be
            negative and life destructive, but for Nietzsche it established a new affirming of life in its
            “noble” sense, striving to a greater sense of ‘Being’, free from sin and guilt. Sin might also be
            doubting. Nietzsche argues that science was to become the new religion and thus he linked
            this to original sin with the fall of man and the denial of access to knowledge (the forbidden
            fruit of the tree of knowledge).

            Candidates might explore (part A):
            • The relationship of the master and the slave
            • The morality of Christianity and role of a sin and suffering
            • The meaninglessness of suffering
            • The ascetic ideal
            • Bad conscience
            • Internalization of feelings and emotions and the mental consequences; the mental
              pressures of guilt or of knowing one has sinned
            • The replacement of religion by science and the desire for knowledge compared to a
              paradisiacal innocence
            • The relationship of guilt and sin
            • Nihilism
            • Contrasting views of redemption.

            Possible discussion points include (part B):
            • Nietzsche’s view of human nature and the role of sin as a human characteristic
            • Suffering as part of the human condition and not a punishment for sin
            • Whether life affirmation is too demanding; the approach of the master/noble accepting or
              ignoring sinfulness
            • Whether master/noble characteristics are appropriate in any society
            • The nature of a morality founded on sin
            • Sin as the opposite of virtue
            • The relationship between sin and the act of wrongdoing: which is the prime driver?
            • Other factors than morality that might direct a lifestyle
            • The meaninglessness of suffering
            • Contrasting faith perceptions of sin: a consequence of disobedience, weakness of the
              human condition, not following Dharma
            • Ways to remove sin: Moksha, redemptive faith, good works
                                    – 24 –               N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


• The degree to which sin is a socio-historic creation
• Acceptance of sin and suffering, for Nietzsche, was not an escape into nothingness but a
  ‘amor fati’ (a love of fate). Contrasts might be made with Augustinian views of sin and
  redemption. Similarly, contrasts might be raised relating to Schopenhauer’s views on
  redemption as a release from suffering.
                                                   – 25 –                N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Martha Nussbaum: Creating Capabilities: The Human Development Approach

11.   (a)   Explain how the capabilities approach applies to the inequality of women.                    [10]

      (b)   Evaluate how the capabilities approach applies to the inequality of women.                   [15]

            The question stems from the last chapter in Nussbaum’s book. Nussbaum considers the
            capabilities approach in relation with some contemporary issues, such as disability, gender,
            aging, education, and animal entitlements. Candidates might explore the particular case of
            gender and the inequality of women. Also, candidates might analyse Nussbaum’s
            explanation of the better validity of the capabilities approach in facing this issue if compared
            to traditional approaches, such as GNP or utilitarian. Responses might explain Nussbaum’s
            reference to Mill and her criticism of liberalism. Candidates might also evaluate the role of
            tradition in women's obstacles to equality. Responses might discuss the possible relation
            between tradition and religion in Nussbaum’s view. This has to do with the issue of personal
            life and preferences: candidates might explain how it would be possible to grant women’s
            equality within the sphere of private life. Responses might highlight the issues of domestic
            violence, child sexual abuse, child marriage, compulsory primary and secondary education
            and how the state can legitimately limit parents’ autonomy. Candidates might explain how
            the list of capabilities helps enact policies against stigma, inferiority, and discrimination
            based on sexual orientation. Candidates might discuss these issues in the light of current
            state laws, which forbid or allow same-sex marriage or miscegenation. Candidates might
            evaluate whether the capabilities approach does better than other traditional views or
            whether feminism and gender politics offer a better approach to this kind of issue, eg: de
            Beauvoir, Gillard, Krook, Irigaray, Butler, Grosz, Collins, Hooks, Davis, Anzaldúa, Moreton-
            Robinson, and Stryker. Also, candidates might consider theories that reinforce the
            differences and discrimination between men and women, eg: aspects of Plato’s Republic, or
            Rousseau’s views about the role of women in Emile.

            Candidates might explore (part A):

            • Why gender is a central issue in the capabilities approach
            • Nussbaum’s criticism of liberalism
            • The issue of the uncriticized views of tradition
            • The relation between tradition and religion
            • The specific issues of domestic violence, child abuse, education and the relation with
              state intervention
            • Why the list of capabilities helps enact policies against discrimination based on sexual
              orientation.

            Possible discussion points include (part B):
            • Why the capabilities approach better focuses on the gender issues
            • Other criticized approaches, eg: GNP, utilitarianism
            • Whether Nussbaum’s criticism of liberalism and Mill is justifiable
            • Whether the inequality of women is related to an uncriticized family, tradition, and religion
            • Whether religion could be considered a tradition
            • To what extent states can legitimately limit parents’ autonomy or regulate individuals’
              private life
            • Whether gender discrimination is related to sexual orientation
            • Examples of laws contrasting or fostering discrimination, eg: forbidding or allowing same-
              sex marriages or miscegenation
            • Other possible approaches in favour of women’s equality, eg: feminism, gender politics
            • Other views reinforcing gender differences, eg: Plato’s Republic.
                                                   – 26 –                N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


12.   (a)   Explain Nussbaum’s use of philosophical influences in her theory.                            [10]

      (b)   Evaluate Nussbaum’s use of philosophical influences in her theory.                            [15]
            The question stems from Chapter 7 of Nussbaum’s book and invites an exploration of the
            several philosophical influences that she presents in relation to her development of the
            Capabilities Approach. After discussing the importance of Aristotle and the Stoics, Nussbaum
            refers to the specific use of these traditions by philosophers during the seventeenth and
            eighteenth centuries. Candidates might explain the two main arguments from Aristotle and
            the Stoics – equal worth of all human beings and human vulnerability – and how they are
            blended by one or more philosophers, such as Grotius, Smith, and Kant. Candidates might
            also highlight the role of Christian beliefs in fostering this combination of old and new
            elements. Responses might pinpoint William’s view of natural law and his contribution to the
            liberty of conscience. Candidates might also explain the role of republican thinkers and
            governments in spreading Stoic and Aristotelian ideas. Responses might explore Nussbaum’s
            reference to Smith and "intrusive legal restrictions". Responses might also explore the role of
            education and habit in shaping human abilities, the pernicious effects of a lack of education –
            particularly in poor people – and the role of the state in granting an essential education at
            least. The central question arising from this specific issue surrounds what form of
            governmental action permits human abilities to develop while respecting human equality?
            Candidates might explore Paine’s criticism of the state and his view on taxation. Responses
            might focus on the difference between negative and positive liberty, eg: Constant, Berlin,
            Bobbio. Finally, candidates might evaluate whether the philosophical influences that
            Nussbaum mentions are consistent with her Capabilities Approach or whether her theory is
            basically grounded in contemporary perspectives, eg: Rawls, Sen.

            Candidates might explore (part A):
            • The Stoic and Aristotelian influences on Nussbaum’s theory
            • The basic arguments from the Stoics and Aristotle: equal worth and human vulnerability
            • The role of Christian beliefs
            • William’s view of natural law
            • Smith’s view of human abilities and legal restrictions
            • The role of education and habit
            • The role of the state in granting essential education
            • Paine’s view on the state and taxation
            • The influence of Sen on Nussbaum’s views.



            Possible discussion points include (part B):
            • Whether the Stoic and Aristotelian arguments are central to the philosophers that
              Nussbaum mentions
            • Whether Christian beliefs play a role in the spread of the ideas of equal worth and human
              vulnerability
            • Whether the defence of free religion is a central capability
            • Whether Smith’s views on trade, labour, and education are compatible with the
              Capabilities Approach
            • The difference between negative and positive liberty, eg: Constant, Berlin, Bobbio
            • Whether the state can limit parents’ autonomy in granting essential education; education
              as a fundamental right
            • Nussbaum’s philosophical methodology, and her willingness to consider the views of
              others to construct her own view
            • Whether the Capabilities Approach is better conveyed by other views, eg: Rawls, Sen.
                                                   – 27 –                N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Ortega y Gasset: The Origin of Philosophy

13.   (a)   Explain the significance of the concept of truth in Ortega y Gasset’s account of the
            origin of philosophy.                                                                         [10]

      (b)   Evaluate the significance of the concept of truth in Ortega y Gasset’s account of
            the origin of philosophy.                                                                      [15]
            The question asks for an explanation and evaluation of the concept of truth in Ortega y
            Gasset’s account of the origin of philosophy, which is central and runs all the way through the
            whole book. Ortega y Gasset uses the classical etymology to explore the origin of philosophy.
            Aletheia means truth and it presents philosophy for what it is: an endeavor at discovery and
            deciphering enigmas to place us in contact with naked reality itself. The thinking process is
            implied in the word aletheia: something akin to un-dressing, un-covering, removing a veil or
            covering, re-vealing (un-veiling), de-ciphering an enigma or hieroglyphic. This literally is what
            the word a-letheia meant in popular language: discovery, exposure, denudation, revelation.
            From this perspective truth, becomes the central feature of making philosophy, since it
            presents the new vital experience in the Greek thought, later to be known as philosophizing.
            Precisely truth or inquiry was the original name for the philosophical activity. In this original
            initial phase philosophizing was a new pursuit, one still unfamiliar to people, devoid of a public
            existence, unable to be seen from the outside. It was the authentic sincere name privately
            given by the philosopher to what he found himself doing, something that had not existed for
            him earlier: "his philosophizing".

            Candidates might explore (part A):
            • Truth pointed out to the original, intimate experience of doing philosophy
            • This personal experience considered from outside as a repetitive occurrence, a habitual
              occupation, became, from the point of view of the “others”, inquiry or philosophy
            • Parmenides and Heraclitus in the very initial understanding of philosophy as truth; the
              reconstruction of the nature of the mental soil in which they were implanted
            • The soil inhabited by Parmenides and Heraclitus was formed by an extraordinary
              complexity of intellectual initiatives, which like an eruption suddenly broke the traditional
              crust of Greek life in the year 600
            • Elements that were part of this complexity: the Dionysian mysteries, Orphism, proto-
              geography and proto-history, Ionian physics, arithmetic, Pythagorean ethics and
              mysticism, tyranny and legislation
            • Philosophy as discovery and deciphering enigmas to place us in contact with naked reality
              itself was initially a dialogistic way of thinking and discoursing.


            Possible discussion points include (part B):
            • There could be no such thing as a perennial philosophy; truth means that we have to go
              on thinking
            • Philosophy is only one historical, dialectical stage in the long series of human ways of
              thinking
            • Ortega y Gasset’s reference to scientific discoveries as new truths that suddenly confront
              us with an immediate vision of the world
            • Ortega y Gasset’s conception of philosophy based on the idea of historical reason in
              relation to other views, eg: Plato, Descartes, Kant, Heidegger
            • Comparison with other philosophical traditions regarding the signification of understanding
              the origin and history of philosophy in order to project philosophy in the present,
              eg: analytical philosophy and forms descending from Hegel
            • The extent to which Ortega y Gasset is successful in holding the possibility of truth
              combined with this central perspectivism.
                                                  – 28 –                N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


14.   (a)   Explain Ortega y Gasset’s view that “philosophy begins by bisecting a
            seemingly single world” and “leaves us with two worlds on our hands”.                      [10]

      (b)   Evaluate Ortega y Gasset’s view that “philosophy begins by bisecting a
            seemingly single world” and “leaves us with two worlds on our hands”.                      [15]

            The question asks for an explanation and evaluation of Ortega y Gasset’s idea (directly
            addressed in the Chapter 6 Philosophy Embarks on the Discovery of Another World) that
            philosophy presents to us another or second world, which goes beyond our immediate
            experience of reality. Advancing from the analysis of the philosophical doctrines externally,
            since philosophy is thought, and hence interiority, Ortega y Gasset explains a more internal
            aspect of philosophical thought, which shows behind the diversity presented by the mass of
            philosophies: the persistent existence of two worlds, the manifest world and the latent or
            supra-world. The latent world beats beneath the manifest world and its revelation constitutes
            the supreme philosophical task. In this way, philosophy begins by bisecting a seemingly
            single world; that is, "the result [...]philosophy leaves us with two worlds on our hands”. The
            relationship between the two worlds can appear in different ways - from distinct to
            intermingled (ie: the "latent world" and the "manifest world"). Briefly, both worlds may
            remain distant but connected, in continual cross-reference to each other, a reference that
            serves to corroborate their separation.

            Candidates might explore (part A):
            • The perception of the aspects of an orange as illustration of the historical presentation of
              the philosophical doctrines
            • The advance from the outside (names, doctrines) to the inside of history of philosophy
              (the unity of philosophy)
            • The movement from the panoramic contemplation of the philosophical past to the
              penetration in it: studying and doing philosophy
            • The convenience of a thorough analysis of the exemplary beginning of the philosophical
              profession to attain maximum understanding of early philosophy
            • Parmenides as a perfect entry into the vast domain of philosophy through reason and
              logic

            Possible discussion points include (part B):
            • Whether the distinction between two worlds is just a metaphysical approach to reality
            • The two worlds: religion and science in the origin of philosophy
            • The idea of the two worlds and the history of metaphysics, from Plato to Heidegger
            • Conceptions of the history of philosophy and its unity, eg: Hegel
            • Whether the history of philosophy has to be understood as whole
            • Historical reason, its opposition to the pure reason and application to the origin of
              philosophy
            • Nietzsche’s point that Western philosophy is bifurcated and has created two worlds: the
              latent and the manifest
            • The possible impact of approaches from the study of world philosophies and intercultural
              philosophies on the understanding of the Greek origin of philosophy.
                                                  – 29 –               N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Plato: The Republic, Books IV–IX

15.   (a)   Explain the Form of the Good in relation to living a good life.                            [10]

      (b)   Evaluate the Form of the Good in relation to living a good life.                           [15]

            The question invites responses to focus on the Form of the Good and its implications
            including those that reflect moral qualities. Plato’s Theory of Forms requires that a person’s
            well-being aims for the highest level of morality, but a person’s virtues provide the skills
            necessary to attain a desired level of morality. Candidates might argue that Plato believes
            happiness is the ultimate level of perfection and that there are objective moral answers to
            ethical issues and dilemmas. This implies a direct rejection by Plato of the predominant
            sentiment of moral relativism pervading Athens at the time. The sophists, who flourished in
            the democracy Plato disdains, appeared to take advantage of moral relativism. They taught
            their charges that the purpose of philosophy was not to discover truth, as there was none to
            discover. Plato’s Theory of the Forms, including the Form of the Good, is a rebuttal: there are
            objective moral truths that can be discovered through the work of philosophy. This makes
            Plato’s philosophy very attractive because he promises a direct path to the good life, through
            the examined life. Responses might argue that Plato’s intention behind the Cave allegory
            and his Theory of Forms was to convey that it is possible to discover absolute moral certainty
            through pure reason and a priori knowledge; and this is likely the reason why Plato holds the
            virtue of knowledge in such high regard. He states, “To produce a true philosopher-guardian,
            we must vigorously pursue the highest forms of knowledge” (504d). “The highest form of
            knowledge is knowledge of the form of the good” (505a). The Theory of Forms is based on
            the belief that good is the highest form. Through pursuing the form of the good, people are
            simultaneously pursuing objective knowledge about morality and the good life.

            Candidates might explore (part A):
            • Why Plato thought the Forms were necessary
            • Properties of the Forms, eg: immutability
            • Hierarchical structure of the Forms with specific reference to the Form of the Good
            • Knowledge is virtue thesis; those who know the good will act accordingly
            • Doing wrong is lack of knowledge
            • Explanations such as the Cave analogy and Divided Line simile to illustrate Plato’s line of
              argument
            • Attaining knowledge of the Forms will enable individuals to know what is morally right
            • Political implications connected to moral knowledge
            • Justice and the form of the good
            • Distinctions between appetite and reason and between appetite and spirit to explain wider
              human thought and action

            Possible discussion points include (part B):
            • Evaluation of the knowledge is virtue thesis; has Plato redefined knowledge? Is Plato
              proposing a logical or psychological thesis? It is possible to do what is wrong and yet
              know what is right and still do wrong
            • Discussion of Aristotle’s points regarding weakness of the will
            • Does Plato’s knowledge of the Good solve moral dilemmas? Plato’s thesis appears to
              imply that moral problems are soluble in terms of the acquisition of knowledge; is this the
              case, even when the knowledge is high-ranking knowledge?
            • Is it ever appropriate to claim that I know that I should have acted differently?
            • Understanding of the Good is problematic and the claim that no one can fully understand
              the Good is unhelpful
            • Difficulties in choosing between different interpretations of what constitutes the Good;
              Plato’s vision led him to advocate elitism and censorship
                                      – 30 –                N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


• Plato’s thesis leads to moral experts; the notion of moral experts or objective morality fails
  to acknowledge the personal element in morality
• Aristotle’s contention that there are too many diverse uses of “good” to suppose there is
  one Form in which they all partake
• The dangers intrinsic in claims to have absolute knowledge in respect of moral issues
• Social and cultural diversity in moral issues; equally it might be argued that there are
  some actions that should never be undertaken regardless of socio-cultural considerations
• The possibility of having objective judgements and correct actions without moral experts;
  moral judgements are inherently subjective and relative to the individual circumstances
• No such thing as moral knowledge
• Moral relativism
• Pappas’s assertion that one reason for the Form of the Good’s philosophical importance is
  that Plato’s Theory of Forms is the “grand unification of all philosophical inquiries”.
                                                   – 31 –                N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


16.   (a)   Explain Plato’s distinction between knowledge and belief.                                     [10]

      (b)   Evaluate Plato’s distinction between knowledge and belief.                                    [15]

            This is a question about the significance of Plato’s answer to what it takes to move from
            belief to knowledge as discussed in Books V-VII. In the Divided Line, Plato sets out four
            categories of belief: ekasia, pistis, dianoia, and noesis. The former two are illusion and belief;
            these are beliefs about the visible world. The realm of forms allows more certainty through
            reasoning and finally understanding. Plato asserts that belief and knowledge are not the
            same thing and that the progression from belief to knowledge is transformative. In Book V,
            Plato presents a discussion that culminates in an argument that distinguishes between
            knowledge and belief, and that provides the basis for his Theory of Forms. Plato sees
            knowledge and ignorance on different ends of the spectrum and belief sitting somewhere in
            between. Plato’s Theory of Forms is crucial for its application to Plato’s distinction between
            belief and knowledge. Effectively, Plato noted the distinction between true knowledge and
            understanding and a mere belief in the state of things. Through his Allegory of the Cave,
            Plato showed that only philosophers can reach true knowledge and understanding, with the
            majority of society’s view consistent with a belief (perception) of how things are. The
            connection between Plato’s Theory of Forms and his conception of the distinction of
            knowledge and belief is not so much clearly established as the two concepts are intertwined.
            Plato’s distinction between knowledge and belief is reflected in the notion that only
            philosophers can possess true knowledge, therefore a legitimate government will need to be
            that of philosophers as only they are fit to govern. Responses might focus on the major
            distinction between belief and knowledge, that of fallibility, and argue that perception, or
            belief is often based around the characteristics of what is being viewed. Plato’s epistemology
            is tightly entangled with his metaphysics, and any discussion of Plato’s epistemology will
            involve a discussion of his ontology. Candidates might reference Plato’s own counter
            argument found in his dialogue Parmenides known as the Third Man Theory or his Hesiod’s
            Wagon example; or Aristotle’s argument that Plato considered only substance to have form,
            rather than all things.

            Candidates might explore (part A):
            • Plato is considered the first western philosopher to focus attention on what exactly
              constitutes knowledge and how it is differentiated from belief
            • Socrates and Glaucon conclude that knowledge and true belief are different powers so
              their natures cannot be the same (477c-478a); knowledge is the most effective power,
              while true belief is only what enables you to believe
            • Knowledge is of the Forms, unchanging reality; knowledge is contrasted with belief which
              is of particulars and subject to change
            • Knowledge is eternal and does not change or go anywhere, and belief is the opposite
            • The person who contemplates reality has knowledge; the person who just enjoys beautiful
              things simply has opinions or mere beliefs
            • Knowledge constitutes a different faculty from belief and, for Plato, their respective objects
              will also be different
            • The a priori nature of knowledge (rationalism)
            • Knowledge is of what is; ignorance of what is not: belief lies between these extremes
            • Knowledge is concerned with what is real, with what is objective, ie: what is true
              irrespective of belief; belief concerns what is merely subjective
            • Concepts of belief, doxa, knowledge and episteme
            • The analogy of the ship and the sea captain
            • The Allegory of the Cave illustrating the differences between knowledge and belief, and
              the Divided Line.
                                       – 32 –                N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Possible discussion points include (part B):
• Differences in faculties will not establish ontological differences in their respective objects
• Plato’s differentiation alters the notion of knowledge beyond recognition therefore we
  could only be said to know a priori propositions
• Knowing a state of affairs does not entail the necessity of that state
• The idea that there is no empirical evidence for the Theory of Forms, and more developed
  criticisms of the Theory of Forms. The consequences of Plato’s notion that knowledge
  must concern that which cannot be false
• Plato’s differentiation generates absolutes and this could have risky implications,
  eg: moral experts, political despots, closed societies, elitism
• It is not clear that anything can be known in the unqualified sense required by Plato
• The relationship between the Forms and sensible particulars is not clear
• Why should eternal existence carry any implications for what we can be said to know?
• Candidates may argue that believing is a component of knowing (justified true belief)
• Plato’s own counter-example of Hesiod’s Wagon
• Aristotle’s argument that Plato considered only substance to have form.
                                                   – 33 –                N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Peter Singer: The Life You Can Save

17.   (a)   Explain Singer’s view about wealth and affluence.                                            [10]

      (b)   Evaluate Singer’s view about wealth and affluence.                                             [15]
            In The Life you can Save, Singer claims that those who are affluent or wealthy have a moral
            duty to give to charity to save lives. He points out the growth of the middle classes means that
            there are roughly 3.8 billion people living at levels of affluence never previously experienced.
            This is before 2153 billionaires are taken into account. Singer discusses the extent to which
            the wealthy ought to give to charity. His basic argument states that it is wrong not to act when
            it is in your power to prevent something bad from happening. This suggests that perhaps
            those who are wealthy ought to give up their wealth so long as this does not involve sacrificing
            anything as bad as the problems they are solving in doing so. However, later on, Singer
            discusses the extent to which people are obliged to give. He suggests that a target of “roughly
            5 % of annual income for those who are financially comfortable, with less for those below that
            level, and significantly more for the very rich” is realistic. This suggests that Singer does not
            think that wealth is immoral, but rather that people should be encouraged to give. On the other
            hand, Singer condemns the fact that we routinely spend money on luxuries such as bottled
            water where tap water is safe, rather than thinking about those whose lives could be saved.
            Finally, Singer suggests that a high salary is a good thing if the money is used to help others.

            Candidates might explore (part A):
            • Singer’s description of wealth and affluence
            • The contrast between affluence today and poverty
            • Singer’s basic argument
            • The idea that if we can sacrifice something without harm to ourselves in order to stop
              something bad from happening, then we have a duty to do so
            • Singer’s conclusion that donating 5 % of income is realistic
            • The moral status of billionaires
            • The idea that spending money on luxuries such as bottled water compares to owning a
              yacht or a private jet
            • The idea that earning a large salary and donating it is an efficient way of saving lives
            • The idea of creating a culture of giving.

            Possible discussion points include (part B):
            • Whether wealth is immoral
            • The extent to which wealth is acceptable and the morality of billionaires
            • The permissibility of spending money on luxury goods
            • Whether the basic argument’s claim that we should give to the extent that we do not
              sacrifice anything as bad as what we will be solving is too extreme
            • Whether the claim that donating 5 % of income is enough is too weak
            • The role of justice in considerations about wealth
            • Other utilitarian stances, eg: Bentham’s hedonic calculus
            • Views about wealth and poverty from political philosophy, eg: Marxism, or Rawls’s veil of
              ignorance view.
                                                   – 34 –                 N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


18.   (a)   Explain Singer’s view that we have obligations to strangers.                                  [10]

      (b)   Evaluate Singer’s view that we have obligations to strangers.                                  [15]
            Peter Singer’s basic argument implies that we have an obligation to strangers such that it is
            better to fulfil the basic needs of a stranger than to provide a luxury to someone you know.
            Furthermore, Singer thinks that we should give to the charities that can save the most lives,
            rather than local charities which will help people nearer to us. This is discussed at length in
            the chapter Your Child or the Child of Others. Singer questions whether obligations to one's
            own children override obligations to others, when in the case of the latter the need or
            suffering could be greater. Singer starts with the story of the unnatural mother who sacrifices
            her child’s life to save the population of a village at risk of flooding. Another example is Paul
            Farmer who sacrificed the comfort and lifestyle of his family to help people in Haiti. Our
            obligations to the basic needs of strangers are, in Singer’s view, stronger than our obligations
            to the comfort of our own children when this goes beyond their basic needs.

            Candidates might explore (part A):
            • The case of the unnatural mother
            • Paul Farmer’s attitude towards this family and guilt about not loving strangers as much as
              he loved his own family
            • The idea that we should not provide ourselves or our loved ones with luxuries when these
              could be exchanged for the basic needs of strangers
            • Singer’s account of the novel The Good German
            • A discussion of Kravinsky’s claims that the children of others are as important to him as his
              own children
            • Singer’s basic argument which implies that we should make sacrifices in order to help
              others
            • The idea that helping others should not be limited to your own friends and family
            • Singer’s list of effective charities which are international, rather than local.

            Possible discussion points include (part B):
            • The view of Judith Jarvis Thomson discussed by Singer, that someone who claims to care
              about the children of others as much as their own children is defective
            • Whether a society which favoured strangers over acquaintances, friends and family would
              be a better or worse society
            • The idea that having loving and caring relationships with people near to us is a virtue that
              should be cultivated
            • The value of caring for those near to us
            • Descriptions of societies where family relations are downplayed, eg: Plato’s Republic
            • The relationship between obligation, social ties and utilitarianism
            • The sorts of goods we should allow and deny those we care about: what counts as a
              luxury?
            • The nature of basic needs.
                                                   – 35 –                N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Charles Taylor: The Ethics of Authenticity

19.   (a)   Explain Taylor’s view of subtler languages.                                                  [10]

      (b)   Evaluate Taylor’s view of subtler languages.                                                 [15]

            The question asks for an explanation and evaluation of Taylor’s idea which is presented and
            discussed in Chapter 7, Subtler Languages. Here Taylor analyses a change that goes back
            to the end of the eighteenth century and is related to the shift from an understanding of art as
            mimesis to one that stresses creation. The core of this change is described by Taylor in the
            following way: “Where formerly poetic language could rely on certain publicly available orders
            of meaning, it now has to consist in a language of articulated sensibility” (p. 84). Until the end
            of the eighteenth century there was intellectual homogeneity which shared certain
            assumptions (the Christian interpretation of history, the sacramentalism of nature, the Great
            Chain of Being, the analogy of the various planes of creation, the conception of man as
            microcosm). The decline of the old order with its established background of meanings made
            necessary the development of new poetic languages in the Romantic period. Now, the poet
            must articulate his own world of references, and make them believable. This represents a
            qualitative change in artistic languages. This means that an important subjectivation has
            taken place in post Romantic art. But it is clearly a subjectivation of manner. It concerns how
            the poet has access to whatever he or she is pointing us to. It by no means follows that there
            has to be a subjectivation of matter. Subjectivation of manner and matter are distinguished.
            The effort of some of the best of modern poets has been precisely to articulate something
            beyond the self.

            Candidates might explore (part A):
            • The languages of art constitute the publicly available reference points that poets and
              painters can draw on
            • Shakespeare’s example with reference to the act of regicide
            • Rilke’s angels: we cannot get at them through a medieval treatise on the ranks of
              cherubim and seraphim, but we have to pass through the articulation of Rilke’s sensibility
            • Pope could draw on age-old views of the order of nature as a commonly available source
              of poetic images. For Shelley, this resource was no longer available
            • The Romantic poets and their successors have to articulate an original vision of the
              cosmos, eg: Hölderlin and Wordsworth
            • Similarities in painting: Caspar Friedrich, distances himself from the traditional
              iconography. He is searching for a symbolism in nature that is not based on the accepted
              conventions.

            Possible discussion points include (part B):
            • The ideal of authenticity requires that we discover and articulate our own identity
            • Authenticity is clearly self-referential: this has to be my orientation. But this does not mean
              that on another level the content must be self-referential
            • Two important different facets in it: one concerning the manner and the other concerning
              the matter or content of action
            • My goals must express or fulfil my desires or aspirations, as against something that
              stands beyond these: God, or a political cause, or tending the earth
            • In blocking out the exploration beyond the self, there is also a deprivation of one of our
              main weapons in the struggle against the flattened and trivialized forms of modern culture
            • When the self is characterized as essentially open to something different and greater than
              itself, to what extent it still makes sense talking of subjectivation?
            • How convincing is Taylor that we need to worry about subjectivism and anthropocentrism?
            • Whether Taylor can draw a clear distinction between form and content eg: Nietzsche
            • Other forms of relating philosophical reflection, poetry and literature: from Plato and
              Aristotle to Heidegger and Murdoch.
                                                    – 36 –                 N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


20.   (a)   Explain Taylor’s critical account of the claim that “a liberal society must be
            neutral on questions of what constitutes a good life”.                                          [10]

      (b)   Evaluate Taylor’s critical account of the claim that “a liberal society must be
            neutral on questions of what constitutes a good life”.                                           [15]
            The question asks for an explanation and evaluation of Taylor’s critical account of this
            conception which Taylor names “liberalism of neutrality” and is discussed originally in Chapter
            2, The Inarticulate Debate. Precisely, Taylor points out that the very notion of a good life and
            its moral significance is pushed to the margins of public debate. The hold of moral
            subjectivism in the culture and the normal fashion of social science explanation also
            conspires to intensify this silence. The result has been to thicken the darkness around the
            moral ideal of authenticity. The result is the general sense that these issues cannot and
            should not be talked about. Oppositely, Taylor sustains the need of a work of retrieval,
            through which the ideal of authenticity as a moral value can help us restore our practice. To
            go along with this, three things are to be believed: (1) that authenticity is a valid ideal; (2) that
            one can argue and reason about ideals and about the conformity of practices to these ideals;
            and (3) that these arguments can make a difference.

            Candidates might explore (part A):
            • Relativism as a form of individualism, whose principle is: everyone has a right to develop
              their own form of life, grounded on their own sense of what is really important or of value
            • Terms like “narcissism” (Lasch) or “hedonism” (Bell) imply that there is no moral ideal at
              work
            • Authenticity as a moral ideal
            • Moral ideal: a picture of what a better or higher mode of life would be; where “better” and
              “higher” are defined not in terms of what we happen to desire or need, but offer a standard
              of what we ought to desire
            • Moral subjectivism: the view that moral positions are not grounded in reason or the nature
              of things but are ultimately just adopted by each of us because we find ourselves drawn to
              them. On this view, reason cannot adjudicate moral disputes
            • Appeals to authenticity that justify ignoring whatever transcends the self: for rejecting our
              past as irrelevant, or denying the demands of citizenship, or the duties of solidarity, or the
              needs of the natural environment
            • Taylor’s suggestion: a position distinct from both boosters and knockers of contemporary
              culture.


            Possible discussion points include (part B):
            • Everybody has his or her own values, and about these it is impossible to argue
            • One ought not to challenge another’s values
            • Taylor’s claim that relativism, as is widely espoused today, is a profound mistake, even in
              some respects self-stultifying
            • The idea that the culture of self-fulfilment has led many people to lose sight of concerns
              that transcend them
            • Taylor’s view that what we need to understand is the moral force behind notions like
              self-fulfilment
            • That the ideal of authenticity might take the form of a kind of soft relativism. This means
              that the defence of any moral ideal is somehow off limits
            • The idea that there is no objectivity to morality, and that Taylor is wrong to seek it
              eg: Nietzsche’s genealogical account of morality
                                     – 37 –               N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


• Critiques of liberal society as prescribing certain ideals
• Since relativism itself is powered by a moral ideal there is something contradictory and
  self-defeating in it
• Taylor’s proposal: authenticity as a moral ideal has degraded but is very worthwhile in
  itself
• The positions of Dworkin and Kymlicka as examples of banishing discussions about the
  good life to the margins of political debate.
                                                   – 38 –                N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Lao Tzu: Tao Te Ching

21.   (a)   Explain the claim that “the Tao that can be named, is not the eternal Tao”
            conveys the essence of the entire book.                                                      [10]

      (b)   Evaluate the claim that “the Tao that can be named, is not the eternal Tao”
            conveys the essence of the entire book.                                                      [15]

            The lines within this First Chapter reflects fundamental Taoist thinking and some philosophical
            insights into the Taoist perception of how the universe flows and the concept of alignment to
            that natural flow. The question stems from the very first sentence of the book, “The Tao that
            can be named, is not the eternal Tao, the name that can be named, is not the eternal name.”
            Responses might be focused on the way (Tao) cannot be ‘named’, and candidates might
            offer up the interpretation that this means Tao cannot be understood or even spoken of;
            consequently, the application of human understanding of something that is beyond human
            understanding has the effect of limiting it. Some might argue that ‘Tao’ is just a word, a label,
            a type of signpost that points to the ineffable. In evaluation candidates might discuss the
            limitations of language by drawing upon Wittgenstein’s language games. The concept of
            paradoxical opposites is a salient theme of the first chapter and candidates might explore the
            continuum between two extreme points of view identified in the chapter such as: to be
            speaking of something that cannot be named or understood while also naming and
            attempting to understand it. The word ‘Tao’ cannot encompass what Tao is in reality; Tao is
            constant, it is eternal, so if something can be named this adds changeability. It is nothing
            more than an attempt at speaking of something that is unspeakable. Candidates might
            identify the idea that the Tao is a concept beyond reason and logic; it is the universal
            principle that permeates every action and every phenomenon, yet it cannot be sufficiently
            understood through the rational mind. Responses might identify the use of 'nameless' as a
            synonym for the Tao and therefore the Tao is the source or root of all that exists.

            Candidates might explore (part A):
            • The Tao as the infinite, common source
            • The Tao as being eternally present; no beginning and no end
            • The Tao as the essence of wisdom
            • Central human notions of who we are, how we got here, and the laws of the universe we
              live in
            • The human psyche and the common rhythms that are conveyed in the imagery of the
              book
            • Paradoxical opposites in the chapter
            • The enigmatic nature of the content of Chapter 1
            • The role of perception
            • The role of language
            • The use of analogies such as flowing like water which highlight the difficulty talking
              about the Tao
            • Similarities with teachings from Buddhism, Hinduism, and Christianity and Islam.


            Possible discussion points include (part B):
            • How can the Tao be constant and eternal and thus immutable, and yet at the same time
              be something that can be ‘named’ thus introducing the possibility of change?
            • If the Tao cannot be understood, then by what understanding is it not understood? Is it an
              absence of understanding itself that gives the impression that it cannot be understood? Is
              it simply that there is no point in even attempting to understand it?
            • Hermeneutic issues in terms of trying to explain the text itself; for example, the received
              text is believed to be corrupted (the text was originally written on one-line bamboo strips
                                       – 39 –                N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


    linked with silk threads) and consequently it is virtually impossible to understand much of
    the text without moving the sequences of Chinese letterings/characters from one place to
    another; therefore, to know what the original author intended is difficult
•   The implication of applying Wittgenstein’s language games approach; is it possible for the
    words in the book to be meaningful when verification cannot be carried out (Ayer’s
    verification principle)?
•   If naming the ‘Tao’ is just a label or signpost, then issues surrounding their legitimacy and
    use might be explored, for example the role of symbols in language, eg: Tillich’s claim that
    symbols can unlock dimensions and elements of the metaphysical
•   Does the use of paradoxical opposites being part of the whole as applied in Chapter 1
    (and all the text itself) contribute to the text’s ambiguity and imagery?
•   Issues surrounding perception and what ‘reality’ actually is: the Tao’s claim that there is
    ‘no-thing’ that exists and therefore everything is empty because it is all a process;
    however, do our senses tell us otherwise? Is having our everyday sense perceptions on
    one side and the truth of the Tao (reality) on the other simply a shift in perception and
    conscious awareness?
•   Does the idea that the Tao is a notion beyond reason and logic make its claims
    counterintuitive?
                                                   – 40 –                N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


22.   (a)   Explain the virtue of not striving (wu wei).                                                 [10]

      (b)   Evaluate the virtue of not striving (wu wei).                                                 [15]
            The idea is from verse 68. Responses could identify that the virtue of not striving is also
            known as the virtue of wu wei and literally means non-action. Candidates might explore ‘not
            striving’ as the understanding that human beings are limited in abilities and that consequently
            “Nothing in the world can manipulate the great Tao”. However, the Taoist also recognizes that
            we do affect the universe; but if we do not follow the way of nature and try to enforce our will
            against it, we will certainly fail. Responses might reference the current debate surrounding the
            environment and climate change. The ‘not striving’ principle in relation to society might be
            explored: we can affect society, but our ability is limited because when we go against society
            or other human beings, we may win a victory or two, but eventually it is better not to strive;
            those who strive generate opposition and thus expose themselves to danger. “Only if you do
            not fight, no one can fight against you”. The virtue of ‘not striving’ based on the view that by
            identifying with the Tao, real strength can be gained; the philosophical basis of the virtue of
            ‘not striving’ is an understanding of the power of naturalness and spontaneity. The Tao has
            this power because it does things by ‘not striving’ (wu wei). This ‘not striving’ does not mean
            total inactivity. Responses might identify its meaning as when one has less desire, one has
            less constraint; when one does not try to do anything, one leaves nothing undone. A
            significant meaning that candidates might explore is that nothing should be done that goes
            against the nature of anything. For example, the ideal ruler treats ruling his people like frying
            a small fish, this implies directing rather than manipulating, and observing rather than
            interfering. Not striving might be likened to using a light touch and being guided by the nature
            of things, like water flowing.

            Candidates might explore (part A):
            • The concept of wu wei
            • Issues surrounding the idea that to forget about the self is part of the Tao
            • The absence of external controls while holding a self to be unrealistic and fighting against
              external controls is a way to destroy one’s freedom
            • ‘Not striving’ in respect to the understanding that human beings have limited abilities
            • Discussion of being in opposition to the great Tao and thus bound to fail (p.16)
            • ‘Not striving’ and issues related to the environment
            • ‘Not-striving’ and issues relating to society
            • The role of spontaneity
            • Issues surrounding self-control
            • Desire and non-desire.

            Possible discussion points include (part B):
            • Wu wei does not negate the concept of self
            • Differences from other religious philosophies such as asceticism or quietism
            • A comparison between the Tao’s concept of ‘not striving’ and modern concepts of striving
              to achieve goals to demonstrate that the two are not just different, but that they are
              practically opposite
            • Implications of ‘non-striving’ not meaning total inactivity
            • Does the Tao invite a philosophical and passive approach to life?
            • To what extent does the Tao require the individual to be self-critical and at the same time
              to be in harmony with the environment?
            • Is the Taoist concept of ‘not-striving’ just an illusion?
            • If freedom, as understood in today’s world, entails an absence of constraints and
              coercions, it follows then that freedom is to be achieved by striving against limitations,
              removing hindrances, and being protected from external interferences. Does this render
              the Tao and the idea of non-striving as an anachronism?
                                      – 41 –               N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


• Is it logical to infer that the fewer desires a person has, the fewer constraints they have?
  And if, taking it to its logical conclusion, a person who has no expectations at all will
  simply have no constraints and therefore attain a perfect state of ‘non-striving’ and thus in
  a sense omnipotence
• Does ‘not-striving’ contradict modern standards of living?
• Is the concept of ‘not striving’ simply a form of morality of being unselfish?
• Does the attainment of ‘not-striving’ as reflected in the Tao mean such an individual differs
  in physical or metaphysical aspects compared to that of an ordinary person?
• Concepts of the self eg: Locke, Hume, Sartre.
                                                   – 42 –               N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Zhuangzi: Zhuangzi

23.   (a)   Explain Zhuangzi’s comparison of the fish in the water to the human in Heaven.              [10]

      (b)   Evaluate Zhuangzi’s comparison of the fish in the water to the human in Heaven.             [15]

            This question invites an explanation of how fish and humans can behave in a similar way as
            seen by Zhuangzi in an imagined discussion between Zigong and Confucius, in Chapter 6
            section 47. There are many other fish/human references most often beyond the ‘Inner
            Chapters’. Firstly, it is seen that fish in water swims freely and lives a good, nourishing life.
            Humans, while seeking the Tao, mirror the fish in that they serve no ‘particular goal’, and let
            their lives flow and settle into a stability that could not be found in a hectic stress driven
            world. Those humans who behave so in the world are seen as ‘petty men’ but in Heaven they
            are exemplary figures. The fish in water is equating water with the Tao both seemingly
            having regenerative powers allowing free movement, a sense of weightlessness and
            separated from the pulls of the world. The fish can well forget the medium of water and so
            too can humans, with the aid of the Tao, forget the Tao itself, and have a sense of ‘non-
            being' thus losing the sense of self. Another approach that might be related, but which goes
            beyond the “Inner Chapters”, could be the idea of the ‘happy fish’ which explores the nature
            of knowing. How we know the fish might be happy raises parallels with how we know about
            the knowledge and insights of others. The later point of reference can be linked to the fish in
            the pond in the story in 6.27 by questioning a sense of being and why fellow humans judge
            the ‘petty man’ – claiming both to know their state of being and attributing uselessness to
            them. Both these claims are contrary to Zhuangzi’s perspective. He would value both
            uselessness and loss of self-awareness as indications of reaching for the Tao. Other
            parallels can be drawn in the way fish live in harmony with water, whereas non-harmonious
            human interaction results in destruction. Mention might also be made of Zhuangzi’s
            reference to the fish out the pond and how it struggles to survive as similarly the human
            away from the Tao struggles and fights and wrestles with their own existence

            Candidates might explore (part A):
            • The parallel is between the freedom of the fish and the freedom of humans in a
              community setting. Is the pond the same as human society?
            • The relationship between earth and Heaven for humans
            • The nature of the ‘petty man’ in the earth
            • The qualities of the exemplary man in Heaven
            • Different problems of knowing that relate to an understanding of the other and how one
              who is not understood is given little or no value, or when one is not complete (Zhuangzi’s
              frequent use of physical disabled people) one is seen as useless- not worth being taken
              into consideration (which is contrary to Zhuangzi’s view)
            • The use of parallels between animals and humans.

            Possible discussion points include (part B):
            • The way fish are free in water, with no need to think, and the similarities of human in the
              Tao
            • The similarities of the way both respond to stress – struggling – a fish out of water, a
              human not in harmony
            • The perceptions and reaction to danger
            • The possible loneliness of the fish and human; the fish in the pond forgets the other fish
              as humans forget others when with the Tao
            • The issue of isolation and whether it is desirable or even achievable in modern society,
              eg: Simmel, Cioran
            • The possible human strength of adaptability to their environment, eg: Scheler, Dewey
            • Knowledge of the other and communication with the other without complete understanding
            • Parallels between the fish swimming and the wanderer of the First Chapter
            • Whether humans are better than fish and other animals; contrasts might be made with
              Singer’s views on morality and communication.
                                                    – 43 –                N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


24.   (a)   Explain Zhuangzi’s response to the question “How is the world to be managed
            (ruled)?”                                                                   [10]

      (b)   Evaluate Zhuangzi’s response to the question “How is the world to be managed
            (ruled)?”                                                                    [15]

            This question invites an explanation of how Taoism might be a guide to ordering the world or
            the ruling of States, in effect, political activity. Initially in Chapter 7:3 the nameless man
            rejects the question from Tian Gen and considers any response a waste of time and that he
            has better things to do. This rejection is a hint that any ruler who has to ask this question
            should not be ruling. Much of the attitude to political behaviour is that it is of little value and
            one should not get involved. This could well be a reflection of the times in which the text was
            written – a time of civil war and political upheaval. However, on the second asking, the
            answer reveals an application of the Way (the Tao) to politics. It is not a case of non-action
            as this would result in acceptance of the politics of the time and what is happening in the
            current political arena. It is more a sense of rising above the pettiness of the times and the
            self-interest that is driving actions. It is suggested to ‘blend your vital energy with the
            boundless silence, follow the rightness of the way each thing is, without allowing yourself the
            least bias’ (7:3, 7:4). This is not quite the wu wei approach that might be expected but is
            more a Zhuangzian approach of ziran, of being oneself, and allowing and encouraging others
            to be themselves. There is no self-interest in the actions of the ruler. The implication of this is
            to be ‘one’s own man’ and not succumb to pressure groups or trends and fads; rather to
            objectively view unique situations and come to conclusions which might well not set policies
            but resolve only the current situation. A tendency to create policy would be counter ‘to the
            Tao in that the Way is each thing’ (7:3), each has to be considered separately (7:3, 7:4). If
            this is done then ‘the world would be in order’ (7:4). There are mentions elsewhere of letting
            ‘horses run free’ which suggests an approach to anarchy but this is not the case. The advice
            is to live in harmony both cosmically and socially and this can be achieved by measured
            judgment. The approach of the ruler separates them from the people. The “clear sighted rule”
            has the bigger picture, a world view and he is able to allow others to excel and fulfill their
            potential, to ‘allow all creatures to delight in themselves’ (7:5) without interfering. There might
            be comparisons between a ruler and the behaviour of the cook/butcher (3:4, 3:5) in dealing
            with the ox meat. The skill of the cook might be equated to the ruler. The cook might seem to
            be in harmony with the meat and does not need to re-sharpen his knife. So too the ruler, in
            harmony with the people, would not need the blunting knife of laws, punishments and
            constraints to rule. When eating meat, one does not consider the butcher and so too, in the
            harmonious state, the ruler is not at the forefront of the people thoughts.

            Candidates might explore (part A):
            • The nature of the Tao and its presence in all things
            • Whether fixed policies prevent flexible thinking and flexible problem solving
            • The effect on rulers of advice and advisors. The relationship of ministers, administrators
              and advisors to the Ruler
            • Whether decision-making processes can be bias-free
            • The nature of a broad perspective (world view) on the everyday
            • The effect of ziran (naturalness, spontaneity and just-so ness) on governing
            • The role of the sage as a ruler, or an advisor, or the sage completely divorced from
              politics.

            Possible discussion points include (part B):
            • The degree to which any political act can be divorced from self-interest
            • Whether a wise clear-sighted leader can relate to the general populace
            • How such a clear-sighted leader would maintain their authority
            • Cross reference might be made to a ‘philosopher king’, eg: Plato
            • The degree to which people will take on greater responsibility, and the consequent effect
              on governance
                                       – 44 –               N22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


•   The degree to which a Zhuangzian style of leader is consultative
•   Whether market driven societies allow for a Zhuangzian style of leader
•   A comparison between wu wei and ziran leadership
•   The degree to which a leader can be above politics
•   Zhuangzi’s view of the common people needing to be returned to their natural crude and
    simple condition, where they live in harmony with the world and themselves
•   Comparisons to other forms of Taoist thought, eg: Lao Tzu and ruling like frying a small
    fish
•   Confucianism as an alternative approach to ruling
•   Forms of governance that are at odds with Zhuangzi‘s suggestions eg: Machiavelli
•   Ways in which a benevolent, caring ruler can transform society; mention of the
    cook/butcher finding intuitively ways through the meat with a constantly sharp knife
    compared to the blunt knife which is the directive ruler – a legalistic, punishment driven
    approach.
