M21/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                       Markscheme


                               May 2021


                           Geography


                           Higher level


                               Paper 3




12 pages
                                            –2–                 M21/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2021

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2021

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2021

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                       –3–                 M21/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 3 part (a) markbands

 Marks   Level descriptor
         AO1: Knowledge and understanding of                 AO3: Synthesis       AO4: Selection, use and
         specified content                                   and evaluation       application of a variety of
                                                                                  appropriate skills and techniques
         AO2: Application and analysis of knowledge
         and understanding
   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
  1–3    The response is general, not focused on the question, and lacks detail and structure.
         • The response is very brief or general, listing a • No evidence of • Information is listed but is not
            series of unconnected comments or largely         synthesis or     grouped together in paragraphs,
            irrelevant information. Evidence is general or    evaluation is    or paragraphing is erratic.
            relevant to the topic, but not to the question.   expected.      • If present, the conclusion is brief,
         • Evidence (that is, facts, statistics, examples or                   does not summarize the argument
            theories) is listed, lacks detail, and the                         and/or does not address the
            relevance to the question is unclear.                              question.
         • Evidence is not used to formulate an argument
            or an analysis.
         • Everyday language is used; there is little use
            of geographical terminology or it is used with
            errors in understanding.
  4–6    The response only partially addresses the question; evidence is both relevant and irrelevant and is
         largely unstructured.
         • The response partially addresses the question • No evidence of • Paragraphs do not reflect
           and/or does not meet the requirements of the      synthesis or    grouping of information that
           command term. Key evidence is not included.       evaluation is   addresses a specific element of
         • A mix of relevant and irrelevant evidence is      expected.       the question.
           outlined (that is, facts, statistics, examples or               • If present, the conclusion is one-
           theories) and any links to the question are only                  sided, addressing only part of the
           listed.                                                           question.
         • The evidence presented supports only one
           element or interpretation of the question.
         • Key geographical terms are defined briefly.
           The terminology used is both relevant and
           irrelevant to the question.
  7–9    The response addresses most parts of the question and outlines an analysis supported by relevant
         evidence but may lack clear links between paragraphs.
         • The question is broken down into parts and        • No evidence of     • A series of standalone paragraphs
           most parts of the question are addressed in         synthesis or         each addressing a specific
           the response, with supporting evidence for          evaluation is        element of the question but
           each aspect of the question. The response           expected.            lacking clear links connecting
           meets the requirements of the command term.                              them all into a coherent whole.
         • Relevant evidence (that is, facts, statistics,                         • The conclusion repeats and
           examples or theories) is described, focused                              summarizes the analysis or
           on the question and mostly correct. Links with                           argument, but may contain new
           the question are described.                                              information as well.
         • The analysis outlines a two-sided argument
           briefly (if appropriate) and is mostly
           descriptive, using examples as explanation.
         • Correct definitions are given, and relevant and
           irrelevant specialist geographical terms are
           used with occasional errors; or everyday
           language is used.
                                                           –4–                M21/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


10–12   The response addresses all aspects of the question; the analysis is explained using evidence
        integrated in the paragraphs, and it is well structured.
        • All aspects of the question are addressed        • No evidence of    • Paragraphs focus on a relevant point
          and the response meets the requirements            synthesis or        of the argument and integrate the
          of the command term.                               evaluation is       supporting evidence. Paragraphs
        • Detailed evidence (that is, facts, statistics,     expected.           are linked and support the logical
          examples or theories) are integrated in                                flow of the argument and response.
          sentences and paragraphs, and links made                             • The conclusion summarizes the
          between evidence and the question are                                  evidence and argument, and links all
          explained and relevant.                                                back to the question.
        • The response explains how the two sides
          of the argument (if appropriate) are
          supported by detailed evidence that is
          integrated in sentences.
        • Clear, correct definitions and use of
          geographical language is integrated in the
          sentences and throughout the response.
                                                       –5–                  M21/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 3 part (b) markbands

 Marks   Level descriptor
         AO1: Knowledge and                    AO3: Synthesis and evaluation           AO4: Selection, use and
         understanding of specified                                                    application of a variety of
         content                                                                       appropriate skills and
                                                                                       techniques
         AO2: Application and analysis of
         knowledge and understanding
   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
  1–4    The response is general, not focused on the question, and lacks detail and structure.
         • The response is very brief or         • No synthesis or evaluation is      • Information is listed but is
            general, listing a series of           expected at this level.              not grouped together in
            unconnected comments or largely • No links are presented between the        paragraphs, or
            irrelevant information. Evidence       response and (sub)topics in the      paragraphing is erratic.
            is general or relevant to the topic,   guide.                             • If present, the conclusion is
            but not the question.                • No valid opinion or perspective on   brief, does not summarize
         • Evidence (that is, facts, statistics,   the issue is formulated.             the argument and/or does
            examples or theories) is listed,                                            not address the question.
            lacks detail, and the relevance to
            the question is unclear.
         • Evidence is not used to formulate
            an argument or an analysis.
         • Everyday language is used; there
            is little use of geographical
            terminology or it is used with
            errors in understanding.
  5–8    The response only partially addresses the question with limited links to the guide; evidence is both
         relevant and irrelevant and is largely unstructured.
         • The response partially addresses • No synthesis or evaluation is       • Paragraphs do not reflect
           the question and/or does not         expected at this level.             grouping of information that
           meet the requirements of the       • The link(s) between the response    addresses a specific
           command term. Key evidence is        and the guide focus on one topic;   element of the question.
           not included.                        other potential links are listed. • If present, the conclusion is
         • A mix of relevant and irrelevant   • A valid but limited opinion or      one-sided, addressing only
           evidence is outlined (that is,       perspective on the issue is         part of the question.
           facts, statistics, examples or       formulated.
           theories) and any links to the
           question are only listed.
         • The evidence presented supports
           only one element or interpretation
           of the question.
         • Key geographical terms are
           defined briefly. Terminology used
           is both relevant and irrelevant to
           the question.
 9–12    The response addresses most parts of the question with developed links to the guide and outlines an
         analysis supported by relevant evidence but may lack clear links between paragraphs.
         • The question is broken down into • Synthesis or evaluation is required • A series of standalone
           parts and most parts of the            at this level.                          paragraphs each
           question are addressed in the        • Links between the response and          addressing a specific
           response, with supporting              the guide refer to multiple topics      element of the question but
           evidence for each aspect of the        and are described.                      lacking clear links
           question. The response meets         • Opinion or perspective presented is     connecting them all into a
           the requirements of the command        aligned with the response but the       coherent whole.
           term.                                  links are not made explicit or the    • The conclusion repeats and
         • Relevant evidence (that is, facts,     link is a general statement.            summarizes the analysis or
           statistics, examples or theories) is   Other perspectives or interpretations   argument, but may contain
           described, focused on the              are listed without details.             new information as well.
           question and mostly correct.
                                                       –6–                  M21/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


          Links with the question are
          described.
        • The analysis outlines a two-
          sided argument briefly (if
          appropriate) and is mostly
          descriptive, using examples as
          explanation.
        • Correct definitions are given, and
          relevant and irrelevant specialist
          geographical terms are used with
          occasional errors; or everyday
          language is used.
13–16   The response addresses all aspects of the question; the analysis is explained and evaluated using
        evidence integrated in the paragraphs, and it is well structured.
        • All aspects of the question are      •   Synthesis and evaluation is           • Paragraphs focus on a
          addressed and the response               required at this level.                 relevant point of the
          meets the requirements of the        •   Links between the response and          argument and integrate the
          command term.                            (sub)topics from the guide are          supporting evidence.
        • Detailed evidence (that is, facts,       explained and supported by the          Paragraphs are linked and
          statistics, examples or theories)        evidence in the response.               support the logical flow of
          are integrated in sentences and      •   The opinion or perspective              the argument and
          paragraphs, and links made               presented is explicitly linked to the   response.
          between evidence and the                 range of evidence included in the • The conclusion
          question are explained and               response, including critical             summarizes the evidence
          relevant.                                analysis of the relative certainty of    and argument, and links all
        • The response explains how the            evidence used, describing other          back to the question.
          two sides of the argument (if            perspectives or interpretations of
          appropriate) are supported by            evidence.
          detailed evidence that is
          integrated in sentences.
        • Clear, correct definitions and use
          of geographical language is
          integrated in the sentences and
          throughout the response.
                                                 –7–               M21/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.   (a)   Explain how microfinance organizations and alternative trading networks can help
           communities to develop.                                                                   [12]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on pages 3 to 4.

           Human development is a broad multi-strand concept that has economic, social, cultural,
           gendered, political and other dimensions for communities.
           Microfinance organizations provide small loans (microloans) to individuals, often women;
           for example, in India and Bangladesh.
           Fairtrade is the most well-known alternative trading network.

           Microfinance organizations and/or alternative trading networks can support
           community development:
           • Financial resources are transferred to those needing them most.
           • Small investments may be sufficient to allow substantial improvements in agriculture.
           • Family incomes may rise / become more reliable / no longer be dependent on child
              labour.
           • Children can attend regular schooling/purchase books; education of girls helps tackle
              gender inequality.
           • Health benefits; access to technology; political participation.

           Good answers may apply (AO2) a wider range of knowledge and understanding (AO1) in a
           well-structured way (AO4). One approach might be to provide a structured systematic
           analysis of the different strands of human development that microfinance organizations and
           alternative trading networks can support. Another approach might be to analyse the effects
           for different communities and located contexts. Another approach might be to critically
           analyse similarities and differences in the developmental impacts of microfinance
           organizations and alternative trading networks.

           For 4–6 marks, expect some weakly evidenced outlining of the way microfinance
           organizations and/or alternative trading networks have helped people/places; or a good
           account of community development which lacks knowledge of understanding of microfinance
           and alternative trade).

           For 7–9 marks, expect a structured, evidenced analysis of:
           • either the actions of microfinance organizations and alternative trading networks
           • or human development processes in communities helped by either microfinance
             organizations or alternative trading networks.

           For 10–12 marks, expect both of these traits.

           Additional guidance for answers with omissions or category errors:
           • Responses which do not distinguish between MF and AT (or omit one) may still access the
              7-9 band provided explicit analysis (AO2) of the concept of community development
              features as part of a knowledgeable (AO1) and well-structured (AO4) response.
           • Responses which do not make use of any valid MF and AT examples (and may instead
              erroneously use examples of TNCs, etc.) may access the 1-3 and possibly 4-6 bands
              provided explicit analysis (AO2) of the concept of communities becoming more
              developed features as part of a knowledgeable (AO1) and well-structured (AO4) response.
                                            –8–                M21/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



(b)   Discuss the challenges and opportunities that global superpowers create for
      other countries.                                                                            [16]

      Credit all content in line with the markbands. Marks should be allocated according to the
      markbands on pages 5 to 6. Credit unexpected approaches wherever relevant.

      Global superpowers are a diverse group of countries that have disproportionate power and
      influence compared with other states. Power has different facets – including economic,
      military (hard power), cultural (soft power) and geopolitical influence.

      Alongside the USA, other significant global/regional powers include China, Russia and core
      EU states (Germany, France). The term “superpower” is contested and a case could can be
      made for further countries belonging to this category, including India, Brazil, Qatar, Saudi
      Arabia, etc.

       Possible applied themes (AO2) include knowledge and understanding (AO1) of the
       diverse challenges and opportunities associated with:
      • the actions and strategies of TNCs domiciled in, for example, the USA and China,
          including inward investment, outsourcing, offshoring and glocalization [Guide 4.2]
      • lending and financial aid given to other countries by global superpowers [Guide 4.2]
      • global governance / global actions led by powerful countries e.g. action to tackle climate
          change [Guide 2.3]
      • multi-governmental organizations (MGOs) that have been created by, or are strongly
          influenced by, superpower states [Guide 4.1]
      • shrinking-world technologies developed and deployed by the governments, businesses and
          universities of superpower states [Guide 4.3]
      • economic migration and remittance flows [Guide 4.2]
      • the economic and demographic characteristics of global superpowers - and their attraction
          for TNCs domiciled in other states [Guide 4.1]
      • conflict and political tensions created by the main global superpowers [Guide 4.1].

      Good answers may synthesise (AO3a) three or more of the above (or other) themes in a
      well-structured (AO4) way.

      Good answers may additionally offer a critical evaluation (AO3b) of the statement that
      thoughtfully examines the overall balance of opportunities and challenges. Another approach
      might be to critically discuss and compare the different opportunities and challenges
      associated with different types of power (economic influence, ‘hard’ military power, ‘soft’
      global cultural influence and geopolitical influence over MGOs). Another approach might be
      to discuss how the relative balance of opportunities and challenges has changed over time
      (with challenges increasing recently, eg, renewed nationalism). A good discussion may
      conclude with a substantiated final judgement on the overall balance between challenges
      and opportunities from the point of view of other countries making up the global community.

      For 5–8 marks, expect weakly evidenced and/or imbalanced outlining of two or three
      relevant themes.

      For 9–12 marks, expect:
      • either a structured synthesis that links together several well-evidenced themes from the
        Guide
      • or a critical conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) informed by geographical concepts and/or
        perspectives.

      For 13–16 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                 –9–                M21/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   (a)   Analyse ways in which global trade flows can affect the size of national
           carbon footprints.                                                                        [12]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on pages 3 to 4.

           Global trade flows encompass movements of food, consumer goods, digital information sales
           (data) and touristic movements. National carbon footprint sizes are affected by both
           production and consumption of goods and services. In the context of global shift of industry,
           views differ on whether the carbon emissions created by the production of an item should be
           included as part of the footprint size for the producer or consumer country.

           Possible ways in which global trade flows affect national carbon footprint sizes:
           • Countries manufacturing high volumes of goods for export (eg China) have large carbon
              footprints.
           • Countries rearing large numbers of cattle or growing large amounts of crops (eg palm oil)
              may have high carbon/methane emissions.
           • Countries importing large volumes of fossil fuels subsequently use these fuels, emitting
              carbon.
           • The emissions created by the transport of goods may contribute to the national footprint
              of the country where the company is domiciled/headquartered.
           • Data flows can have surprisingly high footprints (eg bitcoin trading).

           Good answers may apply (AO2) a wider range of knowledge and understanding (AO1) in a
           well-structured way (AO4). One approach might be to provide a structured systematic
           analysis of how different global flows/movements (different commodities, people, data) can
           all result in increased carbon emission sizes. Another approach might be to analyse, in turn,
           direct and indirect responsibility for carbon emissions (eg, questioning whether the producer
           or consumer of goods is responsible).

           For 4–6 marks, expect some weakly evidenced outlining of one or two different ways in
           which trade flows affect carbon footprints (most likely the analysis of two different
           types/aspects of trade flows).

           For 7–9 marks, expect a structured, evidenced analysis of:
           • either a range (two or more) of different global trade flows / economic activities
           • or complex national footprints in a global context (imports, exports, offshoring etc)

           For 10–12 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                            – 10 –             M21/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   “Cultural changes caused by globalization have affected urban and rural places equally.”
      Discuss this statement.                                                                  [16]

      Credit all content in line with the markbands. Marks should be allocated according to the
      markbands on pages 5 to 6. Credit unexpected approaches wherever relevant.

      The cultural changes brought by globalization include changes to society, language and the
      landscape. Theories of cultural imperialism/Americanization/McDonaldization view the
      commodification of everyday life as a highly important cultural change. Urban and rural
      places in high-income, emerging and low-income countries alike may be exposed to different
      global flows and interactions, including tourism, trade, migration and social media. However,
      the degree of influence and its effects varies according to context.

      Possible applied themes (AO2) include knowledge and understanding (AO1) of how:
      • diaspora populations increase cultural diversity in places where they have become
         established, typically urban areas [Guide 5.2]
      • TNCs have exported cultural traits globally, including music, language, food and clothing.
         These changes may penetrate rural areas, not just urban areas [Guide 5.2]
      • a digital divide between urban and remote rural areas may limit the latter’s exposure to
         global flows [Guide 4.3]
      • some rural areas are home to groups who voluntarily opt out of globalization and prefer
         local sourcing of food etc [Guide 5.3]
      • entire countries may be disconnected in some ways from global interactions: both their
         urban and rural areas may be resistant to cultural change as a result [Guide 5.3]
      • economic development may mean the differences between rural and urban core
         areas lessen in any case, which complicates the analysis [Guide 5.1].

      Good answers may synthesize (AO3a) three or more of the above (or other) themes in a
      well-structured (AO4) way.

      Good answers may additionally offer a critical evaluation (AO3b) of the statement that
      discusses the processes of cultural change in contrasting contexts (at different stages of
      development, or differing degrees of isolation). Another approach might be to discuss the
      extent of cultural change experienced by different places with varying power to resist
      particular global flows and interactions. A good discussion may conclude with a substantiated
      final judgement on the overall degree to which the statement is true given the diversity of
      different urban/rural places/types.

      For 5–8 marks, expect weakly evidenced outlining of two or three relevant themes.

      For 9–12 marks, expect:
      • either a structured synthesis that links together several well-evidenced themes from the
        Guide
      • or a critical conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) informed by geographical concepts and/or
        perspectives.

      For 13–16 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                 – 11 –              M21/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   (a)   Analyse how the actions of two global groups or organizations have resulted in countries
           being more interconnected.                                                               [12]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on pages 3 to 4.

           Global groups and organizations can include the G7/8/20, OECD, OPEC, UN, EU, IMF,
           BRICs, WHO among many others. Their actions include rules, incentives and sometimes
           sanctions and penalties. Interconnectivity may be analysed in terms of economic (trade),
           sociocultural (eg, migration), political or environmental interactions.

           Possible actions:
           • The IMF lends money to states; in return, it usually requires increased participation in
              free trade.
           • EU members have four freedoms of movement and so increased participation in trade,
              migration, etc.
           • OPEC countries agree amongst themselves on how best to participate in global energy
              trade.
           • Decisions made by G-groups and OECD members affect both themselves
              and non-member countries.

           Good answers may apply (AO2) a wider range of knowledge and understanding (AO1) in a
           well-structured way (AO4). One approach might be to provide a structured systematic
           analysis of different kinds of actions (agreements, sanctions, etc). Another approach might
           be to provide a structured systematic analysis of different types of interconnectivity (through
           trade, migration, data and ideas). Another approach might be to analyse positive and
           negative ways in which interconnectivity develops (eg, dependency theory).

           For 4–6 marks, expect some weakly evidenced outlining of the actions/influence of one or
           two global groups/organizations (do not expect balance).

           For 7–9 marks, expect a structured, evidenced analysis of:
           • either how the actions of two global groups/organizations have impacted on countries
           • or ways in which countries can be made more interconnected by global groups.

           For 10–12 marks, expect both of these traits.

           Additional guidance for omissions or category errors in answers:
           • Responses which only include one valid global group/organization may access the 7-9
              band provided explicit analysis (AO2) of the concept of interconnected countries features
              as part of a knowledgeable (AO1) and well-structured (AO4) response.
           • Responses which do not make use of valid global groups/organizations (and may instead
              erroneously use examples of TNCs, etc) may still access the 1-3 or 4-6 bands provided
              explicit analysis (AO2) of the concept of interconnected countries features as part of a
              knowledgeable (AO1) and well-structured (AO4) response.
                                            – 12 –             M21/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   Discuss how different businesses and societies have been affected by the growth of global
      supply chains.                                                                         [16]

      Credit all content in line with the markbands. Marks should be allocated according to the
      markbands on pages 5 to 6. Credit unexpected approaches wherever relevant.

      Global supply chain growth encompasses outsourcing and offshoring strategies, and the
      development of sometimes complex networks of businesses / factories / offices / suppliers.
      Effects may be positive or negative; economic, social, cultural or environmental; short term
      or long term. These effects are experienced by: businesses (successful TNCs and their
      suppliers; also failing businesses exposed to global competition); and producer and
      consumer societies in a range of geographic contexts.

      Possible applied themes (AO2) include knowledge and understanding (AO1) of:
      • positive effects for those TNCs (and their shareholders) that use supply chains to great
         advantage [Guide 4.2]
      • negative effects for local forms of economic activity that cannot compete with the low
         costs of the global supply chain model [Guide 5.3]
      • negative effects for local communities where deindustrialization has occurred [Guide 5.3]
      • negative effects for local communities who suffer poor working conditions within global
         supply chains [Guide 5.1]
      • positive effects of affordable products, technology and innovation by TNCs whose
         success is attributable in part to supply chains, eg Apple [Guide 4.3]
      • negative environmental effects for societies/communities [Guide 5.2].

      Good answers may synthesize (AO3a) three or more of the above (or other) themes in a
      well-structured (AO4) way.

      Good answers may additionally offer a critical evaluation (AO3b) of the statement that
      discusses the effects of global business supply chains on communities in particular places
      (deindustrialized areas, export processing zones). Another approach might be to discuss
      ways in which global supply chains have effects on human health and welfare at different
      scales (local or global). A good discussion may conclude with a substantiated final
      judgement on the overall balance between different (positive and negative) effects, or for
      different stakeholders (businesses and societies).

      For 5–8 marks, expect weakly evidenced and/or imbalanced outlining of two or three
      relevant themes.

      For 9–12 marks, expect:
      • either a structured synthesis that links together several well-evidenced themes from the
        Guide (with a reasonable balance of effects for businesses and societies)
      • or a critical conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) informed by geographical concepts and/or
        perspectives.

      For 13–16 marks, expect both of these traits.
