M21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                       Markscheme


                               May 2021


                           Geography


           Higher level and standard level


                               Paper 1




26 pages
                                            –2–                 M21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2021

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2021

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2021

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                         –3–                  M21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 1 markbands
These markbands are to be used for paper 1 at both standard level and higher level.

 Marks   Level descriptor
         AO1: Knowledge and understanding of            AO3: Synthesis and             AO4: Selection, use and
         specified content                              evaluation                     application of a variety of
                                                                                       appropriate skills and
         AO2: Application and analysis of
                                                                                       techniques
         knowledge and understanding

   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
  1–2    The response is too brief, lists unconnected information, is not focused on the question and lacks
         structure.
         • The response is very brief or descriptive,    • No evidence of evaluation    • Information presented is not
           listing a series of unconnected                 or conclusion is expected      grouped logically (in
           comments or largely irrelevant                  at this level.                 paragraphs or sections).
           information. The knowledge and                                               • Maps, graphs or diagrams
           understanding presented is very general                                        are not included, are
           with large gaps or errors in                                                   irrelevant or difficult to
           interpretation. Examples or case studies                                       decipher (only if appropriate
           are not included or only listed.                                               to the question).
         • There is no evidence of analysis.
         • Terminology is missing, not defined,
           irrelevant or used incorrectly.

  3–4    The response is too general, lacks detail, is not focused on the question and is largely unstructured.

         • The response is very general. The        • If appropriate to the         • Most of the information is not
           knowledge and understanding presented      question, the conclusion is     grouped logically (in
           outlines examples, statistics, and facts   irrelevant.                     paragraphs or sections).
           that are both relevant and irrelevant.   • There is no evidence of       • Maps, graphs or diagrams
           Links to the question are listed.          critical evaluation of          included lack detail, are
         • The argument or analysis presented is      evidence (examples,             incorrectly or only partially
           not relevant to the question.              statistics and case studies).   interpreted without explicit
         • Basic terminology is defined and used                                      connections to the question
           but with errors in understanding or used                                   (only if appropriate to the
           inconsistently.                                                            question).
  5–6    The response partially addresses the question, but with a narrow argument, an unsubstantiated
         conclusion, and limited evaluation.
         • The response describes relevant              • If appropriate to the        • Logically related information
           supporting evidence (information,              question, the conclusions      is grouped together (in
           examples, case studies et cetera),             are general, not aligned       sections or paragraphs) but
           outlining appropriate link(s) to the           with the evidence              not consistently.
           question.                                      presented and/or based on • Maps, graphs or diagrams
         • The argument or analysis partially             an incorrect interpretation    included do not follow
           addresses the question or elaborates           of the evidence.               conventions, and include
           one point repeatedly.                        • Other perspectives on          relevant and irrelevant
         • Relevant terminology is defined and            evidence (examples,            interpretations in the text
           used with only minor errors in                 statistics and case studies)   (only if appropriate to the
           understanding or is used inconsistently.       and/or strengths and           question).
                                                          weaknesses of evidence
                                                          are listed.
                                                       –4–                  M21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


7–8    The response addresses the whole question, the analysis is evaluated and the conclusion is relevant
       but lacks balance.
       •  The response describes            • If appropriate to the question, the  • Logically related
          relevant supporting evidence         conclusion is relevant to the         information is grouped
          correctly (information, examples     question, aligned with the evidence   together (in sections)
          and case studies) that covers all    but unbalanced.                       consistently.
          the main points of the question,  • Other perspectives on evidence       • Maps, graphs or
          describing appropriate links to      (examples, statistics and case        diagrams included
          the question.                        studies) and/or strengths and         contribute to/support the
       • The argument or analysis is           weaknesses of evidence are            argument or analysis
          clear and relevant to the            described.                            (only if appropriate to
          question but one-sided or                                                  the question).
          unbalanced.
       • Complex terminology is defined
          and used correctly but not
          consistently.
9–10   The response is in-depth and question-specific (topic and command term); analysis and conclusion
       are justified through well-developed evaluation of evidence and perspectives.
       •   The response explains correct        •   If appropriate to the question, the   •   Response is logically
           and relevant examples, statistics        conclusion is relevant to the             structured with
           and details that are integrated in       question, balanced and aligned with       discussion (and if
           the response, explaining the             the evidence.                             appropriate to the
           appropriate link to the question.    •   Evaluation includes a systematic and      question, a conclusion)
       •   The argument or analysis is              detailed presentation of ideas, cause     focusing on the
           balanced, presenting evidence            and effect relations, other               argument or points
           that is discussed, explaining            perspectives; strengths and               made, making it easy to
           complexity, exceptions and               weaknesses of evidence are                follow.
           comparisons.                             discussed; (if appropriate) includes  •   Maps, graphs or
       •   Complex and relevant                     justification of the argument and         diagrams are annotated
           terminology is used correctly            conclusion.                               following conventions
           throughout the response.                                                           and their relevance is
                                                                                              explained and support
                                                                                              the argument or
                                                                                              analysis (only if
                                                                                              appropriate to the
                                                                                              question).
                                                    –5–                M21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Option A — Freshwater

1.   (a)   (i)    Identify which country has the most waterfalls between 780 m and 860 m in height. [1]

                  USA.

           (ii)   State the mode for height from the table above.                                          [1]

                  840 (“m” not needed)

     (b)   Outline the main features of one landform, other than a waterfall, created
           by river erosion.                                                                                [2]

           Award [1] for a basic outline of a valid landform and [1] for further development of its main
           feature(s) or the process relating to its formation.

           For example: A meander is a winding/sinuous section of a river [1] with a steep river cliff on
           the outside bend [1].

           Other erosional landforms include:
           • gorges
           • v-shaped valleys
           • plunge pools
           • rapids
           • potholes
           • terraces
           • ox-bow lakes

     (c)   Explain two reasons why rates of erosion could vary at different waterfalls, such as those
           shown in the table.                                                                      [3+3]

           In each case, award [1] for a valid reason and [2] for further explanation/development of
           variation in rates of erosion at different waterfalls.

           For example: If the drop in height is great [1], the water will be very fast [1]; therefore, there
           will be more rapid abrasion/hydraulic action [1].

           Other possible reasons include:
           • geology
           • scale / size of drainage basin
           • variations in discharge levels
           • load causing abrasion in plunge pool.
                                                  –6–               M21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   (a)   Examine how human and physical factors can contribute to a low risk of river flooding.     [10]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

           River flooding continues to cause serious human and environmental problems, especially in
           urban and densely populated rural areas. In order to reduce the impact, severity and
           frequency of flooding it is important that there should be an understanding of the physical
           and human causes of river flooding.

           Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):

           Human factors that may contribute to low flood risk include:
           •   flood mitigation schemes, such as structural changes to river systems, including levees,
               channel modification, dams and flood reservoirs
           •   land use planning and zoning; changes in land use, agricultural techniques and
               afforestation
           •   changes in land use and afforestation
           •   also important are factors such as weather forecasting and flood prediction.

           Physical factors that may contribute to low flood risk include:
           •   geology, including rock permeability
           •   relief, including slope steepness
           •   rainfall amounts and seasonality
           •   land use, including types of vegetation cover.

           Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may examine the relative importance
           (AO3) of the two sets of processes, or the interaction of the two sets of processes, or how
           influences may vary from place to place.

           For 5–6 marks, expect some weakly evidenced outlining of how human and/or physical
           factors contribute to a low flood risk.

           For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account that includes:
           •   either an evidenced explanation of how human and physical factors (do not expect
               balance) contribute to a low flood risk
           •   or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
               and/or perspectives.

           For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                  –7–                M21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   (b)   Examine why it can be difficult to achieve stakeholder agreement over how best to manage
           one or more water resources.                                                           [10]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

           As the quantity of water resources available to meet rising demands over time intensifies,
           and the quality of water degrades, there is increasing competition and possible conflict
           between water users. The rising demands include freshwater supplies from rivers, lakes and
           aquifers, fishing, irrigation and navigation. Many river basins cross political boundaries and
           there is a need for international agreements and cooperation to avoid possible conflicts over
           increasingly scarce resources.

           Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
           •   Freshwater resources include rivers, lakes, reservoirs and aquifers.
           •   Many large river basins cross political boundaries, and there is potential conflict over the
               use of water resources.
           •   Increasing demands for water resources come from meeting the needs of water supply,
               fishing, agriculture, energy and navigation, and there is a potential for conflict between
               different stakeholders.
           •   There is a need for international treaties and agreements to resolve the potential
               conflicts.
           •   The different stakeholders involved in resolving possible conflicts include local
               populations, national governments and international associations like the UN, FAO and
               UNESCO.
           •   International agreements may also be important in water management, conservation and
               protection.

           Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
           evaluation (AO3) of the roles and power of different stakeholders in relation to water
           management issues. Perspectives can differ so greatly that no consensus can be arrived at.
           Different stakeholders have unequal power, which means that some views are ignored. The
           scale and complexity of the issue affects outcomes.

           For 5–6 marks, expect some weakly evidenced outlining of the management of one or more
           water resources.

           For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account that includes:
           •   either an evidenced explanation of the management of one or more water resources, and
               why it is difficult to get stakeholder agreement
           •   or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
               and/or perspectives.

           For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                    –8–                 M21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Option B – Oceans and coastal margins

3.   (a)   (i)    State the direction that Hurricane Irma is predicted to track in the first three days
                  as a hurricane.                                                                           [1]

                  WNW (allow W and NW)

           (ii)   Estimate the number of hours it is predicted for Hurricane Irma to track from the
                  Leeward Islands to the eastern tip of the Dominican Republic.                             [1]

                  66 hours (allow 64–68)

     (b)   Outline one reason why hurricane activity may increase when ocean temperatures
           are warmer.                                                                                      [2]

           Award [1] for a reason and [1] for development.

           For example: Higher ocean temperatures result in greater evaporation [1], which provides
           more energy for the formation of hurricanes [1].

     (c)   Explain two effects of a hurricane on the physical environment of a coastal margin such as
           that shown in the diagram.                                                             [3+3]

           In each case, award [1] for the effect and [2] for explanation/development.

           Do not credit human impacts.

           For example: Hurricanes can cause significant damage to coral reefs [1] due to high wave
           energy destroying the coral [1] and high rainfall reducing salinity, causing coral to die [1].

           Other physical impacts include:
           • loss of wetlands
           • coastal erosion
           • destruction of mangroves
           • loss of biodiversity
           • coastal flooding and debris deposited
           • destruction of sand dunes
           • landslides.
                                                  –9–                M21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   (a)   Examine how the importance of wind and waves varies for the development of two or more
           coastal landforms.                                                                  [10]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

           Erosional landforms include cliffs, stacks and wave-cut platforms, while depositional features
           include beaches, spits, bars and sand dunes. The actions of wind and waves are interrelated
           in the formation of such landforms.

           Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
           •   The actions of wind and waves are interrelated in the formation of coastal landforms,
               although their relative importance may vary.
           •   Wind affects wave strength and type – whether constructive or destructive – and the
               direction of longshore drift.
           •   Constructive waves – of low energy – produce depositional features. Destructive waves –
               of high energy – are responsible for erosional features.
           •   The importance of wind is dominant in the formation of sand dunes; other factors include
               adequate sediment supply and the role of vegetation.

           Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
           evaluation (AO3) that examines the interrelationships between the two sets of processes,
           the relative power of the different influences in shaping environments, and the possibility of
           extreme wind and wave processes at different timescales, eg tsunamis.

           For 5–6 marks, expect some weakly evidenced outlining of the formation of one or more
           coastal landforms by wind and/or waves.

           For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account that includes:
           •   either an evidenced examination of the relative importance of wind and waves (do not
               expect balance) in the formation of two coastal landforms
           •   or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) regarding their relative importance.

           For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                  – 10 –              M21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   (b)   Evaluate strategies designed to manage pollution caused by two or more types of waste
           materials in the oceans.                                                              [10]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

           Waste in the oceans includes radioactive materials, oil and chemical waste, and solid
           materials such as plastics. The consequences of the disposal of plastic waste have been of
           particular concern in recent years.

           Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
           •   Chemical waste includes SO2 and NOx and nitrates.
           •   Oil pollution may come from offshore oil production and effluent from ships.
           •   Physical waste includes plastic materials and sediment inputs from rivers.
           •   Waste may be deliberately disposed of in the oceans, or may come from effluent and
               output from rivers and land run-off, such as from agriculture.
           •   Oceanic pollution from waste may lead to significant damage to marine ecosystems,
               including fisheries and coral reefs.
           •   Strategies to manage pollution occur at both the local and global scales, including
               monitoring of levels of pollution, regulations and laws to limit different types of waste
               disposal, and clean-up operations following a significant pollution event.

           Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
           evaluation (AO3) that examines a variety of strategies and the roles of different stakeholders
           in varying places and different scales from local to global. For example, strategies to deal
           with oil pollution may be more successful than plastics because of the temporal and spatial
           scales of the problem. It is hard to get stakeholder agreement to tackle plastic waste
           because of scale.

           For 5–6 marks, expect some weakly evidenced outlining of management strategies aimed at
           reducing oceanic pollution for one or more types of waste materials.

           For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account that includes:
           •   either an evidenced explanation of strategies for managing pollution caused by two or
               more types of waste materials
           •   or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
               and/or perspectives regarding the success of management strategies.

           For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                   – 11 –              M21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Option C – Extreme environments

5.   (a)   (i)    Identify which state has the largest area of named deserts.                            [1]

                  Western Australia

           (ii)   Identify the two deserts with the greatest longitudinal (east to west) extent.         [1]

                  Great Sandy Desert and Great Victoria Desert

                  Both are needed for [1].

     (b)   Outline one reason why rainfall is low in hot, arid deserts.                                  [2]

           Award [1] for the reason and [1] for some explanation of how it limits rainfall.

           Diagrams should be given credit.

           For example: Rain shadow [1] due to descending dry air on leeward side of a mountain
           range [1].

           Other possibilities include:
           • cold ocean currents
           • latitude/sub-tropical high pressure
           • continentality / interior.

     (c)   Explain two challenges that low rainfall creates for agriculture in inland deserts such as
           those shown on the map.                                                                    [3+3]

           The challenges may relate to difficulties growing crops or raising livestock in arid
           environments, or finding alternative water resources because of inaccessibility.

           Award [1] for each challenge and up to [2] for further development / explanation /
           exemplification.

           For example, desertification can occur due to the dryness of the soil [1], and susceptibility to
           wind erosion [1] results in loss of soil for plant roots [1].

           Other possible challenges include, but are not limited to:
           • salinization
           • problems with water collection and storage, cost of irrigation systems.
           • problems with locating/accessing underground aquifers
           • competition with other water users.
                                                 – 12 –             M21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


6.   (a)   Examine the importance of permafrost in the development of periglacial landscapes.         [10]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

           Permafrost is the most distinctive feature of periglacial environments. Many periglacial
           landforms are associated with permafrost. Permanently frozen ground is overlaid by an
           “active layer”, which undergoes seasonal melting and freezing.

           Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
           •   The importance of permafrost and the active layer in periglacial environments.
           •   Freeze–thaw processes in the active layer and frost wedging of exposed bedrock
               produce large areas of coarse, angular rock debris (blockfields or felsenmeer).
           •   Widespread areas of patterned ground, thermokarst and polygons, formed by thermal
               contraction, cracking and frost heave.
           •   The formation of pingos within the active layer.
           •   The role of solifluction as a transportation process within the active layer, forming
               solifluction lobes and terraces.
           •   Sediment transport by solifluction may modify the patterned ground into stone nets and
               stripes and produce depositional solifluction lobes and terraces.

           Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
           evaluation (AO3) that examines the role of permafrost in the formation of periglacial
           landscapes. Periglacial landscapes may depend on the type of permafrost, seasonal process
           changes and the interrelationships between processes. The different scale of landform
           features – eg, widespread areas of thermokarst, isolated patterned ground features or
           pingos.

           For 5–6 marks, expect some weakly evidenced outlining of the formation of periglacial
           landforms/landscapes.

           For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account that includes:
           •   either an evidenced explanation of the importance of permafrost in the formation of
               periglacial landforms/landscapes
           •   or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
               and/or perspectives.

           For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                   – 13 –              M21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


6.   (b)   Examine the political issues associated with mineral extraction in two or more extreme
           environments.                                                                          [10]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

           Extensive valuable mineral resources occur in different extreme environments and their
           exploitation poses significant human and physical challenges. Opportunities include
           economic gains by TNCs, governments and local populations from the exploitation of
           resources. They also provide employment opportunities and higher wages for local people.

           Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
           •   Valuable mineral deposits occur in extreme environments, such as oil in North America
               and iron ore in Australia.
           •   Political issues may arise between different stakeholders, including national
               governments, TNCs and local peoples.
           •   Financial gains by TNCs and local and national government may contribute to economic
               and social development.
           •   There is the political problem of “leakage” to TNCs and a lack of skilled local labour
           •   Other political issues may concern environmental degradation, pollution, and
               disagreements over land ownership and rights.

           Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
           evaluation (AO3) of the varying power of different stakeholders, interactions between
           different political forces and the connected issues, and possibilities for conflict resolution.

           For 5–6 marks, expect some weakly evidenced outlining of some political issues associated
           with mineral extraction in one or more extreme environments.

           For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account that includes:
           •   either an evidenced explanation of the political issues in two or more extreme
               environments
           •   or a discursive and structured evaluation grounded in geographical concepts and/or
               perspectives.
           For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                  – 14 –             M21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Option D – Geophysical hazards

7.   (a)   (i)    Identify the altitude range within which the majority of mass movements occur.         [1]

                  2000–2999 (m not needed)

           (ii)   Estimate the number of mass movements occurring above the altitude of 3500 m.          [1]

                  11 (allow 10–12)

     (b)   Outline one physical factor affecting the speed of a mass movement.                           [2]

           Award [1] for physical factor and [1] for development.

           For example: Gradient/slope [1] influences the effect of gravity on how fast material moves
           [1].

           Other possible factors include:
           • water content
           • sediment size
           • vegetation
           • rainfall amount.

     (c)   Explain two possible strategies to reduce human vulnerability to rapid mass movement
           hazards in a mountainous area such as this.                                          [3+3]

           In each case, award [1] for outlining the strategy and up to [2] for the explanation and
           development/exemplification of how the strategy reduces human vulnerability.

           For example: Land-use zoning keeps people away from dangerous areas [1]. This could be
           at the base of rock faces where debris might fall/slide [1]. This prevents loss of life/economic
           loss [1].

           Other possible strategies include:
           • insurance
           • slope stabilization, eg netting, rock armour, revetments, snow fences
           • excavation and infilling of slopes to realign them
           • improving groundwater drainage / diverting water
           • diverting roads/infrastructure from known areas
           • evacuation warnings / education
           • banning logging on hillsides.
           • controlled explosions
           • housing design, to withstand impact of mass movement.
                                                 – 15 –             M21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


8.   (a)   Examine the relationship between plate margin type and the character of
           volcanic activity.                                                                        [10]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

           Most volcanic activity occurs along plate margins, although some is related to hotspots (eg,
           Hawaii). Volcanoes occur along both destructive (convergent) and constructive (divergent)
           boundaries but are generally absent along strike-slip boundaries such as the San Andreas
           Fault. There is a relationship between the type of plate margin and the character of volcanic
           activity and resultant landforms.

           Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
           •   Most volcanic activity occurs along plate margins, and there is a close relationship
               between the type of plate margin and character of activity.
           •   Destructive (convergent) plate margins are associated with violent, explosive, andesitic
               eruptions, formed in relation to subduction processes. These form large strato-volcanoes,
               ash cones, ash falls, pyroclastic flows and lahars.
           •   Constructive plate margins are associated with less violent basaltic eruptions, forming
               large shield volcanoes, fissure vents, and basaltic lava plains. They often form on the
               ocean floors and mid-oceanic ridges, such as Iceland.
           •   Volcanic eruptions also occur away from plate margins, such as on “hot-spots” like
               Hawaii.
           •   Passive, strike-slip plate margins, such as the San Andreas Fault are not normally
               associated with volcanic activity.

           Good answers may be well-structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
           evaluation (AO3) of the statement in a way that shows understanding of the complex
           relationship between volcanic activity and processes operating at different types of plate
           margin. The relationship is sometimes complicated because in some places volcanic activity
           occurs away from plate margins. There may also be temporal change with changing
           characteristics at the same plate margin. Another approach might be to look at the varying
           scale of volcanic activity.

           For 5–6 marks, expect some weakly evidenced outlining of one or more plate margin types
           and the characteristics of volcanic activity.

           For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account that includes:
           • either an evidenced explanation of the relationship(s) between two types of plate margin
              and varying characteristics of volcanic activity
           • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
              and/or perspectives.

           For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                 – 16 –             M21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


8.   (b)   Examine how geophysical factors were responsible for the differing impacts of two
           earthquake hazard events.                                                                 [10]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

           The focus of the question is on the relationship between geophysical factors and their
           differing impacts. Earthquake hazard events are associated with the impact of ground
           shaking and rupture, landslides, tsunamis, and liquefaction. The geophysical characteristics
           of an area will have a major influence on the severity of impacts of an earthquake event. The
           impacts may be physical, human, or a combination of the two.

           Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
           •   The type of plate boundary affects the impact of earthquakes: convergent/destructive
               boundaries often produce stronger (higher magnitude) earthquakes than divergent
               (constructive) plate margins.
           •   The severity of the impact will vary with the intensity and depth of the earthquake event,
               and the nature/frequency of aftershocks. Shallow focus earthquakes have greater impact
               than deep earthquakes.
           •   Type of plate movement is important – vertical movement between plates (as on a
               convergent plate boundary) may cause more impact than horizontal (strike-slip)
               movement (as on a destructive plate margin).
           •   Other geophysical factors may include geology/rock type/sediments – which influence
               intensity of shaking, and possible liquefaction.
           •   Relief/slope steepness, and coastal topography may affect the incidence of landslides,
               and coastal flooding due to tsunamis.
           •   Time of day may also be considered as a geophysical factor.
           •   Impacts of earthquakes include ground shaking, liquefaction, landslides and tsunamis, as
               well as coastal flooding, collapsed buildings and damage to infrastructure.

           Good answers may be well-structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
           evaluation (AO3) of the statement in a way that shows understanding of the complex
           relationship between the nature of earthquake activity and resultant impacts. Good answers
           will have a wider variety of physical factors and associated processes. Another approach is
           to look at the interactions between physical factors and systems. There may be a clear
           contrast in the power and scale of examples used.

           For 5–6 marks, expect some weakly evidenced outlining of geophysical factors affecting one
           or more earthquake hazard events/impacts.

           For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account that includes:
           • either an evidenced explanation of how geophysical factors led to differing impacts for
              two earthquake hazard events (do not expect balance)
           • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
              and/or perspectives.

           For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                   – 17 –            M21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Option E – Leisure, tourism and sport

9.   (a)   (i)    Estimate the range of costs shown for the Winter Olympics, in billions of US dollars. [1]

                  21 (allow 20-22 or 22-1 / 22-2 / 23-1 / 23-2)

           (ii)   Estimate the total cost shown for the Summer Olympics between 2004 and 2016, in
                  billions of US dollars.                                                         [1]

                  29 (allow 27–31)

     (b)   Outline one possible reason why some higher-income countries have chosen to host the
           Olympics on multiple occasions.                                                      [2]

           Award [1] for the reason and [1] for development linked to hosting on multiple occasions.

           Award a maximum of [1] for the simple reason that “they can afford it and infrastructure is
           expensive” (this does not address the choice to hold events on multiple occasions).

           For example: Some wealthy countries hope to gain political influence [1] and are prepared to
           commit high amounts of money regularly to achieve this [1].

           Other possible factors include:
           • re-use of existing infrastructure
           • legacy / regeneration
           • highly advantageous physical conditions
           • economic benefits if linked to tourism
           • nationalism / patriotism



     (c)   Explain two ways in which participation in international sporting events became more diverse
           during the years shown in the graph.                                                   [3+3]

           In each case award [1] for identifying the way diversity has increased (eg, more women
           participating) and up to [2] for further explanatory development.

           Responses should focus on who is affected and what has happened to make sports more
           inclusive. Award up to a maximum of [4] for a response dealing with an increase in the
           number of countries participating (which may imply diversity).

           For example: There has been an increase in participation by disabled athletes (at the
           Paralympics) [1]. The Paralympics have been invested in and received large amounts of
           financial sponsorship [1] and high-profile media coverage [1].

           Other possibilities include:
           • women participating
           • religion
           • transgender inclusion
           • economically disadvantaged people
                                                  – 18 –             M21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


10.   (a)   Examine the contribution that ecotourism can make to the sustainability of tourism on local
            and global scales.                                                                        [10]

            Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

            Ecotourism is a form of sustainable tourism that aims to reduce the impact on the natural
            environment and sustain the economic and social wellbeing of local people. However, in
            recent years, considerable doubt has been cast on whether the aims have been fulfilled and
            on the negative environmental, economic and social impacts. Ecotourism may not be entirely
            sustainable, especially on a global scale.

            Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
            •   Ecotourism has gained in popularity as a form of sustainable and responsible tourism. It
                aims to conserve the natural environment and promote the economic and social
                wellbeing of local people.
            •   However, the aims may not always be realized, and ecotourism may do more harm than
                good in certain places.
            •   Poor management may harm the environment by introducing people to ecologically
                sensitive areas; the carrying capacity may be exceeded.
            •   As a destination’s popularity grows, resources suffer from overuse.
            •   Human activity might disrupt wildlife; encourage soil erosion and habitat loss, and put
                pressure on limited water resources.
            •   Ecotourism is promoted and advertised in the media as responsible tourism, resulting in a
                large increase in tourist numbers globally.
            •   Many ecotourism destinations are in remote areas, requiring extensive air and vehicle
                travel and creating large carbon footprints.
            •   International developers may divert money away from the local community; corrupt
                governments may take a large cut of the profits.
            •   There may be threats to indigenous cultures. However, the promotion of ecotourism may
                educate people of the need for responsible and sustainable tourism.

            Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
            evaluation (AO3) that show a good understanding of sustainable tourism, and may examine
            how ecotourism works well in particular places, but does not necessarily translate to a global
            scale.

            For 5–6 marks, expect some weakly evidenced outlining of ecotourism as a form of
            sustainable tourism locally and/or globally.

            For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account which includes:
            •   either an evidenced explanation of ecotourism at local and global scales (do not expect
                balance) and its contribution to sustainability
            •   or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
                and/or perspectives.

            For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                  – 19 –             M21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


10.   (b)   Examine the geographic relationship between the hierarchy of teams and the distribution of
            supporters for one named national sports league.                                        [10]

            Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

            The position of a team in a hierarchy is shown by its position in that league. The team’s
            position will go up and down in the league, depending on success, over different timescales.
            The relative success of a team is partly related to economic power and influence. An
            example of a national sports league should be clearly identified.

            Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
            •   The hierarchy of teams includes: the position of teams in the sports league, their
                economic wealth, and the value and importance of players.
            •   Teams at the top of a hierarchy, such as in the English Premier Football League, are
                often located in major urban areas and have a large number of supporters from a wide
                sphere of influence.
            •   They may attract supporters from a local, national and international scale.
            •   Teams lower in the hierarchy will attract fewer supporters, mainly from a local scale. They
                will have much less wealth and power.
            •   Reference could be made to factors such as the role of the media, sponsorship and
                advertising in influencing the sphere of influence.

            Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
            evaluation (AO3) of the statement, recognizing that the economic power of the top tier gives
            rise to a truly global scale of influence. Another approach would be to question how the
            relationship changes over time.

            Award a maximum of [4] if a non-national league is discussed eg Champions League, Super
            Rugby.

            For 5–6 marks, expect some weakly evidenced outlining of the hierarchy of a national sports
            league and/or the distribution of supporters.

            For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account that includes:
            •   either an evidenced explanation of the relationship between team hierarchy and
                distribution of supporters in a named national league
            •   or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
                and/or perspectives.

            For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits
                                                    – 20 –             M21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Option F — Food and health

11.   (a)   (i)    State the four-figure grid reference for the spot height of 1062 metres in the northeast
                   of the map.                                                                            [1]

                   Allow only 1462, 14 62 and 14,62 (no E /N or dashes)

            (ii)   Estimate the area, in km2, of cultivated land to the west of easting 02.                   [1]

                   10 (allow 9–11)


      (b)   Outline one way in which the use of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) could help
            increase food production from cultivated land.                                                    [2]

            Award [1] for a basic outline point about increasing productivity/yield and [1] for further
            development.

            For example: Scientists use GM technology to increase, say, the amount of fruit grown by a
            plant [1], which means there is a higher yield per unit area [1].

            Other possibilities include:
            • growing season/time of germination
            • frost or pest resistance
            • size and number of fruits/nuts/seeds etc.

      (c)   Explain one physical factor and one human factor contributing to the diffusion of
            one named water-borne disease through an area such as this.                                   [3 + 3]

            In each case, award [1] for outlining a relevant factor and up to [2] for an explanation of
            why diffusion occurs through an area/from place to place.

            For example: Physical – heavy rainfall [1], which may lead to flooding in the area [1]
            and spreads the cholera bacteria away from source [1].

            For example: Human – some sections of the city are densely populated, so the sewage
            system is inadequate [1] and it overflows into rivers [1], which contaminates the
            drinking supply of places downstream [1].

            Other possible factors include:

            Physical
            • drainage issues/swampy land
            • warm temperatures / increased evaporation
            • reduced water level-salinity (cholera conditions)

            Human
            • through transport links, where infection is carried/spread through feces
            • education about water safety

            Award a maximum of [4] if no specific disease is named, or if a water-borne disease is
            incorrectly identified.
                                                   – 21 –              M21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


12.   (a)   Examine how spatial variations in food consumption can impact upon life expectancy.          [10]

            Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

            Life expectancy shows considerable variation in different regions of the world. There is a
            close relationship between life expectancy and spatial variations in food consumption. Life
            expectancy tends to be lower in poorer regions with low food security and higher in richer,
            more developed areas. The relationship between life expectancy and food consumption will
            vary with time and scale.

            Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
            •   Life expectancy varies spatially, between different regions and places.
            •   There is a relationship between life expectancy and patterns of food consumption.
            •   Food consumption refers to the quantity and nutritional quality of food, and is linked to
                food security.
            •   Significant inequality exists between life expectancy and food consumption in different
                places/regions.
            •   There is a close relationship between life expectancy, food consumption and income
                levels.
            •   Increases in food consumption may lead to a reduction in life expectancy due to the
                increased incidence of obesity and heart disease.

            Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
            evaluation (AO3) of the statement. They could examine the statement at different scales –
            eg, food consumption in different continents or in different parts of a city (places) linked to
            incomes. Another approach might be to look at interactions between food and health in
            contrasting ways – eg, increased food supply can both increase and decrease life
            expectancy.

            For 5–6 marks, expect some weakly evidenced outlining of the relationship between life
            expectancy and food consumption.

            For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account that includes:
            • either an evidenced explanation of the spatial variations in the relationship between life
               expectancy and food consumption
            • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
               and/or perspectives.

            For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                    – 22 –               M21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


12.   (b)   Examine the reasons why food insecurity remains high in many places.                            [10]

            Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

            Food security considers the core issues of availability, affordability, quality and safety;
            that people should have access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food that meets their
            dietary needs. The lack of food security affects people on a variety of spatial scales,
            from village to nation, in many areas of the world. Food insecurity may be caused by
            many inter-related physical, economic, social and political factors. It is often associated
            with poverty, poor economic development and political instability. Attempts to tackle
            food insecurity have met with only limited success, and it remains high in many places.

            Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding
            (AO1):
            • Food security considers the core issues of availability, quality and safety of food.
            • Low food security affects people in many areas of the world, from local to national
              scales.
            • Low food security is often related to poverty; many people are trapped in a cycle of
              poverty, with poor diets, low productivity and short life expectancy.
            • Other factors, such as adverse physical environment, lack of economic
              development, agricultural practises, crop disease, poor communications and political
              unrest, also contribute to low food security.
            • Stakeholders involved in attempts to tackle food insecurity include international
              organisations (eg, WHO/FAO), national governments and NGOs, and local
              communities – often with only limited success.
            • The priorities and power of different stakeholders is also important.
            • Strategies to reduce food insecurity include improving agricultural production,
              improving infrastructure and storage, trade agreements to facilitate trade in food
              crops, international aid, overcoming political instability, food waste reduction.
            • Food insecurity remains high; it is a difficult problem to resolve and many attempts
              to reduce the problem have had only limited success.

            Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
            evaluation (AO3) of the statement. They could examine the statement on a variety of
            scales – eg, food insecurity in different countries, regions, or in different areas of a city
            (places) – linked to various geographic factors, together with attempts to reduce
            insecurity. Another approach might be to look at changes in food insecurity over
            different time scales, possibly linked to global climatic changes, or the power of
            different stakeholders.

            For 5–6 marks, expect some weakly evidenced outlining of causes of food insecurity.

            For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account that includes:
            • either an evidenced examination of the reasons for high food insecurity in many
              places
            • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical
              concepts and/or perspectives.

            For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                      – 23 –           M21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Option G — Urban environments

13.   (a)   (i)    State the factor that belongs in box A.                                               [1]

                   Reduced job opportunities/unemployment/outmigration

            (ii)   State one political factor that could be included in box B.                           [1]

                   Award [1] for a valid political factor.

                   Possibilities include:
                   • Clean Air Act
                   • adoption of sustainability goals
                   • land-use planning
                   • tariffs and trade (including trade barriers)
                   • government policies.


      (b)   Outline how one physical factor can affect the location of low-income residential areas in a
            city.                                                                                        [2]

            Award [1] for a correct physical factor and [1] for development.

            For example, favelas on steep slopes [1] because they are prone to landslides and other
            people don’t want to live there [1].

            Other possible factors include:
            • swampy area
            • contaminated land
            • prevailing wind or strong winds

            Do not accept distance from the CBD as this is being interpreted as an economic factor (bid
            rent).
                                            – 24 –                 M21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(c)   Explain two possible ways of solving the long-term issue of urban social deprivation in an
      area such as this.                                                                      [3 + 3]

      In each case, award [1] for the strategy and up to [2] for
      development/explanation/exemplification.

      For example: Re-training of people who have lost their job and lack skills [1] in order for them
      to get work in new service industries [1], which attracts new employers/industry to the area
      and breaks the cycle [1].

      Other possibilities include:
      • movement of new industries into these brownfield sites
      • micro-financing / lending
      • re-industrialization
      • provision of affordable housing
      • government intervention
      • encouraging a wider range of leisure activities/night life
      • developing flag ship attractions
      • constructing new offices, conference centres, hotels
      • re-urbanization with new apartment blocks.

       Do not accept gentrification as a factor.
                                                   – 25 –              M21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


14.   (a)   Examine the influence of two or more physical factors on patterns of economic activity in
            urban environments.                                                                       [10]

            Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

            Patterns of economic activity are influenced by several different physical factors, such as
            geology, relief, drainage, site (eg coastal or riverside) and local climates (which might
            influence patterns of pollution). Geological factors might include proximity to mineral deposits
            (mining); areas of low relief might be suitable for industrial and retailing activities and
            influence the development of infrastructure. Coastal regions may attract port activities.

            Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
            •   Physical factors that might influence patterns of economic activity include geology, relief,
                drainage, site (coastal/riverside) and climate.
            •   Relief is an important factor – low relief is a site factor influencing the location of large
                scale industrial or retail activities, which will avoid areas of steep slopes.
            •   Economic activities will also tend to avoid areas of poor drainage/marshland liable to
                flooding. On the other hand, these areas may be of low economic value and so suitable
                for extensive industrial activities.
            •   Infrastructure development is also favoured by areas of low relief.
            •   A coastal or riverside location is an important site factor for the development of port-
                related activities.
            •   Geology may be important – proximity to mineral resources may lead to the
                development of mining; unstable ground may be unsuitable for urban development.
            •   Local climates, such as the direction of prevailing winds, may influence the location of
                polluting industrial activities.

            Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
            evaluation (AO3) of the statement in a way that examines interactions between different
            factors (such as physical, economic, and planning) at varying scales; eg different site factors
            in different places. Examination may also be made of the changing role of physical factors
            over varying time scales.

            For 5–6 marks, expect some weakly evidenced outlining of the influence of one or more
            physical factors on urban economic activities.

            For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account that includes:
            •   either an evidenced explanation of the influence of two or more physical factors in urban
                environments
            •   or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
                and perspectives.

            For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                   – 26 –             M21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


14.   (b)   Examine the management challenges in cities experiencing rapid population growth.           [10]

            Marks should be allocated according to the markbands

            In recent years there has been a dramatic growth of population in cities, especially in Asia
            and Africa, caused by a combination of rural–urban migration and high rates of natural
            increase. This rapid growth causes significant challenges to urban planners, especially in
            relatively poor areas of the world.

            Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
            •   Rapid population growth in large urban areas is causing significant challenges to urban
                planners, especially in Asia, Africa and Latin America.
            •   Challenges include provision of employment, housing, water supply, sanitation and
                health.
            •   Other challenges include reducing urban stress caused by traffic congestion, pollution
                and waste disposal.
            •   Urban planners need to devise strategies to manage the urban systems for a sustainable
                future, such as resilient city design, reducing the urban ecological footprint, and purpose-
                built settlements.

            Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
            evaluation (AO3) of the statement in a way that links the challenges to the scale of the city
            and growth (i.e., some worse than others); demographic processes of migration and natural
            increase mean management goals must keep changing. Different places/world regions may
            have different context-specific challenges.

            For 5–6 marks, expect some weakly evidenced outlining of one or more management
            challenges caused by rapid population growth in cities.

            For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account that includes:
            •   either an evidenced explanation of management challenges facing cities experiencing
                rapid population growth
            •   or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
                and perspectives.

            For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
