M21/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




                       Markscheme


                               May 2021



                           Psychology



                           Higher level



                               Paper 1




12 pages
                                            –2–                 M21/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2021

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2021

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2021

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                              –3–                  M21/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Section A markbands

 Marks                                       Level descriptor

   0     • The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

         • The response is of limited relevance to or only rephrases the question.
         • Knowledge and understanding is mostly inaccurate or not relevant to the question.
  1–3
         • The research supporting the response is mostly not relevant to the question and if
           relevant only listed.

         • The response is relevant to the question, but does not meet the command
           term requirements.
  4–6
         • Knowledge and understanding is accurate but limited.
         • The response is supported by appropriate research which is described.

         • The response is fully focused on the question and meets the command term
           requirements.
         • Knowledge and understanding is accurate and addresses the main topics/problems
  7–9
           identified in the question.
         • The response is supported by appropriate research which is described and explicitly
           linked to the question.
                                                  –4–                   M21/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


                                           Section A

Biological approach to understanding behaviour

1.   With reference to one study, outline the effect of one agonist or one antagonist on
     human behaviour.                                                                                  [9]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands when awarding marks.


     The command term “outline” requires candidates to give a brief account or summary of the effect of
     one agonist or one antagonist on human behaviour.

     An agonist is a molecule that can bind and activate a receptor to induce a biological reaction.
     Candidates may either use an example of an endogenous agonist, such as a neurotransmitter, or
     an exogenous agonist, such as a drug. Antagonists inhibit the activation of receptor sites.

     Relevant studies should demonstrate the effect of the chosen agonist or antagonist. Relevant
     research includes, but is not limited to:

     •   Rasmusson and Dadar (1979), Antonova et al (2011); Rogers and Kesner (2003) –
         scopolamine and its effects on spatial memory consolidation
     •   Martinez and Kesner (1991) – physostigmine as an ACh agonist in the consolidation of spatial
         memory
     •   Leyton (2013) – alcohol as a dopamine agonist and increased activity in the nucleus
         accumbens
     •   Guo et al (2014) – dopamine / Romach et al (1999) – dopamine antagonist
     •   Crockett et al (2010) – SSRIs as a serotonin agonist in the study of prosocial behaviour
     •   any study of an effect of a neurotransmitter on human behavior.


     If a candidate outlines the effect of one agonist or antagonist without reference to a relevant
     study, award up to a maximum of [5].

     If a candidate addresses a relevant study but does not outline the effect of one agonist or
     antagonist, award up to a maximum of [4].

     Animal research may be used to describe an effect of an agonist or antagonist, but the response
     must then be linked to human behaviour. If there is no explicit link to human behaviour, a
     maximum of [6] should be awarded.

     If a candidate outlines the effect of more than one agonist or antagonist, credit should be
     given only to the first agonist or antagonist.
                                                   –5–                    M21/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Cognitive approach to understanding behaviour

2.   Describe one study investigating how one bias in thinking and decision-making influences
     human behaviour.                                                                                     [9]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands when awarding marks.

     The command term “describe” requires candidates to give a detailed account of one study
     investigating biases in thinking and decision-making on human behaviour.

     Candidate responses should include information related to the aim, procedure, findings and
     conclusion(s) of the study. Information relevant to a description includes, but is not limited to:

        •   the aim of the study linked to a cognitive bias.
        •   a description of the research method used
        •   description of the design and identification of the IV and DV of an experiment.
        •   use of terminology to classify an observation (e.g. covert, participant, naturalistic) or an
            interview (structured, semi-structured, focus group)
        •   description of the use of triangulation in a case study
        •   identification of the sample that was used; however, precise sample sizes are not required
        •   controls used by the researcher
        •   materials used in the study
        •   the conclusions drawn from the findings with regard to a bias. Candidates do not need to
            state the statistical results.

     Relevant studies may include, but are not limited to:

        •   Anchoring bias: Englich and Mussweiler (2001), Tversky and Kahnemann (1974)
        •   Availability heuristic: Tversky and Kahneman (1973) – participants recalled more famous
            names than non-famous names as they were more readily 'available' in their memory.
        •   Confirmation bias: Chapman (1969), Stone (1997), Darley and Gross (1983), Wason
            (1960).
        •   Framing effect: Tversky and Kahnemann (1986)
        •   Halo effect: Dion et al (1972), Zebrowitz and McDonald (1991)
        •   Illusory correlation: Hamilton and Gifford (1976), Snyder and Schwann (1978),
        •   Matching bias: Wason (1968), Cox and Griggs (1982) – participants use the language
            of the rule to choose which cards to turn over.
        •   Representativeness heuristic: Tversky and Kahnemann (1973)

     If a candidate addresses one bias in thinking and decision-making but does not describe a
     study, award up to a maximum of [3].

     If a candidate describes more than one study, credit should be given only for the
     first description.
                                                   –6–                    M21/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Sociocultural approach to understanding behaviour

3.   Describe one study investigating enculturation.                                                      [9]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands when awarding marks.

     The command term “describe” requires candidates to give a detailed account of one study
     investigating enculturation.

     Candidate responses should include information related to the aim, procedure, findings and
     conclusion(s) of the study. Information relevant to a description includes, but is not limited to:

        •   the aim of the study linked to enculturation
        •   a description of the research method used
        •   description of the design and identification of the IV and DV of an experiment.
        •   use of terminology to classify an observation (e.g. covert, participant, naturalistic) or an
            interview (structured, semi-structured, focus group)
        •   description of the use of triangulation in a case study
        •   identification of the sample that was used; however, precise sample sizes are not required
        •   controls used by the researcher
        •   materials used in the study
        •   the conclusions drawn from the findings with regard to enculturation. Candidates do not
            need to state the statistical results

     Relevant studies may include, but are not limited to:

        •   Fagot et al (1974) and Sroufe et al. (1993) on enculturation of gender roles
        •   Odden and Rochat (2004) on enculturation of fishing, household chores and the
            hierarchical systerm in Samoa
        •   Greenfield (2006) on enculturation of weaving techniques
        •   Demorest et al (2008)—the influence of enculturation on musical memory
        •   Kim and Omizo (2006)—enculturation, acculturation and identity
        •   Keller et al (2008) Verbal interaction of German and Cameroonian mothers with their
            infants

     If a candidate addresses enculturation but does not describe a relevant study, award up to a
     maximum of [4].

     If a candidate describes more than one study, credit should be given only to the first study.
                                                  –7–                  M21/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Section B assessment criteria

A — Focus on the question

To understand the requirements of the question students must identify the problem or issue
being raised by the question. Students may simply identify the problem by restating the
question or breaking down the question. Students who go beyond this by explaining the
problem are showing that they understand the issues or problems.

 Marks    Level descriptor


    0     Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.


    1     Identifies the problem/issue raised in the question.


    2     Explains the problem/issue raised in the question.


B — Knowledge and understanding

This criterion rewards students for demonstrating their knowledge and understanding of
specific areas of psychology. It is important to credit relevant knowledge and understanding
that is targeted at addressing the question and explained in sufficient detail.

 Marks                                          Level descriptor


    0    Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.


   1–2   The response demonstrates limited relevant knowledge and understanding.
         Psychological terminology is used but with errors that hamper understanding.

   3–4   The response demonstrates relevant knowledge and understanding but lacks detail.
         Psychological terminology is used but with errors that do not hamper understanding.

   5–6   The response demonstrates relevant, detailed knowledge and understanding.
         Psychological terminology is used appropriately
                                                   –8–                   M21/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


C — Use of research to support answer

Psychology is evidence based so it is expected that students will use their knowledge of research to
support their argument. There is no prescription as to which or how many pieces of research are
appropriate for their response. As such it becomes important that the research selected is relevant
and useful in supporting the response. One piece of research that makes the points relevant to the
answer is better than several pieces that repeat the same point over and over.

 Marks Level descriptor


    0     Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.


   1–2    Limited relevant psychological research is used in the response. Research selected serves to
          repeat points already made.

   3–4    Relevant psychological research is used in support of the response, and is partly explained.
          Research selected partially develops the argument.

   5–6    Relevant psychological research is used in support of the response and is thoroughly
          explained. Research selected is effectively used to develop the argument.

D — Critical thinking

This criterion credits students who demonstrate an inquiring and reflective attitude to their
understanding of psychology. There are a number of areas where students may demonstrate critical
thinking about the knowledge and understanding used in their responses and the research used to
support that knowledge and understanding.

The areas of critical thinking are:
• research design and methodologies
• triangulation
• assumptions and biases
• contradictory evidence or alternative theories or explanations
• areas of uncertainty.

These areas are not hierarchical and not all areas will be relevant in a response. In addition, students
could demonstrate a very limited critique of methodologies, for example, and a well-developed
evaluation of areas of uncertainty in the same response. As a result, a holistic judgement of their
achievement in this criterion should be made when awarding marks.
                                                  –9–                   M21/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




 Marks Level descriptor


    0    Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.


   1–2   There is limited critical thinking and the response is mainly descriptive. Evaluation or
         discussion, if present, is superficial.

   3–4   The response contains critical thinking, but lacks development. Evaluation or discussion of
         most relevant areas is attempted but is not developed.

   5–6   The response consistently demonstrates well developed critical thinking. Evaluation
         and/or discussion of relevant areas is consistently well developed.

E — Clarity and organisation

This criterion credits students for presenting their response in a clear and organized manner. A good
response would require no re-reading to understand the points made or the train of thought
underpinning the argument.

 Marks Level descriptor


    0    Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.


    1    The answer demonstrates some organization and clarity, but this is not sustained throughout
         the response.

    2    The answer demonstrates organization and clarity throughout the response.
                                                      – 10 –             M21/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


                                                  Section B

4.   Evaluate one or more research methods used when investigating the relationship between
     the brain and behaviour.  [22]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “evaluate” requires candidates to make an appraisal by weighing up the
     strengths and limitations of one or more research methods used when investigating the
     relationship between the brain and behaviour. Although a discussion of both strengths and
     limitations is required, it does not have to be evenly balanced to gain high marks.

     Behaviour may include cognitive processes.

     Research methods used when investigating the brain and behaviour include, but are not limited to:

     • true experiments (Crockett et al., 2015; Draganski et al., 2003; Antonova, 2011)
     • quasi experiments (Maguire, 2000; Sharot, 2007)
     • case studies (HM, Milner, 1966; Tierney et al., 2001)

     As part of their response, candidates may address results of studies that use technologies
     (eg MRI, fMRI, PET); however, the focus of the evaluation must be on the chosen research
     method(s).

     Evaluation may include, but is not limited to:

     • the ability to determine causality
     • the ability to replicate the research and establish reliability
     • ecological validity
     • ethical considerations in the use of deception
     • holistic vs reductionist approaches to the study of behaviour
     • internal validity – the ability to control for extraneous variables through double-blind
       techniques, random allocation, placebo groups
     • potential generalizability of findings

     If the candidate addresses only strengths or only limitations, the response should be awarded up to
     a maximum of [3] for criterion D: critical thinking.
                                                   – 11 –              M21/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


5.   Discuss schema theory in relation to cognitive processing. [22]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” asks candidates to offer a considered review of how schema
     theory contributes to an understanding of cognitive processing.

     Psychological studies investigating schema theory include but are not limited to:

     • Anderson and Pichert’s (1978) study on the effect of schema processing on memory
       encoding and retrieval
     • Bartlett’s (1932) schema processing as part of reconstructive memory
     • Loftus and Palmer’s (1974) study on reconstructive memory
     • Brewer and Treyens’s (1981) study on the role of office schemas on recall
     • Bransford and Johnson’s (1972) study on contextual conditions for encoding and recall.

     Critical discussion points may include, but are not limited to:

     • applications of schema theory – for example, CBT. It is a robust theory that has many
       applications across many fields of psychology.
     • implications of the findings in our understanding of cognitive processing
     • the inability to observe schema: Cohen (1993) argued that the concept of schema is too
       vague and hypothetical to be useful
     • methodological considerations.
                                                   – 12 –                M21/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


6.   To what extent does globalization influence behaviour?       [22]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term "to what extent" requires candidates to consider the influence of
     globalization on human behaviour.

     Behaviour in this instance may include attitudes, identities or any other accepted behaviour.

     Relevant research may include, but is not limited to:

     • Adams (2003) on cultural values in the USA and Canada converging over time
     • Buchan et al. (2009) on globalization and cooperation
     • Gupta’s (2011) research on the effect of globalization in consumer behaviour
     • Jensen, Arnett and McKenzie’s (2011) research on globalization and cultural identity, which
       explains that globalization has fostered the occurrence of a new period of life, emerging
       adulthood, related to issues of identity
     • Ogihara and Uchida (2014) on the effects of globalization on subjective well-being
     • Norasakkunkit and Uchida (2014); Becker et al. (2002) on the effects of globalization on mental
       health.

     Candidates may discuss acculturation to the global culture or the role of contact with other cultures
     as a means of changing local culture; however, it is not relevant to discuss acculturation research
     based on immigrants moving to a new culture and the level to which one assimilates to the culture
     of a new country.

     To address the “to what extent” command term, appropriate strategies may include, but are not
     limited to:

     •   methodological difficulties in measuring and testing the effect of globalization.
     •   the inability to establish a cause and effect relationship
     •   studies of the effects of globalization are relatively recent and often have not been replicated
     •   the difficulty of generalizing the findings of globalization research
     •   the reliance on self-reported data is open to demand characteristics.
