M21/3/SOCAN/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                       Markscheme


                               May 2021


           Social and cultural anthropology


                         Standard level


                               Paper 1




14 pages
                                            –2–                 M21/3/SOCAN/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2021

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2021

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2021

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                     –3–                 M21/3/SOCAN/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The following interpretation of the markscheme is offered as an example of the types of responses we
may expect, however it is not prescriptive or exhaustive, and other possible answers should be
appropriately rewarded if relevant.

1.     Define the term structure and describe how it can be understood and applied in the
       context of the passage.                                                                              [4]

       This question requires candidates to demonstrate conceptual knowledge and
       understanding of the term “structure” and apply it in relation to the text.

       Candidates may write in terms of any of the following outlined guidance, but other
       definitions or applications will also be acceptable if made relevant to the context of the
       passage.


 Marks          Level descriptor                 What you might expect to see in a response
 awarded
                The work does not reach a
 0              standard described by the
                descriptors below.
                                                 Candidates will be expected to provide any
                                                 conceptualization along the lines of “structure” as a term
                                                 used by anthropologists –and other social scientists– to
                                                 make sense of a system or organization, derived from
                                                 social institutions and social relations existing in a
                                                 society.
                                                 Another possible way of defining the term is with
                                                 reference to the coercive conditions and contexts that are
                The response demonstrates
                                                 beyond the control of the individual or the group. It refers
                a basic knowledge and
                                                 to the multiple elements that individuals or groups
                understanding of the
                                                 perceive as being fixed or overpowering.
                concept.
 1–2
                                                 Other appropriate definitions should be rewarded.
                There is a partial application
                of the concept in relation to
                                                 An example of application:
                the text.                        Some candidates may refer to the miners as having a
                                                 disadvantaged position in this socio-economic structure,
                                                 which works at a global scale, and/or make reference to
                                                 Africa’s position in the world economic and social
                                                 structure.

                                                 Other appropriate examples should be rewarded.
                                       –4–                M21/3/SOCAN/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



                                   More sophisticated or complex definitions of the concept
                                   are expected at this level.
                                   Examples of application may include:
                                   There are several examples from the text that can be
                                   used to show how the concept of structure can be applied
                                   in this context. For example:
                                   • The experience of the miners in terms of their social
                                       and economic position in the world economic
                                       structure;
                                   • The author’s reference to capitalism as a system or
                                     structure;
      The response demonstrates    • The unequal nature of the structure;
      sound knowledge and
      understanding of the         • The hierarchy and division of labour;
      concept: the concept is      • That the social organization is imposed on the workers
      described in detail.           and determines what actions they can and cannot
3–4
                                     take.
      The concept is clearly
      applied in relation to the
                                   Other appropriate examples should be rewarded.
      text.
      .
                                   By detailed explanation we expect that some candidates
                                   may show understanding of how this term is used by:
                                   • Discussing how structure manifests itself
                                     simultaneously in multiple layers or modes;
                                   • Relating it to the concept of agency;
                                   • Relating it to different theoretical approaches;
                                   • Relating to the contestable nature of the concept itself;
                                   • Relating to how the concept has changed with the
                                     development of the discipline.
                                   Other appropriate explanations should be rewarded.
                                                     –5–                M21/3/SOCAN/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.     Analyse the ethnographic data presented in the passage using the concept of
       materiality.                                                                                       [6]

       This question requires candidates to develop an analysis and explanation of this
       ethnographic text using the key concept of materiality to help make sense of the
       ethnographic data. In order to do this, candidates are required to demonstrate an
       understanding of the key concept and use it to illuminate certain issues within the
       context of the passage, supporting their analyses by making reference to the
       ethnographic data of the extract.

       Candidates may write in terms of any of the following outlined guidance, but other
       definitions or applications will also be acceptable if made relevant to the context of the
       passage.

 Marks        Level descriptor                       What we might expect to see in a response
 awarded
    0         The work does not reach a
              standard described by the
              descriptors below.
 1–2          The response offers a common-          A superficial understanding of the concept will make
              sense or superficial understanding     reference to objects being studied by anthropologists.
              of the key concept.                    The connection between objects and meaning may
                                                     not be made.
              There is an attempt to relate the
              key concept to the text, and some
              ethnographic examples are              Application at this level may include:
              presented but these are only           • An awareness of the centrality of coltan as a
              partially relevant.                      mineral that is fundamental to the production of
                                                       digital products;
                                                     • That coltan is embedded within an economic and
                                                       social system;
                                                     • That coltan has a global dimension.

                                                     Other possible examples should be rewarded.
                                           –6–                M21/3/SOCAN/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3–4   The response demonstrates an         At this level an understanding of the key concept of
      understanding of the key concept     materiality may display any of these aspects:
      and establishes its relevance to     • It relates to the sensory dimension of social life,
      the text.                               especially in reference to objects; and/or that it
                                              can be used to refer to sensory experiences;
      There is an analysis of the text     • That these objects or sensory experiences have
      using the key concept, although        cultural meaning;
      there are some inconsistencies.
                                           • That they are embedded in all kinds of social
      Relevant ethnographic examples         relations and practices.
      from the text are presented to
      support the analysis.                At this level, candidates may also show awareness
                                           that some anthropologists seek to understand human
                                           experience through the study of material objects as a
                                           research approach.

                                           Application at this level may include mention of:
                                           • the ethnographic approach to the analysis of
                                             capitalism by tracking the commodity chain;
                                           • the ethnographer’s focus on the physical
                                             conditions of workers;
                                           • the demand for digital products by consumers,
                                             such as cell phones and PlayStation and its
                                             relation to the subordinated position of African
                                             miners.

                                           Other possible examples should be rewarded.
5–6   The response demonstrates a          As above, but a more developed or sophisticated
      clear understanding of the key       conceptualization and more detailed or in-depth
      concept, explaining this in the      interpretation of the examples. Any of the examples
      context of the text.                 noted may be applied to support the analysis made
                                           by the candidate.
      There is a clearly explained
      analysis of the text using the key   At this level responses may also take into account
      concept and a detailed               that the concept of materiality:
      interpretation of the ethnographic
      data.                                   •   is almost always linked to a non-
                                                  material/symbolic dimension, for which
      Clear and explicit ethnographic             material objects or sensory experiences are
      examples from the text support              given meaning and function within a set of
      the analysis.                               social practices;
                                              •   can also be a trigger for social conflict, in
                                                  relation to access to objects and resources;
                                              •   objects or resources can operate as
                                                  substitutes for the social relations they
                                                  mediate;
                                              •   is discussed with reference to different
                                                  approaches to the concept itself.
–7–               M21/3/SOCAN/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Application at this level may include mention of:
  • The consequential complex set of social
      relations that have emerged to secure access
      and availability of the mineral in the hands of
      consumers, and whom are mostly unaware of
      such interconnection;
  • By focusing on materiality instead of only the
      social relations themselves, the ethnographer
      is able to keep attention on the degree of
      physical suffering, unhealthy and physically
      dangerous conditions that workers are
      subjected to;
  • That consumers in other parts of the world
      can lead physically more comfortable and
      indulgent lives, unaware of how their taste for
      digital products is a direct cause of physical
      pain and suffering for populations in other
      parts of the world;
  • It is also possible that responses at this level
      may discuss the symbolic dimensions of
      materiality referred to in the text.

Other possible examples should be rewarded.
                                                    –8–                 M21/3/SOCAN/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.     Compare and contrast the way in which the key concept of symbolism or power is
       evident in this passage with how it is evident in one other ethnographic example you
       have studied.                                                                                   [10]

       This passage focuses on social, economic and political inequalities in relation to
       capitalist labour practices. By approaching the analysis of global capitalism through the
       social flow of a certain mineral in the global commodity chain, the anthropologist will
       explore how miners in Eastern Congo finds ways of expressing and making sense of
       these exploitative conditions and understand their own living conditions. Candidates
       are expected to show an ability to think about the text in relation to other contexts and
       to draw explicit comparisons. Either of the key concepts chosen on which such
       comparison may be drawn should be made explicit and clearly linked to any
       anthropological issues raised by the text. Candidates must situate the comparative
       case in terms of place, author and historical context. The discussion should be
       supported with reference to concepts.

       The target societies for this comparative question are varied and many. Candidates are
       expected to show an ability to think about the text in relation to other contexts and draw
       explicit comparisons. In order to do this, responses must demonstrate an
       understanding of how either the key concept of symbolism or power relates to this
       ethnographic context. They should be able to establish a relevant comparison with any
       other group or society based on any of these concepts. The response should be
       structured as a comparison, highlighting similarities and differences.

       Candidates may write in terms of any of the following outline guidance, but other
       definitions or applications will also be acceptable if made relevant to the context of the
       passage.


 Marks        Level descriptor                 What you might expect to see in a response
 awarded
 0            The work does not reach a
              standard described by the
              descriptors below.
 1–2          Comparative ethnography or       At a superficial level, the response should be focused on
              approaches are presented         either symbolism or power. There may be an attempt to
              but in limited detail;           define either concept. There is/are example(s) from the
              relevance is only partially      text and from other ethnographic material although their
              established.                     relevance to the question is limited and not presented as a
                                               comparison.
              The response is not
              structured as a compare
              and contrast.

              The identification of
              ethnographic material is
              missing.
                                             –9–                  M21/3/SOCAN/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3–4   Comparative ethnography or         The response focuses on either symbolism or power.
      approaches are presented
      and although this is in            An attempt at defining either of these is made and may
      limited detail, its relevance is   include mention of:
      established.                       For symbolism
                                         • That it refers to the meaning or value that people attach
      The response is structured            to objects, processes or relationships.
      as a compare and contrast,
      but this is not balanced and       For power
      lacks detail.                      • An essential feature of social relations
      The identification of              • Control of groups and resources
      ethnographic material is           • Inequality
      partially complete.
                                         • A capacity to impose one's will over others
                                         • Linked to structural or symbolic power/violence

                                         Examples from the text may include:
                                         For symbolism
                                         • Metaphors which the informants use to understand and
                                           to explain to the ethnographer their position in the world
                                           and in the social system. For example: "being in the
                                           dark" “being in a hole”, “being like a snake”, “being like
                                           a machine”, equating the mine to home, or others;
                                         • The adoption of nicknames;
                                         • The replication of the division of labour and titles used
                                           in colonial times.

                                         For power
                                         • The experiences and working conditions of the group;
                                         • The exploitation/alienation/commodification of the
                                           workers;
                                         • The loss of land and resources;
                                         • The lack of agency;
                                         • The hierarchical structure and organization of the
                                           mines;
                                         • The armies forcing them to work.
                                          – 10 –               M21/3/SOCAN/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


5–6   Comparative ethnography or      As above but including a more comprehensive discussion
      approaches are presented;       and structured as a comparison. Examples and
      relevance is established and    conceptualization will be more detailed and balanced in
      explained.                      terms of references to the text and another ethnography
                                      they have studied.
      The response is clearly
      structured as a compare and
      contrast; however, either
      comparison (similarities) or
      contrasts (differences) are
      explained in detail, but not
      both.
      The identification of
      ethnographic material is
      mostly complete.
7–8   Comparative ethnography or      At this level we expect further conceptual discussion and
      approaches are presented;       detailed analysis of examples.
      relevance is clearly
      established and explained in    Candidates who analyse and discuss the ethnographic
      detail.                         data through the lens of symbolism will likely focus on

      The response is clearly         examples that explore the significance that miners attach
      structured as a compare and     to their experience. For example:
      contrast with comparisons       • "being in the dark" as a reference to their underground
      (similarities) and contrasts        working conditions, connecting this to the miners'
      (differences) being                 ignorance about social forces;
      discussed in detail, although
                                      • "being in a hole" as a reference to their constricted and
      this is not balanced.
                                          limited agency; structural working conditions; that they
                                          occupy the lowest position in the social system;
      The response demonstrates
                                      • the metaphor of the "snake" as a reference to the
      anthropological
                                          flexibility and adaptability required of the workers;
      understanding.
                                      • The smoke metaphor which humanizes their working
      The identification of               conditions by comparing it to home;
      ethnographic is mostly          • The machine metaphor as a reference to their
      complete.                           acceptance of the dehumanization and mechanization
                                          of their labour and their assimilation to inanimate
                                          machinery; or as a reference to masculinity;
                                      • The workers who appropriate the nicknames of
                                          celebrities trying to assimilate; themselves to imaginary
                                          characters that represent masculinity (Chuck Norris,
                                          Rambo) or quick wealth achieved from non-hard work
                                          activities, such as creating music (Snoop Dogg, P
                                          Diddy);
                                      • Belgian factory-mining era symbols used by the miners
                                          to organize their labour.

                                      Candidates who analyse and discuss the ethnographic
                                      data through the lens of power will likely focus on
                                      examples that explore the experiences and working
                                      conditions of this group, within the context of an analysis of
                                      global inequalities in the capitalist economy. In addition to
                                            – 11 –               M21/3/SOCAN/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                        the examples provided before, at this level candidates may
                                        also discuss the following:

                                        • the concept of ideology linked to the analysis of the
                                          global ideoscapes, or the modern narratives that hide
                                          the material conditions of existence of the digital age;
                                        • linking power to knowledge (Foucauldian approaches)
                                          and the mystification related to the miners’ knowledge
                                          about this mineral;
                                        • concept of hegemony linked to global narratives;
                                        • the belief that their bodies are more resilient to stress
                                          and danger as a strategy of resistance;
                                        • the use of nicknames as a strategy of resistance.

Capped   If fieldwork location(s),
marks    fieldwork context, group(s)
         studied and ethnographer(s)
         have not been fully
         identified, no more than 8
         marks will be awarded.
9–10     Comparative ethnography or At this level, as above, but comparisons are more
         approaches are presented;    balanced, and more critical discussion. Overall general
         relevance is clearly         quality is more sophisticated.
         established and discussed in
         detail.

         The response is clearly
         structured as a compare and
         contrast with comparisons
         (similarities) and contrasts
         (differences) discussed
         critically.

         The response demonstrates
         anthropological
         understanding.

         The identification of
         ethnographic material is
         complete.
                                                      – 12 –             M21/3/SOCAN/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.     Compare and contrast the approaches to research adopted by the anthropologist in
       this passage to the approaches to research used by one other anthropologist you have
       studied. Make reference to concepts and ethnographic material in your answer.                       [10]

       While in the previous question the stress of the comparison needs to be drawn on the
       key concepts which would help to frame the responses; here candidates are expected
       to show an ability to think about the text with emphasis on the methodological and
       theoretical perspectives of the anthropologists as the main principle on which such
       comparisons should be established.

       By "approaches to research" the question essentially refers to the research methods
       used by the anthropologist to gather data.

 Marks             Level descriptor                   What you might expect to see in a response
 awarded
 0                 The work does not reach a
                   standard described by the
                   descriptors below.
 1–2               Comparative ethnography or         At a superficial level, the response should be
                   approaches are presented           focused on the approaches taken by the
                   but in limited detail;             ethnographer. There may not be an attempt to define
                   relevance is only partially        the methods, but they will be mentioned (e.g.,
                   established.                       fieldwork, participant-observation). There is/are
                                                      example(s) from the text and from other
                   The response is not                ethnographic material although their relevance to the
                   structured as a compare            question is limited and not presented as a
                   and contrast.                      comparison.

                   The identification of
                   ethnographic material is
                   missing.
 3–4               Comparative ethnography or         At this level candidates will likely present descriptions
                   approaches are presented           of the methods. Examples of methods candidates may
                   and although this is in            mention are:
                   limited detail, its relevance is
                   established.                           •    Participant-observation: the ethnographer
                                                               drinking beer with the informants; mentioning
                   The response is structured                  the nicknames; mentioning the Belgian
                   as a compare and contrast,                  colonial job titles; detailed observation
                   but this is not balanced and                descriptions;
                   lacks detail.                          •    Informal interview: quotes from the
                                                               informants' narratives.
                   The identification of
                   ethnographic material is           At this level candidates may also make mention of
                   partially complete.                other relevant methodological terms, though possibly
                                                      not developing this. For example:
                                                          • qualitative methods;
                                                          • life-history;
                                                          • insider/outsider;
                                                          • local categories/analytical categories;
                                                          • positionality;
                                                          • representation.
                                      – 13 –            M21/3/SOCAN/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                      Candidates may also highlight ethical strategies, such
                                      as:
                                          • not mentioning real names;
                                          • considering informants as friends.

5–6   Comparative ethnography or      As above but including a more comprehensive
      approaches are presented;       methodological discussion supported by relevant
      relevance is established and    evidence from the text and structured as a
      explained.                      comparison. Examples and conceptualization will be
                                      more detailed and balanced in terms of references to
      The response is clearly         the text and another ethnography they have studied.
      structured as a compare and
      contrast; however, either
      comparison (similarities) or
      contrasts (differences) are
      explained in detail, but not
      both.
      The identification of
      ethnographic material is
      mostly complete.
7–8   Comparative ethnography or      At this level we expect further conceptual discussion
      approaches are presented;       on methodological approaches and detailed analysis
      relevance is clearly            of examples.
      established and explained in
      detail.                         An example of a more detailed methodological
                                      discussion could include references to:
      The response is clearly             • differences between qualitative and
      structured as a compare and            quantitative methods in relation to the aims of
      contrast with comparisons              the research. For instance, the
      (similarities) and contrasts           ethnographer's interest in the life experiences
      (differences) being                    of the miners;
      discussed in detail, although       • use of oral narratives and observation
      this is not balanced.                  focused around the core research goals;
                                          • the advantages of informal ethnographic
      The response demonstrates              interviews as opposed to formal interviews (or
      anthropological                        other similar contrasts);
      understanding.                      • discussion of issues of representation. For
                                             example, considering informants as friends,
      The identification of                  use of their nicknames to identify them;
      ethnographic is mostly              • discussion of local categories/analytical
      complete.                              categories, and the lens of theoretical
                                             perspective. For example, Geertz and "thick
                                             description", or others;
                                          • a historical approach, evidenced in the
                                             reference to the colonial past;
                                          • ethical issues.
                                              – 14 –           M21/3/SOCAN/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Capped marks   If fieldwork location(s),
               fieldwork context, group(s)
               studied and ethnographer(s)
               have not been fully
               identified, no more than 8
               marks will be awarded.
9–10           Comparative ethnography or     At this level, as above, but comparisons are more
               approaches are presented;      balanced, and there is more critical discussion.
               relevance is clearly           Overall, the general quality is more sophisticated.
               established and discussed in
               detail.

               The response is clearly
               structured as a compare and
               contrast with comparisons
               (similarities) and contrasts
               (differences) discussed
               critically.

               The response demonstrates
               anthropological
               understanding.

               The identification of
               ethnographic material is
               complete.
