M18/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                    May / Mai / Mayo 2018


              English / Anglais / Inglés
        A: literature / littérature / literatura


                         Standard level
                         Niveau moyen
                          Nivel medio

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




5 pages/páginas
                              –2–           M18/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use
of examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Global Centre, Cardiff.



Ces remarques pour la notation sont confidentielles. Leur
usage est réservé exclusivement aux examinateurs participant
à cette session.

Ces remarques sont la propriété du Baccalauréat International.
Toute reproduction ou distribution à de tierces personnes sans
l’autorisation préalable du centre mondial de l’IB à Cardiff
est interdite.



Estas notas para la corrección son confidenciales y para el uso
exclusivo de los examinadores en esta convocatoria de
exámenes.

Son propiedad del Bachillerato Internacional y no deben
reproducirse ni distribuirse a ninguna otra persona sin la
autorización del centro global del IB en Cardiff.
                                               –3–              M18/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


The following are the annotations available to use when marking responses.

                                                                                Associated
        Annotation                          Explanation
                                                                                 shortcut

                         Caret – indicates omission.

                         Incorrect point – indicates factual inaccuracies or
                         misinterpretations.

                         Ellipse that can be expanded.

                         Horizontal wavy line that can be expanded –
                         indicates language errors / incoherence.

                         Highlight tool that can be expanded.

                         On page comment – justifies application of
                         assessment criteria.

                         Unclear content or language.

                         SEEN - every scanned page must be annotated
                         or marked as SEEN.

                         Good Response/Good Point.

                         Vertical wavy line that can be expanded –
                         indicates irrelevance / going off the point.

You must make sure you have looked at all pages. Please put the           annotation on any blank
page, to indicate that you have seen it.

When using the On page comment annotation, please keep the following in mind:
  • Avoid covering the candidate’s own writing. This can be done by writing your comments in
    the margins then running the arrow attached to the “On page comment” annotation to the
    appropriate place.
  • Provide all comments in the target language.
  • You may provide summative comments at the end of the script, but please do NOT record
    numerical marks on the scripts.
                                                –4–             M18/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


General marking instructions

 These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking. They are not
 offered as an exhaustive and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must
 rigidly adhere.
 Good ideas or angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate.
 Similarly, answers which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here should be
 rewarded appropriately.

 Of course, some of the points listed will appear in weaker papers, but are unlikely to be
 developed.


Instructions générales pour la notation

 Ces remarques sont de simples lignes directrices destinées à aider les examinateurs lors de la
 notation. Elles ne peuvent en aucun cas être considérées comme un ensemble fixe et exhaustif
 de réponses ou d’approches de notation auxquelles les réponses doivent strictement
 correspondre.
 Les idées ou angles valables qui n’ont pas été proposés ici doivent être reconnus et
 récompensés de manière appropriée.
 De même, les réponses qui ne comprennent pas toutes les idées ou approches mentionnées ici
 doivent être récompensées de manière appropriée.

 Naturellement, certains des points mentionnés apparaîtront dans les épreuves les moins bonnes
 mais n’y seront probablement pas développés.


Instrucciones generales para la corrección

 El objetivo de estas notas para los examinadores es servir de directrices para ayudar en la
 corrección. Por lo tanto, no deben considerarse una colección fija y exhaustiva de respuestas y
 enfoques por la que deban regirse estrictamente todas las respuestas.
 Los buenos enfoques e ideas que no se mencionen en las notas para la corrección deben recibir
 el reconocimiento y la valoración que les corresponda.
 De igual manera, las respuestas que no incluyan todas las ideas o los enfoques que se sugieren
 en las notas deben valorarse en su justa medida.

 Por supuesto, algunos de los puntos que se incluyen en las notas aparecerán en exámenes
 más flojos, pero probablemente no se habrán desarrollado.
                                               –5–              M18/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


1.   An adequate to good guided literary analysis will:
     • offer some understanding of each of the characters
     • discuss the relationship between the characters
     • comment on the use of dialogue, action and description
     • show some awareness of the ways in which tension is created in the passage.

     A very good to excellent guided literary analysis may also:
     • show a more sophisticated understanding of the presentation of each of the characters
     • explore in greater depth the subtleties of the relationships between the characters, for
        example, in terms of control, strength and vulnerability
     • discuss in greater detail the use of dialogue, action, description, for example, details of
        setting and what they suggest
     • provide a more complete overview of the build-up of tension
     • recognize a possible allusion to a fairy tale.


2.   An adequate to good guided literary analysis will:
     • identify the roles played by the participants in the experience
     • show some awareness of the speaker’s presentation of the elephant
     • comment on the incident concerning payment
     • identify some of the sources of pleasure throughout the experience
     • show some awareness of the use of stylistic devices.

     A very good to excellent guided literary analysis may also:
     • explore in greater detail the roles played by the participants
     • offer a more comprehensive view of the entire experience
     • comment in greater depth on stylistic devices, including structure, imagery, tone, sensory
        appeal
     • show a more sophisticated awareness of the presentation of the experience
     • comment on the shift in mood in lines 26–38.
