M18/1/AXENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                  May / Mai / Mayo de 2018


              English / Anglais / Inglés
        A: literature / littérature / literatura


                        Higher level
                      Niveau supérieur
                       Nivel superior

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




5 pages/páginas
                        –2–                 M18/1/AXENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use
of examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Global Centre, Cardiff.



Ces remarques pour la notation sont confidentielles. Leur
usage est réservé exclusivement aux examinateurs participant
à cette session.

Ces remarques sont la propriété du Baccalauréat International.
Toute reproduction ou distribution à de tierces personnes sans
l’autorisation préalable du centre mondial de l’IB à Cardiff
est interdite.



Estas notas para la corrección son confidenciales y para el uso
exclusivo de los examinadores en esta convocatoria de
exámenes.

Son propiedad del Bachillerato Internacional y no deben
reproducirse ni distribuirse a ninguna otra persona sin la
autorización del centro global del IB en Cardiff.
                                       –3–                     M18/1/AXENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


The following are the annotations available to use when marking responses.

                                                                                Associated
        Annotation                          Explanation
                                                                                 shortcut

                        Caret – indicates omission.

                        Incorrect point – indicates factual inaccuracies or
                        misinterpretations.

                        Ellipse that can be expanded.

                        Horizontal wavy line that can be expanded –
                        indicates language errors / incoherence.

                        Highlight tool that can be expanded.

                        On page comment – justifies application of
                        assessment criteria.

                        Unclear content or language.

                        SEEN - every scanned page must be annotated or
                        marked as SEEN.

                        Good Response/Good Point.

                        Vertical wavy line that can be expanded –
                        indicates irrelevance / going off the point.


You must make sure you have looked at all pages. Please put the           annotation on any blank
page, to indicate that you have seen it.

When using the On page comment annotation, please keep the following in mind:
  • Avoid covering the candidate’s own writing. This can be done by writing your comments in
    the margins then running the arrow attached to the “On page comment” annotation to the
    appropriate place.
  • Provide all comments in the target language.
  • You may provide summative comments at the end of the script, but please do NOT record
    numerical marks on the scripts.
                                        –4–                    M18/1/AXENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


General marking instructions

These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking. They are not
offered as an exhaustive and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must
rigidly adhere.
Good ideas or angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate.
Similarly, answers which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here should be
rewarded appropriately.

Of course, some of the points listed will appear in weaker papers, but are unlikely to be
developed.


Instructions générales pour la notation

Ces remarques sont de simples lignes directrices destinées à aider les examinateurs lors de la
notation. Elles ne peuvent en aucun cas être considérées comme un ensemble fixe et exhaustif
de réponses ou d’approches de notation auxquelles les réponses doivent strictement
correspondre.
Les idées ou angles valables qui n’ont pas été proposés ici doivent être reconnus et
récompensés de manière appropriée.
De même, les réponses qui ne comprennent pas toutes les idées ou approches mentionnées ici
doivent être récompensées de manière appropriée.

Naturellement, certains des points mentionnés apparaîtront dans les épreuves les moins bonnes
mais n’y seront probablement pas développés.


Instrucciones generales para la corrección

 El objetivo de estas notas para los examinadores es servir de directrices para ayudar en la
 corrección. Por lo tanto, no deben considerarse una colección fija y exhaustiva de respuestas y
 enfoques por la que deban regirse estrictamente todas las respuestas.
 Los buenos enfoques e ideas que no se mencionen en las notas para la corrección deben recibir
 el reconocimiento y la valoración que les corresponda.
 De igual manera, las respuestas que no incluyan todas las ideas o los enfoques que se sugieren
 en las notas deben valorarse en su justa medida.

Por supuesto, algunos de los puntos que se incluyen en las notas aparecerán en exámenes más
flojos, pero probablemente no se habrán desarrollado.
                                        –5–                     M18/1/AXENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


1.   An adequate to good literary commentary will:
     • identify the situation, the mood of the passage, and the state of mind of the young man
     • comment on the use of some stylistic devices, e.g. diction, imagery, contrast
     • offer some understanding of the creation of tension
     • comment on the ways that setting is used.

     A very good to excellent literary commentary may also:
     • consider in more detail the shifts in the young man’s mind, for example, the interplay
        between imagination and reality
     • explore stylistic devices in greater breadth and depth, e.g. ambiguity, symbolism, narrative
        voice, contrast (light/dark, danger/safety, sociability/isolation) and interplays (fear/guilt,
        reprieve/relief)
     • discuss the ways in which tension is built up and then reduced
     • comment in greater depth on the impact of setting.


2.   An adequate to good literary commentary will
     • identify what is meant by “banished gods”
     • discuss the ways in which nature/settings are portrayed in the poem
     • comment on literary features, for example, structure, imagery, rhyme
     • comment on the final stanza.

     A very good to excellent literary commentary may also:
     • examine in more detail the significance of “banished gods”
     • explore in more details and depth the presentation of locations in the poem (forest
        clearing, seas, moor)
     • discuss in greater detail the literary features
     • show an awareness of the elegiac nature of the poem
     • offer a more developed analysis of the impact of the final stanza.
