M18/1/AYENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX




English A: language and literature – Standard level – Paper 2
Anglais A : langue et littérature – Niveau moyen – Épreuve 2
Inglés A: lengua y literatura – Nivel medio – Prueba 2

Tuesday 8 May 2018 (morning)
Mardi 8 mai 2018 (matin)
Martes 8 de mayo de 2018 (mañana)

1 hour 30 minutes / 1 heure 30 minutes / 1 hora 30 minutos


Instructions to candidates
• Do not turn over this examination paper until instructed to do so.
• Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on both of the part 3 works you
  have studied.
• You are not permitted to bring copies of the works you have studied into the examination room.
• The maximum mark for this examination paper is [25 marks].

Instructions destinées aux candidats
• Ne retournez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
• Traitez un seul sujet de composition. Vous devez baser votre réponse sur les deux œuvres de
  la troisième partie que vous avez étudiées.
• Vous n’êtes pas autorisé(e) à apporter des exemplaires des œuvres que vous avez étudiées
  dans la salle d’examen.
• Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est de [25 points].

Instrucciones para los alumnos
• No dé la vuelta al examen hasta que se lo autoricen.
• Conteste una sola pregunta de redacción. Base su respuesta en las dos obras estudiadas de
  la parte 3.
• No está permitido traer copias de las obras estudiadas a la sala de examen.
• La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [25 puntos].




                                                                                              2218 – 2016
     2 pages/páginas                                      © International Baccalaureate Organization 2018
                                                –2–                 M18/1/AYENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on both of the part 3 works you have
studied. Answers which are not based on a discussion of both part 3 works will not score high marks.
Your answer should address the ways in which language and context contribute to your reading of each
work.

1.   In what ways do the two works you have studied (in form and/or content) question or subvert
     norms, conventions or traditions?


2.   Explore how women are represented as stronger than men in the two works you have studied.


3.   How do the two works you have studied show that good can come out of destruction or violence?


4.   How and to what effect are strangers or strangeness represented in the two works you have
     studied?


5.   Discuss how one or more of the formal characteristics of a genre influence meaning in the two
     works you have studied.


6.   Show how aspects of the two works you have studied can be better understood with a knowledge
     of the time and context in which they were written.
