M18/1/TEXTP/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX




Literature and performance
Standard level
Paper 2 – poetry


Tuesday 8 May 2018 (morning)


1 hour 30 minutes


Instructions to candidates

yy Do not turn over this examination paper until instructed to do so.
yy Answer one question.
yy The maximum mark for this examination paper is [25 marks].




                                                                                                2218 – 0302
     2 pages                                                © International Baccalaureate Organization 2018
                                                  –2–                  M18/1/TEXTP/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Answer one question. Refer closely to the works of at least two poets you have studied.

1.   Dark though it may be, death is a subject often treated by poets, and with varying attitudes. In the
     work of at least two poets you have studied, show how different and/or similar treatments of death
     can be made into successful material for poems.


2.   Imagery is surely one of the poet’s most valuable tools. Making clear exactly what you mean by
     the term ‘imagery’, show how at least two poets in your study have used imagery to good effect in
     their poetry.


3.   The voice or persona in poems is an important factor in their delivery and effect. In the work of at
     least two poets you have studied, show how the voice in the poems is managed so as to produce
     various effects in terms of emotion, wisdom, persuasion and so on.


4.   Often poetry addresses the differing or similar ways men and women live, think and operate in
     the world. In the work of at least two poets you have studied, show how they have reflected on,
     agreed or argued with notions about the two sexes.


5.   Poets have distinctive ways of writing about their subjects. Choosing at least two poets you have
     studied, discuss how they have presented their material in different ways and what effects are
     achieved.


6.   “The heart has its reasons of which reason knows nothing.” The interaction or conflict between
     feeling and thinking has long been considered by poets. In the work of at least two poets you
     have studied, explore how such interactions or conflicts contribute to the subject of some poems.
