N12/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                      November 2012



           BUSINESS AND MANAGEMENT



                        Higher Level



                               Paper 1




25 pages
                              –2–            N12/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.
                                         –3–              N12/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The markbands on pages 3–6 should be used where indicated in the markscheme.


             Section A

    Q1 (c)    Q2 (c)     Q3 (c)                    Level descriptors

              Marks
               0–7

                                  • No knowledge or understanding of relevant
                0                   issues, concepts and theories.
                                  • No use of appropriate terminology.

                                  • Little knowledge and understanding of relevant
                                    issues, concepts and theories.
               1–2                • Little use of appropriate terminology.
                                  • No reference is made to the information in the
                                    case study.

                                  • A description or partial analysis/examination with
                                    relevant knowledge and/or understanding of
                                    relevant issues, concepts and theories.
                                  • Some use of appropriate terminology.
               3–5                • Some reference is made to the information in the
                                    case study, not just to the name of the
                                    organization.
                                  • At the lower end of the markband responses are
                                    mainly theoretical.

                                  • A balanced analysis/examination with accurate,
                                    specific,     well-detailed    knowledge      and
                                    understanding of relevant issues, concepts and
                                    theories.
               6–7
                                  • An analysis/examination that uses appropriate
                                    terminology throughout the response.
                                  • Explicit references are made to the information in
                                    the case study.
                        –4–              N12/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Section B

 Q4 (d)
                                 Level descriptors
 Marks
  0–8

            • No knowledge or understanding of relevant issues,
   0          concepts and theories.
            • No use of appropriate terminology.

            • Little knowledge and understanding of relevant issues,
              concepts and theories.
  1–2       • Little use of appropriate terminology.
            • No evidence of judgments and/or conclusions.
            • No reference is made to the information in the case study.

            • A description with some knowledge and/or understanding
              of relevant issues, concepts and theories.
            • Some use of appropriate terminology.
  3–4       • No evidence of judgments and/or conclusions.
            • Some reference is made to the information in the case
              study, not just to the name of the organization.
            • The response is mainly theoretical.

            • A response with relevant knowledge and understanding of
              relevant issues, concepts and theories.
            • A response that uses relevant and appropriate terminology.
  5–6       • Evidence of judgments and/or conclusions that are little
              more than unsubstantiated statements that has balanced
              analysis and demonstrates understanding.
            • Explicit references to the information in the case study are
              made at places in the response.

            • A response with accurate, specific, well-detailed
              knowledge and understanding of relevant issues, concepts
              and theories.
            • A response that uses appropriate terminology competently
  7–8         throughout the response.
            • A response that includes judgments and/or conclusions
              that is well supported and underpinned by a balanced
              analysis.
            • Explicit references to the information in the case study are
              made throughout the response.
                        –5–             N12/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




Section C

 Q5 (c)                          Level descriptors

Marks 0–9

            • No knowledge or understanding of relevant issues,
    0         concepts and theories.
            • No use of appropriate terminology.

            • Little knowledge and understanding of relevant issues,
              concepts and theories.
   1–3      • Little use of appropriate terminology.
            • No reference is made to the information in the case study
              and/or the extension material within Section C.

            • A description or partial analysis/examination with relevant
              knowledge and/or understanding of relevant issues,
              concepts and theories.
            • Some use of appropriate terminology.
   4–6      • Some reference is made to the information in the case
              study and/or the extension material within Section C, not
              just to the name of the organization.
            • At the lower end of the markband responses are mainly
              theoretical.

            • A balanced analysis/examination with accurate, specific,
              well-detailed knowledge and understanding of relevant
              issues, concepts and theories.
   7–9      • An analysis/examination that uses appropriate terminology
              throughout the response.
            • Explicit references are made to the information in the case
              study and/or the extension material within Section C.
                                                   –6–                N12/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Section C

 Q5 (d)
                                                     Level descriptors
 Marks
 0–12

   0        • No knowledge or understanding of relevant issues, concepts and theories.
            • No use of appropriate terminology.

            • Little knowledge and understanding of relevant issues, concepts and theories.
            • Little use of appropriate terminology.
            • No evidence of synthesis of information from the case study, the extension material in Section C
  1–3         and, where applicable, from other responses within Section C. Information is merely lifted and
              copied into the response.
            • No evidence of judgments and/or conclusions.
            • No reference is made to the information in the case study and the extension material within
              Section C.

            • A description with some knowledge and/or understanding of relevant issues, concepts and
              theories.
            • Some use of appropriate terminology.
            • No evidence of synthesis of information from the case study, the extension material in Section C
  4–6         and, where applicable, from other responses within Section C. Information is merely lifted and
              copied into the response.
            • Evidence of judgments and/or conclusions that are no more than unsubstantiated statements.
            • Limited reference is made to the information in the case study and the extension material within
              Section C.
            • The response is mainly theoretical.


            • A response with relevant knowledge and understanding of relevant issues, concepts and theories.
            • A response that uses appropriate terminology.
            • At places in the response information from the case study, the extension material in Section C
              and, where applicable, from other responses within Section C is (synthesised and) integrated to
  7–9         provide a basis for analysis and evaluation.
            • A response that includes judgments and/or conclusions that have limited support and are
              underpinned by a balanced analysis.
            • Explicit references to the information in the case study and the extension material within Section
              C are made at places in the response.


            • A response with accurate, specific, well-detailed knowledge and understanding of relevant issues,
              concepts and theories.
            • A response that uses appropriate terminology competently throughout the response.
            • Information from the case study, the extension material in Section C and, where applicable, from
 10–12        other responses within Section C is proficiently (synthesised and) integrated to provide a basis for
              analysis and evaluation.
            • A response that includes judgments and/or conclusions that is well supported and underpinned by
              a thorough and balanced analysis.
            • Explicit references to the information in the case study and the extension material within Section
              C are made throughout the response.
                                                  –7–               N12/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                              SECTION A

1.   (a)   General Diane Pierce uses a situational leadership style (lines 33–34).
           Identify four key features of a situational leadership style.                        [4 marks]

           A situational leadership style has features such as:
           • the leader adapts their style to different situations (hence the name
              “situational”)
           • flexibility (e.g. General Diane Pierce may lead “the Olive Hats” differently
              according to changes in Loyka)
           • it is influenced by the nature of the followers, or the nature of the
              organization, or the nature of the task
           • the leader will sometimes delegate (as General Diane Pierce has done with
              Colonel Michael Donovan about the construction project), but may
              sometimes be more directive (e.g. when a strategic decision needs to be
              made and implemented)
           • it can be presented as a combination of other leadership styles
           • accept any other relevant feature.

           Award [1 mark] for each correct feature identified, up to a maximum of
           [4 marks].

     (b)   Explain why General Diane Pierce decided to order Colonel Michael
           Donovan to carry out surveys and also to organize focus groups
           (lines 97–101).                                                                      [4 marks]

           General Diane Pierce decided to order Colonel Michael Donovan to carry out
           surveys because in addition to qualitative data providing an indication of “local
           community’s opinion” the results should give quantitative data (percentages,
           statistics) to help make a better informed decision about which facility to build,
           a hospital or a university (see Appendix 4). Surveying 2000 local residents
           should provide a “valid and reliable indication of the local community’s
           opinion” as this is a large sample, however the results proved inconclusive.

           General Diane Pierce also decided there was a need to organize focus groups
           because the results would provide more detailed qualitative data, exploring in
           more depth some issues, for example about locals’ resistance to both projects.
           This would help interpret the results from the surveys. As she is aware of
           cultural differences, she also thought that the men and the women of Loyka
           would have different opinions, which is why she wanted focus groups
           composed differently (some of men only, some of women only, and some of
           both men and women).

           Award [1 mark] for reference to a survey as providing quantitative data and
           [1 mark] for mentioning that focus groups provide qualitative data. Award a
           further [1 mark] for an explanation of General Diane Pierce’s decision for each
           research method up to a maximum of [2 marks].

           Award [1 mark] only for generic comments about data collection to make an
           informed decision.
                                                    –8–                   N12/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(c)   General Diane Pierce decided to use UWP resources to build either a new
      hospital or a new university campus. Using Maslow’s motivation theory,
      analyse the impact of this decision on both the local population and
      “the Olive Hats”.                                                                            [7 marks]

      Maslow’s motivation theory is usually represented through a pyramid of needs,
      ranging from safety (at the bottom of the pyramid) to self-actualization (at the
      top of the pyramid).




                                                             morality,
                                                            creativity,
                                                           spontaneity,
                                                         problem solving,
                                                         lack of prejudice,
                                                        acceptance of facts
      Self-actualization

                                                          self-esteem
                                                  confidence, achievement,
                                              respect of others, respect by others
       Esteem


                                               friendship, family, sexual intimacy
       Love/belonging

                                       security of body, of employment, of resources,
                                       of morality, of the family, of health, of property
       Safety


            [Source: Clark, P. et al., 2009, Business and Management Course Companion, page 125,
                                      Glasgow, U.K. Oxford University Press]

      After a period of civil war, the Loykese population needs safety, especially
      security of resources and of property. General Diane Pierce’s project of
      building a hospital also corresponds to the safety needs at the bottom of
      Maslow’s pyramid, about health and security of the family. Her project of
      building a university is higher up on the pyramid model as it would address
      some locals’ needs of achievement and confidence through their studies and
      qualifications, even leading to self-actualization. According to this model, the
      hospital satisfies more basic needs than the university; this could be a factor to
      help General Diane Pierce’s decision.
                                      –9–              N12/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


With regard to “the Olive Hats”, General Diane Pierce is well aware of
their security and safety needs at the UWP Mission where they work.
The community-based military environment also offers the soldiers a sense of
belonging and togetherness. The involvement of Colonel Michael Donovan’s
engineering group would even satisfy their needs for esteem and
self-actualization: “the officers in the Civil Engineering Group were excited by
the opportunity to lead the project”. The soldiers’ “motivation was beginning
to deteriorate” before her arrival, General Diane Pierce has well understood
how to act in order to satisfy a range of needs, not only basic ones for safety
and security, but also more complex ones.

Accept any other relevant analysis.


N.B. Candidates are not expected to draw the model itself. For maximum
marks, candidates must refer to both the needs of the local population and the
needs of “the Olive Hats”.

If the response is one-sided with only the local population or “the
Olive Hats” being referred to then a maximum of [4 marks] should be
awarded.

Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                   – 10 –          N12/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   (a)   Define the following terms:

           (i)    economies of scale (line 121)                                               [2 marks]

                  Economies of scale are defined as a cost saving which a business
                  experiences when the long-run unit costs or production costs fall as a
                  business engages in larger-scale production.


                  N.B. Examples are not required for full marks provided the definition is
                  accurate.

                  Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

                  Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and
                  understanding.

                  Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
                  understanding of economies of scale (with reference to both decrease in
                  cost per unit and increase in production volume).

                  For only a relevant example or application to the case study or statement
                  about bulk buying award [1 mark].

           (ii)   just-in-case stock control (line 140).                                      [2 marks]

                  Stock control is about checking/monitoring the level(s) of inventory
                  i.e. in the case of Kos Palouk’s business: the amount of fresh produce he
                  stores. There are two types of stock control methods: just-in-case (JIC)
                  and just-in-time (JIT). JIC is about keeping a certain level of stock
                  because of emergencies i.e. having a reserve (the buffer stock) just in
                  case (literally) it might be needed (hence the name of JIC).


                  Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

                  Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and
                  understanding.

                  Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
                  understanding similar to the answer above.

                  For only a relevant: example or application to the case study award
                  [1 mark].
                                             – 11 –             N12/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   Explain how Kos Palouk’s fixed and variable costs would be affected by
      pursuing Option 2 (lines 150–152).                                                    [4 marks]

      Option 2 is an increase in the scale of operation, though not as radical as
      Option 3. With Option 2, Kos Palouk would sell more produce, so his output
      would increase, yet without major changes to his business.
      • Fixed costs are costs that do not change as output does;
        an example of a fixed cost is the rent of the storage facility, or the lorry loan
        repayment. Pursuing Option 2 would mean an increase to such fixed costs.
      • Variable costs are costs that do change as output does; an example of a
        variable cost is the cost of the products bought by Kos Palouk from farmers
        for resale to the UWP Mission and to the university or hospital. Pursuing
        Option 2 would mean an increase to such variable costs.

      Accept any other relevant example of fixed costs and variable costs in the
      context of Kos Palouk and Option 2.


      N.B. Candidates may refer to economies of scale in their answer. This is
      acceptable as Kos Palouk could well realize economies of scale with Option 2,
      though there is no explicit indication in the case study.

      N.B. Candidates are not required to give a detailed definition of fixed/variable
      costs.

      N.B. Candidates may refer to maintenance costs for the lorry as either fixed or
      variable; accept either.


      Mark as 2 + 2: [2 marks] for fixed costs and [2 marks] for variable costs.

      Award [1 mark] for a clear understanding of the concept of fixed costs/
      variable costs and [1 mark] for relating this accurately to Kos Palouk,
      explaining any change, up to a maximum of [2 marks].
                                            – 12 –           N12/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(c)   Analyse the advantages and disadvantages for Kos Palouk of pursuing
      Option 2 (lines 150–152).                                                         [7 marks]

      Option 2 has several advantages for Kos Palouk:
      • he would benefit from economies of scale and would earn much more every
        month (he would have personal savings of $950 a month, compared to $100
        with his existing, small-scale business model)
      • once built, the university or hospital will represent a large volume new
        customer, without Kos Palouk having to do much marketing, promotion or
        advertising in order to target that market (first mover advantage)
      • accept any other relevant advantage.

      However, it also has the following disadvantages:
      • there are strong elements of risk: risk for his own safety (the danger of
        driving to remote communities where he may be perceived as collaborating
        with the UWP troops), risk for his own property (as the bank wants his lorry
        as collateral)
      • competition may become fierce, once other local entrepreneurs realize the
        potential and enter the market; if his business is not successful, Kos Palouk
        might regret leaving his safe job at the officers’ dining hall
      • Kos Palouk would need to leave his job at the officers’ dining hall and lose
        his regular source of income
      • accept any other relevant disadvantage.

      Accept any other relevant analysis.


      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                 – 13 –           N12/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   (a)   General Diane Pierce needs to remotivate her troops but cannot offer any
           financial rewards (lines 39–41). Describe two non-financial rewards that
           she could use.                                                                     [4 marks]

           General Diane Pierce could use several non-financial rewards to remotivate her
           troops, such as:
           • Job enrichment: she could give her troops opportunities to use the skills they
              have, which will be the case for the officers when they start working on the
              construction of the hospital or university, as they have said that they are
              excited to do so.
           • Job enlargement / job expansion: she could increase the range of tasks of the
              soldiers, motivating them by a variety of jobs and a change of routine
              (this can be called “job rotation”). As part of their job enlargement, they
              could be more involved in projects with the local population.
           • Empowerment / increased responsibility / delegation: she could give some
              staff (especially officers) more power in decision-making, for example she
              could empower Colonel Michael Donovan by letting him follow his own
              recommendation to build a hospital in 30 weeks.
           • Teamwork: although soldiers are likely to work in teams already, she could
              strengthen the importance of teamwork, for example by having the troops
              build the hospital using cell production.


           N.B. The concepts themselves (e.g. “empowerment”) might not be mentioned
           explicitly in the answer, but candidates may achieve the marks nonetheless.


           Mark as 2 + 2.

           Award [1 mark] for each relevant non-financial reward and [1 mark] for a
           description of that non-financial reward in the context of the “Olive Hats”, up
           to a maximum of [2 marks].
                                            – 14 –           N12/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   With reference to Option 3 (lines 153–157), distinguish between a
      wholesaler and a retailer.                                                        [4 marks]

      In a long distribution channel, a wholesaler sells products to a retailer who,
      in turn, sells to customers. Wholesalers do not usually sell directly to the
      public, but to another agent: the retailer. Wholesalers buy and store large
      quantities and resell these in smaller quantities to retailers.

      At the moment there is no wholesaler for the produce that Kos Palouk
      distributes; this means that the produce are bought directly from the farmers
      and sold directly to the UWP Mission. With Option 3, Kos Palouk would
      become a wholesaler: he would start selling to other retailers (other shop
      owners), creating a longer distribution chain.


      N.B. A diagram of the supply chain is acceptable as part of the answer.


      [1 to 2 marks]
      Award [1 mark] for an answer that shows some basic knowledge of the
      definitions of a wholesaler and a retailer. Award [2 marks] for a theoretical
      answer that shows some clear knowledge of the difference between a
      wholesaler and a retailer.

      [3 to 4 marks]
      For [3 marks] the candidate refers to Kos Palouk. For [4 marks] the candidate
      refers to Kos Palouk and to the wholesale operation he may set up if he pursues
      Option 3.
                                             – 15 –            N12/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(c)   The UWP Mission has ethical objectives (lines 5–7). Examine whether the
      setting of ethical objectives by the UWP will be beneficial.                         [7 marks]

      Organizations may set ethical objectives for several reasons, for instance:
      • in the 21st century, there is an increasing expectation that organizations will
         behave as “good citizens”, hence the concept of corporate social
         responsibility (CSR), which in practice often means setting ethical
         objectives (in the case of the UWP Mission “to create stability, fulfilling the
         UWP Mission’s aim to maintain order, peace and security”)
      • some organizations are aware that their actions and activities may
         negatively affect some stakeholders or the environment, which is why
         setting up ethical objectives will create a counterbalance (for example in the
         short term the UWP soldiers may have to restrict locals’ movements, but as
         a counterpart they will help create longer-term stability).

      However, setting ethical objectives also has disadvantages:
      • in some cases, it can appear as a mere exercise to give the impression that
        the organization is (suddenly) becoming ethical (i.e. what in English is
        called “paying lip service” to a cause), without anything concrete behind it
      • in some cases, it can give the impression that the organization is trying to
        hide some bad practice by drawing attention to what they do well for the
        benefit of the wider society (for example opponents to the presence of
        “the Olive Hats” in Loyka could argue that the ethical objectives are just a
        way to justify the invasion of their land by foreign troops).

      Accept any other relevant examination.


      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                  – 16 –            N12/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                                SECTION B

4.   (a)   Define the following terms:

           (i)    organizational culture (line 11)                                              [2 marks]

                  Organizational culture (also called “corporate culture”) refers to the fact
                  that companies, like countries, have complex cultures that are marked by
                  beliefs, attitudes and values. The culture of an organization is also
                  influenced by stories, traditions and management style.


                  Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

                  Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and
                  understanding.

                  Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
                  understanding similar to the answer above.

                  For only a relevant: example or application to the case study award
                  [1 mark].

           (ii)   matrix structure (line 91).                                                   [2 marks]

                  A matrix structure refers to a form of organization where workers are in
                  multifunctional teams and may be working on different projects with
                  different managers. The structure is usually represented by a table
                  (the word “matrix” means “table”) that shows vertical as well as
                  horizontal relationships.


                  Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

                  Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and
                  understanding (for example just drawing a diagram of the structure).

                  Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
                  understanding similar to the answer above.

                  For only a relevant: example or application to the case study award
                  [1 mark].
                                            – 17 –            N12/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   Explain how the force field analysis (Appendix 2) helped the UWP
      headquarters in Geneva decide on a change of strategy in 2011.                      [3 marks]

      The candidate may wish to focus their response on an explanation of one of the
      following areas:

      •   identifying the problem/issue
      •   lists of points
      •   driving / restraining forces
      •   weights
      •   decision-making criteria.

      The force field analysis model lists and weighs forces “for” and “against” a
      change of strategy in Loyka. Each point is allocated a number/coefficient
      (e.g. 3 or 5). Although there was an equal number of factors on each side
      (three), the totals showed that the three factors on the “for” side were stronger
      than the three factors on the “against” side (10 compared to 8), so this model
      helped convince the UWP headquarters that a change of strategy was needed.

      If the candidate chooses to focus their explanation on any one key area and that
      includes reference to the case study, they can achieve the full range of marks
      just as if they had covered all the points in a more general explanation.

      Accept any other relevant explanation.

      Award [1 mark] for each correct point, up to a maximum of [3 marks].
                                            – 18 –           N12/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(c)   Explain why General Diane Pierce’s prior experience in social marketing
      can help the UWP Mission to achieve its strategic and operational
      objectives in Loyka.                                                               [5 marks]

      Social marketing refers to the application of marketing principles, concepts and
      techniques to projects that are not necessarily commercial but rather benefit
      communities. General Diane Pierce’s experience of social marketing in
      previous UWP Missions means that she has been in projects where marketing
      activities were used, in order to help local populations, for example
      humanitarian ventures or fundraising ventures. Now in Loyka she can use what
      she has learnt from that experience. One objective is “to improve the image of
      ‘the Olive Hats’”, which is a form of PR (public relations), quite comparable to
      a promotional campaign. The other objective is “to remotivate her troops”,
      which could be seen as a form of internal marketing and as an exercise of
      internal communication. The case study also shows that General Diane Pierce
      is familiar with market research methods such as surveys and focus groups: in
      a way, she considers the Loykese as customers of her organization.

      Accept any other relevant explanation.


      Award [1–2 marks] for a definition of social marketing and/or strategic and
      operational objectives without any relevant reference to the case study.

      Award [3–4 marks] for an explanation of social marketing and/or strategic and
      operational objectives with explicit and relevant references to the case study.

      For [5 marks] the explanation must have clear reference to General Diane
      Pierce’s two specific objectives.
                                              – 19 –           N12/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(d)   Evaluate the possible ways to overcome conflict between external
      stakeholders and the UWP Mission in Loyka.                                           [8 marks]

      The case study refers to several conflicts between external stakeholders (such
      as the local governor, local community) and the UWP Mission in Loyka.
      These conflicts may be overcome in several ways:
      • The UWP Mission in Loyka already supports the local economy; the
         provisions for “the Olive Hats” are purchased locally (and Kos Palouk’s
         business is a good example, as he sells local produce to the UWP Mission);
         “the Olive Hats” also spend their pay in the local economy, which generates
         more income for local businesses such as shops and restaurants. The UWP
         Mission in Loyka could further strengthen its economic role, alleviating the
         critiques of its political and military role.
      • Building the university or hospital will improve the image of “the Olive
         Hats” (this is the strategic objective that General Diane Pierce was given
         when she was appointed). This project is not only about social marketing
         (i.e. using marketing techniques to obtain changes in people’s behaviour and
         attitudes, especially hostile external stakeholders), it also has a business
         dimension, as the construction process and then the running of the new
         facility would also have positive business impacts (direct job creation and
         need for more supplies, for example furniture from local suppliers).
      • The choice of university versus hospital is also relevant as each option leads
         to stakeholder conflicts (for example many conservatives “would be
         strongly opposed to Loykese women receiving care from foreign male
         doctors”, as Kos Palouk explained). Specific operational measures would
         have to be put in place (for example recruiting female doctors for the
         hospital) in order to avoid conflict.

      Accept any other relevant evaluation.

      Candidates could use other examples from the case study (e.g. reference to the
      fact that “the Olive Hats” “also helped repair roads and bridges that had been
      damaged during the civil war. As a result of these improvements in
      infrastructure, local businesses in Beral were able to resume their trade
      activities to the same levels as before the civil war”). Candidates could refer to
      different methods of conflict resolution (such as conciliation and arbitration),
      adapting them from the internal environment (conflict within an organization)
      to the external environment (conflict with external stakeholders).


      This holistic question requires candidates to show their understanding of
      stakeholder conflict to achieve some marks at the lower markbands, and to
      display evaluative skills to reach the higher markbands.

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 4.
                                                 – 20 –           N12/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                             SECTION C

5.   (a)   Identify two factors that may affect the UWP’s workforce planning in
           Beral.                                                                          [2 marks]

           Factors that could affect the UWP’s workforce planning include:
           • increase in violence, increasing demand for patrols
           • skills/training of troops
           • workforce reduction from death, transfer, injury, and illness
           • other changed circumstances (reduction/increase in forces)
           • accept any other relevant factor.

           Award [1 mark] for each correct factor identified up to a maximum of
           [2 marks].

     (b)   (i)   Using information from Item 3, copy and complete into your answer
                 booklet the network diagram in Item 4 for activities A to H and
                 identify the critical path for the construction of the hospital.          [5 marks]




                 Award [5 marks] if the network diagram is correct and the critical path
                 has been correctly identified.

                 Award [4 marks] if there is 1 error (apply own figure rule (OFR)).

                 Award [3 marks] if there are 2 errors.

                 Award [2 marks] if there are 3 or more errors.

                 Award [1 mark] if the candidate has made some attempt to complete the
                 network diagram.
                                              – 21 –            N12/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


      (ii)   With reference to the case study, explain one disadvantage of using a
             critical path analysis.                                                         [2 marks]

             Disadvantages of a critical path analysis include:
             • Planning for a project by way of a critical path analysis does not
               guarantee that the project, in this case the construction of a hospital,
               will not run into problems, or obstacles that throw the project off its
               projected timetable.
             • Planning for the project depends on the quality of the information
               being used as its basis. If the information proves incorrect for
               example, troops trained primarily as infantry working on the
               construction of a building may require more time, or they may make
               mistakes, which could slow the project down.

             Accept any other relevant disadvantage and explanation.

             N.B. General comments such as “the external environment might
             change” need substantiating. Simple statements without sufficient
             explanation can only achieve [1 mark].

             Award [1 mark] for the correct identification of a disadvantage of a
             critical path analysis and an additional [1 mark] for an explanation.
             Award a maximum of [2 marks].

             If a candidate identifies a disadvantage that applies to critical path
             analysis in general, but is not relevant to this case (such as a project that
             is too complex, which this small hospital would not be), award a
             maximum of [1 mark].

(c)   Analyse the use of a cell production approach for the construction of the
      hospital.                                                                              [9 marks]

      Cell production in the construction industry splits the construction of a building
      into cells or modules. Typically this type of construction method can be done
      if it dovetails with the building design, which fits well with the proposed
      hospital in Loyka/Beral.

      Rather than dividing the workforce into areas of specialization (masons,
      carpenters, electricians, plumbers, etc.), the workforce is split into teams,
      each team constructing a cell or module of the building. Though individual
      team members may develop some limited degree of specialization within
      teams, all members can perform all functions within the process.

      In general, cell production fosters teamwork, as a whole team is responsible for
      a cell. This approach also fosters a commitment to the team (and therefore to
      the project) by individual team members as well as foster cohesion among
      team members.

      From a motivational perspective, cell production can be rewarding as workers
      learn a variety of skills (job enrichment) and develop a broad understanding of
      the entire process. If team spirit does develop (as it typically does),
                                      – 22 –            N12/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Though there are some risks to quality because workers in cell production have
less specialized knowledge than in the traditional organization of a construction
project, pride can develop for the whole project, strengthening a commitment
to quality.

For the hospital, cell production makes considerable sense:
• Building the hospital is not the primary mission of the UWP troops in
  Loyka, and Colonel Michael Donovan can expect that soldiers will regularly
  be absent from the construction project to support the primary mission.
• With cell production, the pride it fosters, and the broad-based skill set
  workers develop through it, keeping the construction process going during
  periods of heightened absenteeism from the construction site will be easier.
  In a typical construction process, the absence of certain specialized workers
  could bring the entire project to a halt.
• The design of the building (into four wings) lends itself to construction in
  four different teams; a competitive spirit should develop.
• If one team is diverted to the primary mission (peacekeeping), the entire
  project does not have to come to a halt.
• Though the lack of worker specialization associated with the cell production
  means the facility might have a lesser “finish” compared to hospitals in
  industrialized countries, the top priority is having a functioning hospital,
  a much-needed facility in the war-torn country of Loyka.
• If, for whatever reason (increased violence or withdrawal of the UWP
  Mission from Loyka) several of the cells were completed and not the entire
  project, at least a portion of the project would be complete and could serve
  some purpose. Other portions could, conceivably, be completed later by the
  Loykese.

Given the constraints that the UWP Mission faces, the decision to shift to a
cell production approach makes sense. It produces a manageable plan for
constructing the hospital. The time to complete it is not excessive. Though the
building that is produced may have a lesser “finish” because of less worker
specialization, at least the hospital will be built. The workforce will have
maximum flexibility. All workers on all teams will have some degree of skill
and knowledge about the process.

Accept any other relevant analysis.


Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 5.
                                             – 23 –             N12/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(d)   Using information contained in the case study, Items 1 to 6, and a force
      field analysis (no numerical weightings are required for your forces),
      evaluate General Diane Pierce’s strategic decision to build the hospital.             [12 marks]

      It should be recognized that, given time constraints, answers are likely to
      include a much narrower range of issues and concepts than identified below.
      There is no “correct” answer.

      Examiners must be prepared to award full marks to answers which synthesize
      and evaluate even if they do not examine all the stimulus materials.

      It is to be expected that the answer will include relevant information from the
      case study, extension material and Items 1 to 6 and employ a range of business
      concepts, tools and terminology.

      Candidates are free to recommend that the hospital be built or not built. The
      marks awarded depend upon the strength of the candidate’s reasoning and
      should be based upon the markbands on page 6.

      In general, arguments for building the hospital include:
      • it will provide a much-needed facility to the community
      • it will leave a lasting concrete legacy of the UWP Mission
      • it could immediately have a positive impact on relations with the local
         population
      • the project could increase motivation of the troops by teaching them new
         skills and giving them different activities.

      In general, arguments against building the hospital include:
      • The local governor who contributed the piece of land for the construction
         site prefers a new university.
      • The UWP’s Mission is peacekeeping (to preserve the lives of both the
         people of Loyka and the troops themselves). Diverting troops to other
         purposes could compromise the original mission.
      • The continued deterioration of the situation in Loyka/Beral may mean
         completion of the project will be compromised or entirely halted, thus
         resulting in wasted resources (time and money).
      • Unanswered questions, such as staffing the hospital remain and certain
         solutions (foreign male doctors) could cause added friction between the
         peacekeepers and the local population.
      • As a symbol of foreign intervention, the hospital could become a point of
         controversy among the conflicting factions within Loyka, prolonging
         instability rather than helping to resolve it, and many indications are that the
         situation is deteriorating.
                                      – 24 –            N12/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Candidates should consider the Items 1 to 6 in their evaluation. Possible issues
to raise with each one include:
              Description       Driving forces for building       Restraining forces against
                                          hospital                     building hospital
 Item 1 Report on the        Continued deterioration of the As the situation deteriorates,
            deterioration    situation could mean greater UWP troops may be required
            of the           number of deaths and/or injuries for more security patrols,
            countryside      and possible destruction of thus causing disruption to
                             medical care infrastructure.        labour supply.
 Items      Two possible     A solution to the labour problem If, even before the project
 2+3        approaches       has been found.                     begins, adjustments are
                                                                 being made, it augurs poorly
                                                                 for the weeks and months
                                                                 ahead, as the situation
                                                                 worsens.
 Item 4 Critical path        Path shows that project could be There are certain negatives
            analysis         completed according to the to the cell production
                             revised work schedule.              approach.
 Item 5 Memo from            Colonel     Michael      Donovan In a hierarchical command
            Colonel          seems to have some confidence system, often subordinates
            Michael          in the revised approach. He is are reluctant to disagree with
            Donovan          an expert in this area.             superiors. Colonel Michael
                                                                 Donovan may be producing
                                                                 a solution and portraying
                                                                 some confidence that he does
                                                                 not fully have.
 Item 6 Demographic          Families may be having fewer The decline in birth and
            report           children out of fear from the war death rates suggest a flat or
                             and lack of proper medical care. declining population. This
                             In the long run, a declining may reflect a much more
                             population weakens the business deteriorated condition of the
                             environment. A new hospital country than other reports
                             may provide some confidence.        indicate. If true, the soldiers
                                                                 may be needed for other
                                                                 duties (patrols) and for
                                                                 protection of the UWP
                                                                 Mission itself.
Other reasonable and relevant inferences and conclusions should be accepted.
                                     – 25 –            N12/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Award a maximum of [6 marks] if a force field analysis is not used.

Award a maximum of [7–9 marks] where both the case study or Items 1 to 6
have not been used, i.e. only one set of data.

To achieve the upper levels of the markbands on page 6 the candidate should
provide a balanced evaluation of the arguments for and against the hospital
being built, which is well supported by explicit references to information from
the case study and Items 1 to 6.

Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 6.


N.B. Candidates should not be penalized if they have used the terms “For” and
“Against” instead of “Driving” and “Restraining” forces.
