N12/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX




     88125602

Philosophy
Higher level AND STANDARD LEVEL
PAPER 2

Tuesday 6 November 2012 (morning)

1 hour


INSTRUCTIONS to candidates

 Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Answer one question.
 The maximum mark for this examination paper is [30 marks].




8812-5602                                                                                          4 pages
                                                           © International Baccalaureate Organization 2012
                                                    –2–                  N12/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

In your answer you are expected to:

     • present an argument in an organized way
     • use clear, precise and appropriate language, demonstrating that you understand the author’s specific
       terminology
     • show an understanding of the specific demands of the question
     • give detailed references to the ideas and arguments presented in the text
     • provide relevant supporting material and examples where appropriate
     • analyse the supporting material
     • develop a critical evaluation of the ideas and arguments of the text
     • state a clear, personal response to the position expressed by the author.

Answer one question.  Each question is worth [30 marks].

Bhagavad Gita

1.     “That calm man who is the same in pain and pleasure, whom these cannot disturb, alone is able,
       O great amongst men, to attain to immortality.” Discuss and evaluate.


2.     Evaluate the view that the Bhagavad Gita encourages the reader to approve of war.



Confucius: The Analects

3.     To what extent do the tripartite practices of government – filial piety, humaneness, ritual – lead to
       successful rule?


4.     To what extent should one follow Confucius’s requirement to devote oneself “earnestly to one’s duty
       to humanity”?



Lao Tzu: Tao Te Ching

5.     Evaluate the claim that nature might be equated to the Tao, is divine and becomes an object of
       reverence, being worthy of the most careful attention.


6.     Explain and discuss the political implications of the Tao Te Ching.




8812-5602
                                                      –3–                    N12/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Plato: The Republic, Books IV–IX

7.    Evaluate Plato’s claim that a philosopher possesses both intellectual and practical qualities
      of character.


8.    Explain and discuss the relation between the Simile of the Cave, Plato’s theory of knowledge
      and politics.



René Descartes: Meditations

9.    Explain and discuss Descartes’s arguments for the existence of God.


10.   Explain and discuss the notion of “clear and distinct” ideas.



John Locke: Second Treatise on Government

11.   Evaluate the claim that a just action might become aggressive.


12.   Evaluate the claim that governments can be dissolved but civil society cannot.



John Stuart Mill: On Liberty

13.   Evaluate the claim that for Mill the liberty of action (the greatest possible expression of individuality)
      is practically the same as the liberty of speech.


14.   Evaluate Mill’s proposition that for actions that are prejudicial to the interests of others, “the individual
      is accountable and may be subjected either to social or to legal punishment if society is of the opinion
      that the one or the other is requisite for its protection”.



Friedrich Nietzsche: The Genealogy of Morals

15.   Explain and discuss the account of the development and origin of the master–slave moral codes.


16.   Explain and discuss the relationship of the ascetic ideal to truth.



8812-5602                                                                                              Turn over
                                                    –4–                   N12/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Bertrand Russell: The Problems of Philosophy

17.   Explain and discuss the nature of an object, for example, a table, which is considered to exist
      independently of my perception of it.


18.   “Philosophy is to be studied, not for the sake of any definite answers to its questions … but rather for
      the sake of the questions themselves.” Discuss and evaluate Russell’s claim.



Hannah Arendt: The Human Condition

19.   Evaluate Arendt’s statement that “Human plurality, the basic condition of both action and speech,
      has the two-fold character of equality and distinction”.


20.   Explain and discuss what Arendt identifies as “the victory of the animal laborans”.



Simone de Beauvoir: The Ethics of Ambiguity

21.   Explain and discuss the relationship between freedom and reciprocity.


22.   To what extent does de Beauvoir’s ethical system provide a response to the objection that existentialism
      encloses the individual in an empty subjectivism, making him or her incapable of following any
      principles for making choices?



Charles Taylor: The Ethics of Authenticity

23.   Evaluate the claim that dialogue is essential if we want to give meaning to our lives.


24.   Explain and discuss the role of reason within the activity of an “examined life”.




8812-5602
