N12/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX




     88125707

PSYCHOLOGY
HIGHER LEVEL
PAPER 3

Tuesday 6 November 2012 (morning)

1 hour


INSTRUCTIONS to candidates

 Do not turn over this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Read the passage carefully and then answer all the questions.
 The maximum mark for this examination paper is [30 marks].




8812-5707                                                                                           2 pages
                                                            © International Baccalaureate Organization 2012
                                                       –2–                  N12/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX

The stimulus material below is based on a research article.

            Social networking (for example, Facebook, MySpace) has affected the way people interact
            and present themselves to others. Psychologists argue that examining the nature of online
            communication is critical to understanding the process of identity development.

            The aim of this research was to investigate ways in which young people develop identities on
      5     a social networking website. A multi-ethnic sample of ten undergraduate participants (five males
            and five females, with a mean age of 20 years) was recruited from an online website at an American
            university. The participants were active members of a social networking website and willing
            to present their personal profile (the page which introduces the person).

            The researcher used narrative interviewing to collect data. The participants presented their profiles
     10     to the researcher. The profiles included photos and explanations of why these photos had been
            chosen. The interviews were videotaped.

            The video recordings were transcribed. Inductive content analysis was applied to the transcripts.
            The researcher found three major themes in identity formation:
            • the use of images to represent relationships (for example, using an image of a heart to represent
     15       the participant’s boyfriend/girlfriend)
            • the use of photographs to tell the participants’ personal stories
            • the use of images to indicate the participants’ personal preferences (for example, music
              preferences, favourite sports, support of environmental issues or human rights).

            The researcher concluded that young people use a number of methods to express identity
     20     within the social network. The results indicated that their profile was generally less verbal and
            more visual.



Answer all of the following three questions, referring to the stimulus material in your answers.

1.    Explain considerations that the researcher could have taken both before and after the
      interviews in this study.                                                                      [10 marks]

2.    Explain how reflexivity could be used in the context of this study.                            [10 marks]

3.    Evaluate the use of narrative interviews in this study.                                        [10 marks]




8812-5707
