N12/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                      November 2012



                       PSYCHOLOGY



           Higher Level and Standard Level



                               Paper 2




18 pages
                              –2–            N12/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.
                                                  –3–              N12/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 2 assessment criteria

A — Knowledge and comprehension

Marks         Level descriptor

0             The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

1 to 3        The answer demonstrates limited knowledge and understanding that is of marginal
              relevance to the question. Little or no psychological research is used in the response.

4 to 6        The answer demonstrates limited knowledge and understanding relevant to the question or
              uses relevant psychological research to limited effect in the response.

7 to 9        The answer demonstrates detailed, accurate knowledge and understanding relevant to the
              question, and uses relevant psychological research effectively in support of the response.


B — Evidence of critical thinking: application, analysis, synthesis, evaluation

Marks         Level descriptor

0             The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

1 to 3        The answer goes beyond description but evidence of critical thinking is not linked to the
              requirements of the question.

4 to 6        The answer offers appropriate but limited evidence of critical thinking or offers evidence
              of critical thinking that is only implicitly linked to the requirements of the question.

7 to 9        The answer integrates relevant and explicit evidence of critical thinking in response to the
              question.


C — Organization

Marks         Level descriptor

0             The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

1 to 2        The answer is organized or focused on the question. However, this is not sustained
              throughout the response.

3 to 4        The answer is well organized, well developed and focused on the question.
                                                  –4–               N12/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Abnormal psychology

1.   Discuss cultural variations in the prevalence of one affective or eating disorder.

     Refer to the paper 2 assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered and balanced review that
     includes a range of arguments, factors or hypotheses related to cultural variations in the prevalence
     of the chosen disorder. Conclusions should be presented clearly and supported by appropriate
     evidence.

     The term “prevalence” refers to the percentage of individuals within a population who are affected
     by a specific disorder at a given time.

     Discussion of cultural variations may include, but is not limited to:
      reference to evidence referring to different rates of disorders in different cultures or even
       subcultures
      reference to an increase in diagnoses related to differences in cultural standards (for example,
       increase in diagnoses of depression or eating disorders in women)
      addressing cultural factors that seem to increase the risk of developing affective or eating
       disorders
      reference to evidence that with increasing Westernization, rates of depression and eating
       disorders tend to increase
      addressing changes in diagnostic screening which help mental health professions become more
       culturally aware in their diagnoses
      arguing that eating disorders such as anorexia and bulimia are culture-bound disorders, restricted
       to the Western world and are encouraged by conceptions of beauty and attractiveness that tell
       females to be thin and males to be athletic
      arguing that although there is a clear link between cultural factors and the prevalence of affective
       or eating disorders, it is still difficult to explain why only some people are affected by these
       influences in a way that brings them to the attention of clinical staff. It is likely that an
       understanding of the interaction between biological, cognitive and sociocultural factors is
       necessary to fully comprehend why and how these disorders develop.

     Responses may refer to research studies discussing cultural variations in the prevalence of one
     affective or eating disorder which could include, but are not limited to:
      Okulate et al. (2004) – research suggesting that core symptoms of depression are shared in
        different cultures
      Jaeger et al. (2002) – study on body dissatisfaction suggesting significant differences between
        cultures
      Dutton (2009) – study suggesting that cultural variations in prevalence of major depression could
        be due to cultural differences in stress, standard of living and reporting bias
      Makino et al. (2004) – review of published medical articles – prevalence appears to be
        increasing in non-Western countries but is still lower than in Western countries.

     Candidates may discuss a smaller number of cultural variations in order to demonstrate depth of
     knowledge, or may discuss a larger number of cultural variations in order to demonstrate breadth of
     knowledge. Both approaches are equally acceptable.

     If a candidate discusses more than one affective or eating disorder, credit should be given only to
     the first disorder.
                                                 –5–                N12/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   Outline symptoms of one anxiety, affective or eating disorder.

     To what extent do cognitive factors influence the etiology of the disorder that you
     have outlined?

     Refer to the paper 2 assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     A brief but clear account of symptoms for one psychological disorder should be provided.
     Responses should refer to one psychological disorder from one of the groups of disorders
     specified in the question.

     The command term “to what extent” requires the candidate to provide a sound argument
     concerning the importance of cognitive factors in the development of one anxiety, affective or
     eating disorder. This account should be presented clearly and should be supported with
     appropriate psychological research.

     Responses may refer to cognitive factors influencing the etiology of the disorder such as, but not
     limited to:
      cognitive distortions
      irrational beliefs, or
      cognitive styles.

     The extent to which cognitive factors influence the etiology of the disorder may be addressed by
     referring to, but not limited to:
      research findings that tend to suggest that an analysis of cognitive factors helps clinicians
        understand the etiology, symptoms, and personality of individuals with a certain disorder
      criticism that claims that cognitive explanations fail to provide any explanation of why these
        distortions arise and why some people use them while others do not
      claims that it is difficult to establish cause and effect relationships
      that the onset and development of the disorder is a result of complex interactions between
        biological, cognitive and/or sociocultural factors. For example, responses may claim that
        females are more likely to suffer from some eating disorders than males, suggesting that
        hormonal fluctuations relate to the greater vulnerability of women. Further elaboration may
        argue that the reasons for the disorder are rooted more in social causes than in cognitive ones.

     Candidates may address a smaller number of cognitive factors in order to demonstrate depth of
     knowledge, or may address a larger number of cognitive factors in order to demonstrate breadth of
     knowledge. Both approaches are equally acceptable.

     If a candidate discusses more than one anxiety, affective or eating disorder, credit should be given
     only to the first disorder.

     Candidates who do not make any reference to the extent to which factors other than cognitive factors
     (for example, biological or social factors) influence the etiology of the disorder can be awarded up to
     [6 marks] for criterion B, critical thinking, and up to [3 marks] for criterion C, organization. Up to
     full marks may be awarded for criterion A, knowledge and comprehension.
                                                   –6–               N12/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   Evaluate the use of one or more biomedical approaches to the treatment of one disorder.

     Refer to the paper 2 assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “evaluate” requires a detailed appraisal by weighing up the strengths and
     limitations of the use of biomedical approaches to the treatment of one disorder. Although a
     discussion of both strengths and limitations is required, it does not have to be evenly balanced to
     gain high marks.

     There are various types of biomedical approaches to treatment, for example drug therapy, ECT,
     acupuncture, herbal medicine, dietary change, or exercise. Whichever biomedical approaches to
     treatment are chosen, they should specifically relate to one disorder.

     Evaluative remarks could include, but are not limited to:
      the issue of reductionism
      side effects of some treatments
      ethical, gender or cultural issues
      the argument that biomedical approaches to treatment are effective in reducing the symptoms of
       a psychological disorder but they often don’t constitute a complete and final cure
      methodological issues present in studies investigating the effectiveness of the treatment
       (researcher bias, comparability of samples, placebo effect, how we judge whether the treatment
       is successful).

     Candidates may evaluate a single biomedical approach in order to demonstrate depth of knowledge,
     or may evaluate more than one biomedical approach in order to demonstrate breadth of knowledge.
     Both approaches are equally acceptable.

     If a candidate discusses more than one disorder, credit should be given only to the first disorder.

     If a candidate discusses only strengths or only limitations, the response should be awarded up to a
     maximum of [5 marks] for critical thinking and up to a maximum of [2 marks] for organization.
     Up to full marks may be awarded for knowledge and comprehension.
                                                  –7–               N12/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Developmental psychology

4.   To what extent do biological factors affect human development?

     Refer to the paper 2 assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “to what extent” requires candidates to consider the merits or otherwise of an
     argument addressing the degree to which biological factors affect human development.

     Responses may refer to biological factors influencing human development such as, but not
     limited to:
      the effects of brain maturation on cognitive development – for example, development of object
        permanence is related to the maturation of the frontal cortex
      research on teenage brains suggesting that reorganization and myelination of the prefrontal
        cortex continues during adolescence and enables teenagers to process information faster, perform
        higher-level cognitive activities, and improve impulse control
      the role of hormones in development.

     Environmental factors may be awarded marks if they are explicitly linked to biological factors
     affecting development.

     Candidates may address a smaller number of biological factors in order to demonstrate depth of
     knowledge, or may address a larger number of biological factors in order to demonstrate breadth of
     knowledge. Both approaches are equally acceptable.

     Candidates who do not make any reference to the extent to which factors other than biological
     factors (for example, cognitive or sociocultural factors) affect human development can be awarded
     up to [6 marks] for criterion B, critical thinking, and up to [3 marks] for criterion C, organization.
     Up to full marks may be awarded for criterion A, knowledge and comprehension.
                                                –8–              N12/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


5.   Discuss the relationship between physical change and development of identity during
     adolescence.

     Refer to the paper 2 assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered and balanced review of how
     identity development accompanies physical change during adolescence.

     Relevant content may provide an outline of the emergence of primary and secondary sexual
     characteristics and how that affects identity formation during adolescence such as:
      Simmons and Blyth (1987) – the cultural ideal hypothesis
      Mead’s cross-cultural theory.

     The answer should focus on the fact that physical changes have psychological ramifications that
     contribute to an adolescent’s sense of self. Preoccupation with one’s body image is strong
     throughout adolescence and this preoccupation influences development of identity.

     Discussion may address issues such as:
      the difficulty of generalizing the psychological effects of physical changes – because they
       depend on the timing of puberty, they differ in boys and girls
      the development of identity is influenced by the interaction of biological, cognitive and social
       factors and is not dominated by biology
      culture is also a strong determinant in self-perception and body shape perception.

     Responses may refer to classical theories of identity development in adolescence and this is
     acceptable if the theories are explicitly linked to the relationship between physical change and
     identity during adolescence.
                                                –9–              N12/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


6.   Discuss psychological research (theories and/or studies) on the formation and development of
     gender roles.

     Refer to the paper 2 assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered and balanced review of two
     or more theories and/or studies, or one theory and one study, addressing the formation and
     development of gender roles.

     Theories explaining the development of gender roles could include, but are not limited to:
      social learning theory that maintains the importance of social environment and emphasizes the
       potency of observational and modelling processes
      evolutionary theory that attempts to locate gender role differences in a historical evolutionary
       context
      gender schema theory that stresses the relevance of children’s cognitive schemata
      Freud’s psychodynamic theory could be used to illustrate a historical approach to the
       development of gender roles.

     A variety of studies may be discussed, such as:
      Maccoby’s (1974) study indicating that identification with parents seems to be a result, not a
       cause, of gender typing
      Taylor’s (1996) study showing that young children recognize no environmental influence on
       gender roles but by age 9 or 10, as they gain more life experience and information, develop more
       flexible ideas about what the categories of gender imply
      Kimball’s (1986) study demonstrating that parental treatment affects children’s gender
       knowledge more than their behaviour
      Mead’s (1935) anthropological study showing that gender roles depend upon the beliefs and
       values of a society.

     Candidates may discuss a smaller number of theories and/or studies on the formation and
     development of gender roles in order to demonstrate depth of knowledge, or may discuss a larger
     number of theories and/or studies in order to demonstrate breadth of knowledge. Both approaches
     are equally acceptable.

     If a candidate discusses two theories, the candidate is not required to include studies to support
     the argument.
                                                – 10 –             N12/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Health psychology

7.   Discuss physiological and psychological aspects of stress.

     Refer to the paper 2 assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” requires that the candidate should offer a considered and balanced
     review of physiological and psychological aspects of stress. Conclusions should be presented
     clearly and supported by appropriate evidence.

     Since much research on stress within health psychology consistently demonstrates that prolonged
     stress may have a detrimental effect on health, the interaction between physiological and
     psychological aspects of stress could be the focus of the response, but this is not a requirement.

     In health psychology, stress is associated with a number of physical problems such as hypertension,
     coronary heart disease, and low immune functioning. Stress has also been linked to smoking,
     increased use of alcohol, or overeating to reduce tension. The health status of an individual may be
     influenced by such unhealthy lifestyles.

     Candidates can use research that deals with both the physiological and the psychological aspects of
     stress. There are a number of studies that could be relevant, for example:
      Kiecolt-Glaser et al., (1984) who examined how stress influenced the immune system
      Kemeny et al., (2006) who investigated the stressful situation of getting HIV and the possible
        influence of psychological factors in the development of the disease
      Lazarus and Folkman’s (1975) theory of cognitive appraisal which explained how cognition
        could influence the interpretation of stressful experiences as well as physiological responses
        to stress
      Speisman et al., (1964) who studied the role of appraisal on physiological and psychological
        stress responses.

     Candidates may address a smaller number of physiological and psychological aspects of stress in
     order to demonstrate depth of knowledge, or may address a larger number of physiological and
     psychological aspects of stress in order to demonstrate breadth of knowledge. Both approaches are
     equally acceptable.

     If a candidate discusses only physiological or only psychological aspects of stress, apply the
     markbands up to a maximum of 11 marks.
                                                 – 11 –             N12/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


8.   Discuss the effectiveness of one health promotion strategy.

     Refer to the paper 2 assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered and balanced review of the
     effectiveness of one health promotion strategy, including a range of arguments and factors.

     The aim of health promotion is to prevent illness and disease caused by determinants of health such
     as smoking, alcohol misuse, overeating and lack of physical activity. Health promotion is the
     process of enabling people to change their lifestyle and gain a more immediate control over
     determinants of health. Health promotion takes a multifactored approach to individuals and
     communities through education, prevention and protection measures.

     There is no explicit reference to a specific area of health promotion within health psychology in this
     question so candidates may choose any relevant area, for example those studied in the health
     psychology option such as drug abuse or obesity. However, the response may also include an area
     not specifically mentioned in the programme such as practising safe sex to prevent HIV.
     The important thing is that candidates make reference to a relevant health promotion strategy (for
     example public campaign, community-based intervention, peer education) that has been described
     and evaluated.

     Candidates may respond without discussion of formal health campaigns, although it is likely that
     many candidates will refer to these programmes. Relevant health promotion strategies could
     include, but are not limited to:
      the Victoria (Australia) campaign, “Go for your life” (2004)
      the Florida (US) campaign, “TRUTH” (1998–1999)
      the US campaign, “VERB – It’s what you do” (2002–2006)
      the Canadian community-based peer intervention programme to prevent pregnant mothers from
        drinking alcohol (Carr, 1994).

     If a candidate discusses more than one strategy of health promotion, credit should be given only to
     the first discussion.
                                                  – 12 –            N12/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


9.   Evaluate one treatment for obesity.

     Refer to the paper 2 assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “evaluate” requires candidates to make an appraisal of one treatment for obesity
     by weighing up the strengths and the limitations. Although a discussion of both strengths and
     limitations is required, it does not have to be evenly balanced to gain high marks.

     Candidates could evaluate treatment approaches such as:
      the behavioural programme developed by Stuart and Davis (1972) for a clinical setting.
       The treatment involved monitoring food intake, modifying cues for inappropriate eating as well
       as the encouragement of self-reward for appropriate eating
      cognitive-behavioural therapy (CBT) combined with dieting. Candidates could make reference
       to research such as Beck (2005) who found that CBT could help patients to deal with cognitions
       that lead to obesity
      drug treatments such as appetite suppressants and lipase inhibitors
      surgical procedures such as gastric bypass and gastric banding
      commercial treatments such as Weight Watchers.

     If a candidate evaluates more than one treatment, credit should be given only to the first evaluation.

     If a candidate address only strengths or only limitations, the response should be awarded up to a
     maximum of [5 marks] for critical thinking and up to a maximum of [2 marks] for organization.
     Up to full marks may be awarded for knowledge and comprehension.
                                                   – 13 –             N12/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Psychology of human relationships

10.   Evaluate one or more research studies and/or theories related to cross-cultural differences in
      prosocial behaviour.

      Refer to the paper 2 assessment criteria when awarding marks.

      The command term “evaluate” requires candidates to make an appraisal by weighing up the
      strengths and the limitations of research related to cross-cultural differences in prosocial behaviour.
      Although a discussion of both strengths and limitations is required, it does not have to be evenly
      balanced to gain high marks.

      Studies may include Whiting’s (1979) research on the role of extended family, Bond and Leung’s
      (1988) research on in-group bias, or Levine’s many studies on cultural differences in prosocial
      behaviour (1990s–2000s).

      Candidates may evaluate one or a small number of theories and/or studies in order to demonstrate
      depth of knowledge, or may evaluate a larger number of theories and/or studies in order to
      demonstrate breadth of knowledge. Both approaches are equally acceptable.

      If a candidate discusses only strengths or only limitations, the response should be awarded up to a
      maximum of [5 marks] for critical thinking and up to a maximum of [2 marks] for organization.
      Up to full marks may be awarded for knowledge and comprehension.
                                                   – 14 –             N12/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


11.   Evaluate the effectiveness of one strategy for reducing violence.

      Refer to the paper 2 assessment criteria when awarding marks.

      The command term “evaluate” requires candidates to make an appraisal by weighing up the
      strengths and the limitations of one strategy. Although a discussion of both strengths and
      limitations is required, it does not have to be equally balanced to gain high marks.

      Some strategies that may be considered are:
       teaching social skills (Toch, 1980)
       “jigsaw classroom” (Aronson, 1979)
       empathy training (e.g. Feshbach and Feshbach, 1982)
       computer simulations (Figueiredo et al., 2007).

      Responses may approach the command term “evaluate” in two different ways. They may evaluate
      research related to reducing violence or provide a general evaluation of the effectiveness of the
      strategy for reducing violence. Both approaches are equally acceptable.

      If a candidate evaluates more than one strategy, credit should be given only to the first evaluation.

      If a candidate discusses only strengths or only limitations, the response should be awarded up to a
      maximum of [5 marks] for critical thinking and up to a maximum of [2 marks] for organization.
      Up to full marks may be awarded for knowledge and comprehension.
                                                 – 15 –            N12/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


12.   Discuss how two or more cognitive factors influence human relationships.

      Refer to the paper 2 assessment criteria when awarding marks.

      The command term “discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered and balanced review of how
      two or more cognitive factors influence human relationships.

      There are several approaches that can be taken to answer this question. Candidates may discuss:
       the social exchange theory of relationships
       Batson et al.’s (1981) empathy-altruism model of helping behaviour
       Kiesler and Baral’s (1970) study of attraction
       Baumeister and Bushman (1998) on aggression.

      All aspects of the psychology of human relationships option may be addressed for this question (for
      example, social responsibility, interpersonal relationships, and/or violence).

      Candidates may discuss a smaller number of cognitive factors in order to demonstrate depth of
      knowledge, or may discuss a larger number of cognitive factors in order to demonstrate breadth of
      knowledge. Both approaches are equally acceptable.

      If a candidate discusses only one cognitive factor, apply the markbands up to a maximum of
      [11 marks].
                                                 – 16 –             N12/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Sport psychology

13. Compare and contrast two models of causes of burnout in sport.

     Refer to the paper 2 assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “compare and contrast” requires candidates to give an account of the
     similarities and differences between two models of causes of burnout in sport. Although a
     discussion of both the similarities and differences of models of burnout is required, it does not have
     to be evenly balanced to gain high marks.

     Burnout can be defined as psychological, emotional, and even physical withdrawal from an activity
     that previously was enjoyable. Models of the causes of burnout include the cognitive stress model
     and self-determination theory, but candidates can also discuss the roles of coaches, parents and
     peers in causing burnout, intrinsic versus extrinsic motivation, the role of injury, challenges to
     identity, perfectionism and other psychological and physical factors in burnout.

     If a candidate compares and contrasts more than two models, credit should be given only to the first
     two comparisons and contrasts.

     Discussion of models of burnout prevention should not be awarded marks, unless the discussion is
     directly related to the causes of burnout.

     If a candidate discusses only similarities or only differences, the response should be awarded up to a
     maximum of [5 marks] for critical thinking and up to a maximum of [2 marks] for organization.
     Up to full marks may be awarded for knowledge and comprehension.
                                                 – 17 –             N12/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


14.   Discuss how coaches can affect individual and/or team behaviour in sport.

      Refer to the paper 2 assessment criteria when awarding marks.

      The command term “discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered and balanced review on how
      coaches can affect individual and/or team behaviour in sport. Opinions or conclusions should be
      presented clearly and supported by appropriate evidence.

      Coaches can have a positive or negative effect on the athletes they coach. Ways that coaches can
      affect individual or team behaviour include, but are not limited to:
       giving specific directions
       using positive feedback (Rosenthal, 1974)
       teaching effective training strategies to promote self-efficacy (Chase et al., 1997)
       promoting team cohesion
       understanding the personal dynamics of team member interactions (Weinberg, 2007)
       establishing team goals and setting high but realistic expectations
       recognizing the signs of burnout and having strategies to cope with it.

      Candidates can focus on only the coach’s effect on behaviour in individual sports, on only the
      coach’s effect on behaviour in team sports, or on the coach’s effect on behaviour in both individual
      and team sports.
                                                  – 18 –             N12/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


15.   Evaluate two theories relating arousal and/or anxiety to performance in sport.

      Refer to the paper 2 assessment criteria when awarding marks.

      The command term “evaluate” requires candidates to make an appraisal by weighing up the
      strengths and the limitations of two theories relating arousal and/or anxiety to performance in sport.
      Although a discussion of both strengths and limitations is required, it does not have to be evenly
      balanced to gain high marks.

      It is likely that many candidates will discuss the inverted-U hypothesis. Other theories such as the
      catastrophe model, optimal arousal theory, reversal theory, and the role of self-efficacy may be
      evaluated.

      As the question requires the evaluation of two theories, studies are not required in the response.
      However, studies may be used in a valuable way to point out the strengths and/or weaknesses of a
      particular theory.

      If a candidate evaluates more than two theories, credit should be given only to the first two
      evaluations.

      If a candidate discusses only strengths or only limitations, the response should be awarded up to a
      maximum of [5 marks] for critical thinking and up to a maximum of [2 marks] for organization.
      Up to full marks may be awarded for knowledge and comprehension.

      If a candidate evaluates only one theory, apply the markbands up to a maximum of [11 marks].
