N13/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                      November 2013



                               MUSIC



             Higher and Standard Level



                      Listening Paper




9 pages
                              –2–             N13/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.
                                                 –3–              N13/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


General Comment to Examiners
Please note that the markscheme is provided as a guideline for marking. There are many potential and
valid ways in which to approach these questions and examiners need, therefore, to use their judgment
carefully.

Each question is worth [20 marks].

                                             SECTION A

Examiners should refer to page 32 (Listening paper – Section A (SL and HL)) of the IB Music Guide
(published February 2009, first examinations 2011) when marking questions 1 to 3.

1.   Symphony No. 1 in D Major, Op. 25 “Classical” by S Prokofiev
2.   The Yellow River Piano Concerto by X Xian
3.   Symphony No. 1 in D Major, Op. 25 “Classical” by S Prokofiev and The Yellow River Piano
     Concerto by X Xian

     Question 1 or question 2
     The arguments should refer to the appropriate prescribed work.

     Arguments should address the question and be consistent and convincing in their display of musical
     understanding, and should be backed up by clearly located evidence. Musical terminology should
     be effective in its use.

     Question 3
     The arguments should refer to both prescribed works. The comparing and contrasting as an attempt
     to find significant musical links, must focus on treatment of form/structure.

     Arguments should be consistent and convincing in their display of musical understanding, and
     should be backed up by clearly located evidence. Musical terminology should be effective in its use.
                                                  –4–               N13/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                              SECTION B

Examiners should refer to pages 33 and 34 (Listening paper – Section B (SL and HL)) of the IB Music
Guide (published February 2009, first examinations 2011) when marking questions 4 to 7.

4.   String Quartet No. 2 in D major, K. 155 (3rd Movement Molto Allegro) by W Mozart
     (Identified Piece)
     (score provided)

     Musical elements
     • string Quartet
     • D major / D minor
     • 2/4
     • homophonic
     • imitation
     • triplets.

     Musical structure
     There are many possible interpretations of the structure of this excerpt. Here is one of them.

     Rondo Form
     Bar/measure 1      A     D major Melody in the violins
     Bar 17             B     D major Melody in violin I (triplets)
     Bar 33             A     D major
     Bar 49             C     D minor Melody in violin I
     Bar 67             A     D major
     Bar 75             D     D major Melody in violin I
     Bar 91             A¹    This section acts as a coda

     Musical terminology
     Some of the words that could be relevant to criterion C include (but are not limited to):
     parallel period, tonal, homophonic, trills, double-stops, chromaticism, unison.

     Musical context
     • Classical period.
     • Viennese school.
     • W A Mozart.
     • Chamber music.
     • Early quartets.
                                                  –5–               N13/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


5.   Threnody for the Victims of Hiroshima by K Penderecki (Identified Piece)
     (no score provided)

     Musical elements
     • string orchestra
     • imitation
     • nonmetrical
     • atonal
     • microtonal
     • polyphony.

     Musical structure
     There are many possible interpretations of the structure of this excerpt. Here is one of them.

     0:00    Opening “screams” beginning on the violins and moving through the sections of the
             orchestra, using tone clusters. Dynamic contrasts and undulating pitches.

     0:50    New section of pizzicato including some slapping on the body of the instruments.
             The undulating pitches in the higher register continue for a while, until all instruments are
             involved in an aleatoric bowing and plucking.

     1:45    New section of glissando strings in different pitch ranges (violins, violas, cellos moving in
             contrary motion to each other.) This section finishes with a high note in the violins.
             Accents and diminuendos/crescendos. Use of extended techniques such as ponticello and
             bending pitches.

     Musical terminology
     Some of the words that could be relevant to criterion C include (but are not limited to):
     aleatoric, tone cluster, extended techniques, glissando, crescendo, diminuendo, accents, pizzicato,
     counterpoint, chromaticism, dissonance, “hypertonality”.

     Musical context
     • K Penderecki.
     • 1960.
     • Avant-garde.
     • Polish composer.
     • Unconventional scoring.
     • The dedication to “the victims of Hiroshima” came only after the piece was premiered.
                                                   –6–              N13/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


6.   Amazone by S Forest (Unidentified Piece)
     (no score provided)

     Musical elements
     • 4/4
     • homophonic with elements of counterpoint
     • modal minor
     • clear defined sections and phrases (often 4 measures long)
     • voice solo (male) and supporting male voices. Electronic “DJ” sounds, steel drum, drum kit, etc.
     • percussive turntable rub-
     • syncopation.

     Musical structure
     There are many possible interpretations of the structure of this excerpt. Here is one of them.

     0:00     “DJ” groove and vocal introduction

     0:11     Entrance of the voice with 1st strophe (two 4-measure phrases), using two chords, with
              guitar counterpoint, over a steady drum beat with dotted rhythms in the last half of each
              bar. Voice is recorded in ‘low fidelity’ (low-fi).

     0.21     Repeat, with addition of a steel drum counterpoint

     0:32     Repeat, with addition of synthesized strings (second phrase).

     0.49     Male chorus harmony, leading to:

     0.52     Chorus, melody is now harmonized and the solo “low-fi” voice is improvising over them.

     1.22     New verse – new voice, still with steel drums over.

     1.45     Male chorus harmony, leading to:

     1.50     Chorus, melody is now harmonized and the solo “low-fi” voice is improvising over them.

     Musical terminology
     Some of the words that could be relevant to criterion C include (but are not limited to):
     steel drum, improvisation, counterpoint, harmony.

     Musical context
     • West Central Africa.
     • Bikutsi Pop music from Cameroon, it means “the hit of the floor”.
     • It displays some fusion elements, with influences from Jamaica (steel drum), France (language),
       electric guitar and DJ “grooving”.
     • Contemporary.
                                                  –7–               N13/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


7.   Perinita (Little pillow) (Unidentified Piece)
     (no score provided)

     Musical elements
     • wind/brass ensemble
     • centered around F Major with one section in D minor (and possible a section in the Lydian mode)
     • 2/4
     • homophonic
     • regular phrases (mostly 8 measures).

     Musical structure
     There are many possible interpretations of the structure of this excerpt. Here is one of them.

     Most of the sections of this extract are organized groups of repeated on 8-measure phrases.
     The repetitions include sometimes variations. Accompaniment is rhythmically very stable and
     predictable: a group of instruments plays “on” the beat (low brass, possibly tuba or similar and
     drum) while a second group of instruments plays on the “off” beats (probably baritones and
     cymbals).

     0:00    Section A.     Melody led by a trumpet-like and a double reed instruments (doubling).
                            Phrase is repeated without variation. It could be argued that this section is
                            in Lydian mode (B natural).

     0:12    Section B.     Prominence of reeds in the melody. Phrase is repeated with little variation.
                            (a doubling of the melody by a brass instrument, probably a bugle). F major.

     0:23    Section C.     Prominence of reeds in the melody which uses mostly triplets. In the
                            repetition the melody is doubled by brass instruments (probably trumpets or
                            bugles). 1st and 2nd phrases act as antecedent and consequent.

     0:35    Section D.     Prominence of middle register brass (probably bugles) in the melody. The
                            second       phrase  is    a    repetition   of     the     first  phrase.
                            This section is in D minor. In the last measure there is the modulation to
                            return to F.

     0:46    Section A.     Basically the same as the original A.

     0:58    Section B.     Basically the same as the original B.

     1:10    Section C.     Basically the same as original C with probably some extra ornaments in the
                            trumpet.

     1:21    Section D.     Basically the same as the original D.

     1:33    Section A.     Basically the same as the original A with maybe a very slight accelerando.

     1:45    Section B.     Basically the same as the original B.
                                             –8–               N13/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Musical terminology
Some of the words that could be relevant to criterion C include (but are not limited to):
major, minor, triplets, homophonic, reed instruments, bugle, baritone, off-beats.

Musical context
• Traditional folk music from the Romani of Romania.
• This is a traditional dance (hora) that is danced in circles with a small pillow at the centre where
  at the end of the dance a couple kneels and kisses.
• This popular dance is still used in weddings and other festivities in the region of Transylvania
  and Moldavia.
• There are many versions for this song. In this case this version is performed by a traditional
  Gypsy band.
• Traditional Gypsy brass bands emerged from the Turkish military bands.
                                                –9–              N13/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                            SECTION C

Examiners should refer to page 35 (Listening paper – Section C (HL only)) of the IB Music Guide
(published February 2009, first examinations 2011) when marking question 8.

8.   A choice of any two of the extracts from Section B

     Question 8
     The arguments should refer in a balanced way to both of the candidate’s chosen extracts (taken
     from Section B). Arguments establishing musical links should be consistent and convincing in their
     display of musical understanding, and should be backed up by clearly located evidence.
     Musical terminology should be effective in its use.
