M18/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                   May / Mai / Mayo de 2018


         English / Anglais / Inglés ab initio


                         Standard level
                         Niveau moyen
                          Nivel medio


                   Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2




13 pages/páginas
                              –2–           M18/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use
of examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Global Centre, Cardiff.



Ces remarques pour la notation sont confidentielles. Leur
usage est réservé exclusivement aux examinateurs participant à
cette session.

Ces remarques sont la propriété du Baccalauréat International.
Toute reproduction ou distribution à de tierces personnes sans
l’autorisation préalable du centre mondial de l’IB à Cardiff
est interdite.



Estas notas para la corrección son confidenciales y para el uso
exclusivo de los examinadores en esta convocatoria de
exámenes.

Son propiedad del Bachillerato Internacional y no deben
reproducirse ni distribuirse a ninguna otra persona sin la
autorización del centro global del IB en Cardiff.
                                             –3–               M18/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The following are the annotations available to use when marking responses.

                                                                             Associated
         Annotation                         Explanation
                                                                              shortcut

                         Caret – indicates omission


                         Incorrect point


                         Ellipse that can be expanded

                         Horizontal wavy line that can be expanded

                         Highlight tool that can be expanded

                         On page comment – justifies application of
                         assessment criteria

                         Unclear content or language

                         SEEN - every scanned page must be annotated
                         or marked as SEEN

                         Good Response/Good Point

                         Vertical wavy line that can be expanded


You must make sure you have looked at all pages. Please put the        annotation on any blank
page, to indicate that you have seen it.

When using the On page Comment annotation, please keep the following in mind:
  • Avoid covering the candidate’s own writing. This can be done by writing your comments in the
    margins then running the arrow attached to the “On page comment” annotation to the
    appropriate place.
  • Provide all comments in the target language.
  • You may provide summative comments at the end of the script, but please do NOT record
    numerical marks on the scripts.
                                              –4–             M18/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


General marking instructions

 Assistant Examiners (AEs) will be contacted by their team leader (TL) through RM™ Assessor,
 by email or telephone – if through RM™ Assessor or by email, please reply to confirm that you
 have downloaded the marking notes from IBIS. The purpose of this initial contact is to allow
 AEs to raise any queries they have regarding the marking notes and their interpretation. AEs
 should contact their team leader through RM™ Assessor or by email at any time if they have
 any problems/queries regarding marking. For any queries regarding the use of RM™ Assessor,
 please contact emarking@ibo.org.



Instructions générales pour la notation

 Les chefs d’équipe se mettront en rapport avec les examinateurs assistants de leur équipe par
 l’intermédiaire de RMTM Assessor, par courriel ou par téléphone. S’ils s’adressent à vous par
 RMTM Assessor ou par courriel, veuillez répondre et confirmer que vous avez téléchargé les
 remarques pour la notation à partir d’IBIS. L’objectif de cette première prise de contact est de
 permettre aux examinateurs assistants de soulever toutes les questions qu’ils ont concernant les
 remarques pour la notation et leur interprétation. Les examinateurs assistants doivent contacter
 leur chef d’équipe par l’intermédiaire de RMTM Assessor ou par courriel à tout moment s’ils
 éprouvent des difficultés ou s’ils ont des questions concernant la notation. Pour toute question
 concernant l’utilisation de RMTM Assessor, veuillez envoyer un courriel à emarking@ibo.org.


Instrucciones generales para la corrección

 El jefe de equipo se pondrá en contacto con los examinadores asistentes mediante
 RM™ Assessor, correo electrónico o por teléfono. Si se pone en contacto mediante
 RM™ Assessor o correo electrónico, conteste para confirmar que ha descargado las notas para
 la corrección de IBIS. El propósito de este primer contacto es permitir al examinador asistente
 plantear todas las consultas que tenga respecto a las notas para la corrección y su
 interpretación. El examinador asistente deberá ponerse en contacto con el jefe de equipo
 mediante RM™ Assessor o correo electrónico si tiene problemas o consultas sobre la
 corrección. Si tiene alguna consulta respecto al uso de RM™ Assessor, envíe un correo
 electrónico a emarking@ibo.org.
                                                 –5–              M18/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                              Section A
Criterion A: Language

• Does the student demonstrate an ability to use the language effectively and accurately?
• Does the student use spelling, calligraphy (see “Glossary of terms”), vocabulary and grammatical
  structures correctly and accurately?

 Marks    Level descriptor
   0      Language inaccuracies completely obscure communication.
   1      Language inaccuracies often obscure communication.
   2      Language is generally accurate and does not obscure communication.
   3      Language is mostly accurate and communication is clear.


Clarification

Word count
At ab initio level, students are required to write a minimum of 50 words in section A (with equivalents
in non-Roman script languages). There is no penalty for not writing the minimal word target in
section A.

Language
Not all errors have the same importance, and examiners should bear this in mind. Some errors
affect the communication of meaning significantly, and others do not. Also, some errors indicate
a fundamental lack of command of the language, while others may simply indicate a moment of
forgetfulness.

SLIPS – mistakes at all levels of difficulty, but erratic and occasional – eg the candidate normally
forms past tenses well, but occasionally forgets “-ed”.

FLAWS – errors occur more regularly, particularly in certain structures – eg past tenses are formed
correctly quite often, but are not really reliable, and there may be basic confusions (eg past simple
versus present perfect).

GAPS – some structures are rarely correct, or simply don’t appear – eg the past tenses are needed,
but do not appear.
                                                 –6–             M18/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Question 1

You are going on holiday with your family and need someone to look after your pet each day during
your absence. You decide to put an advertisement in the local newspaper. In the advertisement,
you state
• the length of your absence
• what type of pet you have
• two tasks that the person must do to look after the pet
• how to contact you.



Criterion B: Message

Information to be given:

       •   The length of the absence:
           Accept a specific length (2 weeks)
           Accept from May 10th to May 20th
           Do not accept a return to home date only (I am on holiday until May 10 / I will be
           home on May 10th).
           Do not accept a departure date only (I leave on May 10th).
       •   The type of pet: accept any animal, bird, goldfish…
       •   Two tasks: they must be relevant to the situation of looking after a pet
       •   How to contact you: phone, email…




Criterion B: Message

• Is all the relevant information conveyed?

 Marks     Level descriptor
   0       No relevant information has been conveyed.
   1       Some relevant information has been conveyed.
   2       More than half (at least three pieces of information) has been conveyed.
   3       All relevant information has been conveyed effectively.

Criterion C: Format: advertisement

• Does the format correspond to the task?

 Marks     Level descriptor
   0       The format is not appropriate: no title
           The format is appropriate: a relevant title or one which does not exclude looking after a
   1
           pet.
                                               –7–             M18/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Question 2

You are not enjoying your holiday because of the bad weather. You send an email to a friend.
In the email, you
• say where and with whom you are spending your holiday
• describe the weather
• mention two activities you did during the bad weather.



Criterion B: Message

Information to be given:
     • where you are spending your holiday: accept name of town, country, place; at the seaside,
         in the countryside…
     • with whom you are spending your holiday: accept a name, a friend, a family member…
     • the weather: accept a reference to the temperature or general information which is about
         bad weather (or does not exclude this possibility)
     • two activities during the bad weather: these activities must be relevant to the situation. For
         example, accept watching TV, going to the cinema, walking in the rain. Do not accept
         sunbathing.



Criterion B: Message

• Is all the relevant information conveyed?

 Marks    Level descriptor
   0      No relevant information has been conveyed.
   1      Some relevant information has been conveyed.
    2     More than half (at least three pieces of information) has been conveyed.
    3     All relevant information has been conveyed effectively.

Criterion C: Format e-mail

• Does the format correspond to the task?

 Marks    Level descriptor
          The format is not appropriate:
    0
          no opening or closing greetings
          The format is appropriate. One of the following:
    1     opening greetings /closing greetings
                                                 –8–             M18/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                              Section B
Criterion A: Language

• To what extent does the student demonstrate an ability to use the language effectively and
  accurately?
• Does the student use a range of vocabulary and grammatical structures?
• Does the student show an awareness of the appropriate register for the task?

 Marks    Level descriptor
   0      The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
          The response and communication are of limited effectiveness.
          The range of vocabulary used is limited.
  1–2     Some basic grammatical structures are used accurately. These are isolated and limited
          in range.
          Register is inappropriate.
          The response and communication are partially effective.
          The range of vocabulary used is sometimes varied.
  3–4
          Most basic grammatical structures are used accurately.
          Register is partially appropriate.
          The response is generally accurate and communication is generally effective.
          The range of vocabulary used is varied.
  5–6     Basic grammatical structures and a limited range of more complex grammatical
          structures are used accurately.
          Register is generally appropriate.
          The response is accurate and communication is effective.
          The range of vocabulary used is varied and effective.
  7–8
          Basic and some more complex grammatical structures are used accurately.
          Register is appropriate.


Clarification

Word count
At ab initio level, students are required to write a minimum of 100 words in section B (with equivalents
in non-Roman script languages). There is no penalty for not writing the minimal word target in
section B.

Language
Not all errors have the same importance, and examiners should bear this in mind. Some errors
affect the communication of meaning significantly, and others do not. Also, some errors indicate
a fundamental lack of command of the language, while others may simply indicate a moment of
forgetfulness.

SLIPS – mistakes at all levels of difficulty, but erratic and occasional – eg the candidate normally
forms past tenses well, but occasionally forgets “-ed”.

FLAWS – errors occur more regularly, particularly in certain structures – eg past tenses are formed
correctly quite often, but are not really reliable, and there may be basic confusions (eg past simple
versus present perfect).

GAPS – some structures are rarely correct, or simply don’t appear – eg the past tenses are needed,
but do not appear.
                                                –9–             M18/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B: Message

•    To what extent does the student fulfil the task?
•    Are the ideas well-developed?
•    Is there evidence of a logical structure (paragraphing and sequencing)?
•    Are cohesive devices used effectively?

    Marks   Level descriptor
      0     The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
            The task has been partially fulfilled.
            One or more ideas have been identified and have been partially developed.
     1–2
            There is limited evidence of a logical structure.
            There is a partially successful use of a limited range of simple cohesive devices.
            The task has been generally fulfilled.
            One or more ideas have been identified and have been developed.
     3–4
            There is evidence of a logical structure.
            There is a generally successful use of a range of simple cohesive devices.
            The task has been fulfilled.
            All ideas have been identified and some have been developed well.
     5–6
            There is a logical structure.
            There is successful use of a range of simple cohesive devices.
            The task has been fulfilled effectively.
            All ideas have been developed well.
     7–8
            There is an effective, logical structure.
            There is successful use of a range of simple and some complex cohesive devices.
                                               – 10 –           M18/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Questions 3, 4, 5    General information

Criterion B: Message

Each question is composed of 3 parts. Each part is worth 3 marks. (One detail = 1 mark). When two
reasons / details are required in the question, the total available is 6 marks.

Examples
Question 3:
In the speech, the student must explain why he/she is the best person for president
An answer identified (1 detail = 1 mark): I will be a good student president because I have been a
student in this school for 10 years.
A developed answer (2 details =2 marks): I will be a good student president because I have been
a student in this school for 10 years. I share the students’ concerns.
A well-developed answer (3 details = 3 marks): I will be a good student president because I have
been a student in this school for 10 years. I share the students’ concerns. I am not afraid to speak to
teachers and students.

Question 4:
Give two reasons why you think that it is important to know your neighbours.
Reason 1 & Reason 2: Mark both parts together. Total 6 details = 6 marks


   1.FIRST assess the task based on the number of details.

 MESSAGE                                          TOTAL MARKS

 1-2 details / facts / examples                   1-2

 3-4 details                                      3–4

 5-6 details                                      5–6

 7+ details                                       7-8


   2. THEN attribute one more mark if the structure is logical and cohesive devices are used.
   3. Do not penalize if there are fewer than 100 words.
   4. The message must be clear to be awarded a mark. The message is clear when understood by
       an English speaker.
                                               – 11 –           M18/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Question 3:
Your school is looking for a new president for its student council. Students who want to be president
must give a speech to their classmates. In the speech, the student must explain why he/she is the
best person for president and what two changes to school life he/she hopes to make. Write the text
of the speech.

Message
  • Why you are the best choice for president: accept personality/ personal qualities, actions,
     roles, skills, promises of action in the future (3 reasons = 3 marks)
  • 2 proposed changes to school life: (6 details = 6 marks)


 MESSAGE                                          TOTAL MARKS

 1-2 details                                      1-2

 3-4 details                                      3–4

 5-6 details                                      5–6

 7+ details                                       7-8



Criterion C: Format: speech

The format is not appropriate         No characteristic of a speech                           0

The format is partially appropriate   One of the following characteristics:                   1
                                         • opening address
                                         • reference to audience in the speech
                                         • concluding remarks to audience

The format is appropriate             Two of the following characteristics:                   2
                                         • opening address
                                         • reference to audience in the speech
                                         • concluding remarks to audience
                                                – 12 –          M18/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Question 4:
You think that it is important for everyone to know their neighbours. You decide to organize a
picnic in the local park to help people meet their neighbours. Write the blog you are going to
post to advertise the event. Give the details of the picnic and two reasons why you think that it
is important to know your neighbours.


Message

   •   Details of the picnic: where, when (Friday May 11th / Friday / May 11th), time, the cost,
       what to bring, activities…
       Do not award marks for the information in the sentence taken from the question: “You
       decide to organize a picnic in the local park to help people meet their neighbours.” (3
       details = 3 marks)

   • Reason 1 & Reason 2: Why it is important to know your neighbours           (6 details = 6 marks)



 MESSAGE                                           TOTAL MARKS

 1-2 details                                       1-2

 3-4 details                                       3–4

 5-6 details                                       5–6

 7+ details                                        7-8



Criterion C: Format: blog

The format is not appropriate         No characteristics of a blog                             0

The format is partially appropriate   One of the following characteristics:                    1
                                         • time
                                         • date
                                         • user name
                                         • title (for example: Hello Bloggers)
                                         • reference to audience (“Don’t forget to like and
                                              add a comment”)
The format is appropriate             Two of the following characteristics:                    2
                                         • time
                                         • date
                                         • user name
                                         • title (for example: Hello Bloggers)
                                         • reference to audience (“Don’t forget to like and
                                              add a comment”)
                                                – 13 –           M18/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Question 5:
During the last school holiday, you had an interesting part-time job. Write an article for the school
magazine about your experience. Explain the reason you chose the job, the kind of work you
did and the interesting aspects about the job.

Message
   • Reason you chose the job: practise a language, meet people, travel, work schedule, salary,
       future career (3 reasons = 3 marks)
   • kind of work: description of routine or tasks, with whom, for whom, aim …(3 details = 3
       marks)
   • Interesting aspects: A developed or well-developed answer can mention several different
       aspects or develop one interesting aspect. (3 aspects or details = 3 marks)


       MESSAGE                                            TOTAL MARKS

       1-2 details                                        1-2

       3-4 details                                        3–4

       5-6 details                                        5–6

       7+ details                                         7-8




Criterion C: Format: article

The format is not appropriate         No characteristics of an article                          0

The format is partially appropriate   One of the following characteristics:                     1
                                         • title
                                         • name of journalist
                                         • date
                                         • sub-headings
The format is appropriate             Two of the following characteristics:                     2
                                         • title
                                         • name of journalist
                                         • date
                                         • sub-headings
