© International Baccalaureate Organization 2022

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2022

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2022

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
English B – Higher level – Paper 2 – Reading comprehension
Anglais B – Niveau supérieur – Épreuve 2 – Compréhension écrite
Inglés B – Nivel Superior – Prueba 2 – Comprensión de lectura
Monday 7 November 2022 (afternoon)
Lundi 7 novembre 2022 (après-midi)
Lunes 7 de noviembre de 2022 (tarde)

1h


Text booklet – Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this booklet until instructed to do so.
y This booklet accompanies paper 2 reading comprehension.

Livret de textes – Instructions destinées aux candidats
y N’ouvrez pas ce livret avant d’y être autorisé(e).
y Ce livret accompagne la partie de l’épreuve 2 portant sur la compréhension écrite.

Cuadernillo de textos – Instrucciones para los alumnos
y No abra este cuadernillo hasta que se lo autoricen.
y Este cuadernillo acompaña a la parte de comprensión de lectura de la prueba 2.




                                                                                              8822 – 2236
     5 pages/páginas                                      © International Baccalaureate Organization 2022
                                                    –2–                                            8822 – 2236


Text A

                                  Why Kids Need to Spend Time
                                           in Nature
1        As the suburbs continue to expand, nature is parcelled
         off more, and kids seem less inclined to spend time in a
         fenced-in yard, let alone jump the fence into a neighbor’s
         yard or walk in the woods. Moreover, for kids who are            Non-essential image removed
         growing up with multiplayer video games and social
         media accounts, indoor activities can seem more sociable
         and even safer.

2        Most studies agree that kids who play outside are happier
         and more attentive. They appear less anxious than kids
         who spend more time indoors. While it’s unclear how
         mood improvements occur, there are a few things we do know about why nature is good for
         your kids’ minds.

3        It improves personal decision making
         The way that kids play outdoors has a lot less structure than most types of indoor play. There
         are infinite ways to interact with nature and letting your child choose how they treat nature
         means they have the power to control their own actions.

4        It stimulates creativity
         This unstructured style of play will soon have kids responding to their surroundings. They will
         be able to use their imagination, improvise their own activities, and approach the world in more
         inventive ways.

5        It teaches responsible behaviour
         Living things die if mistreated or not taken care of properly and entrusting a child to take care of
         the living parts of the environment means they’ll learn what happens when they forget to water
         a plant or pull a flower out by its roots.

6        [–5–]
         Nature may seem less inspiring than your child’s violent video game, but in reality, it activates
         more senses—they can see, hear, smell, and touch outdoor environments. As the young spend
         less and less of their lives in natural surroundings, their senses narrow, and this reduces the
         richness of human experience.

7        [–6–]
         Most ways of interacting with nature involve more exercise than sitting on the couch. Your kid
                                               –3–                                           8822 – 2236


     doesn’t have to be joining the local soccer team or riding a bike through the park—even going
     for a walk will get their blood pumping.

8    [–7–]
     Nature creates a unique sense of wonder for kids that no other environment can provide. The
     phenomena that occur naturally in backyards and parks every day make kids ask questions.

9    [–8–]
     In natural environments, we practice an effortless type of attention known as “soft fascination”
     that creates feelings of pleasure and peacefulness, not tiredness and boredom.

10   So, while screen time might be the easier, more popular choice for your children, it’s important
     to set aside time for outdoor play.




                                                           Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                  –4–                                            8822 – 2236


Text B

                Generation Z not ready to eat lab-grown meat: study
         People born between 1995 and 2015 now number two billion
         globally and scientists say that these Generation Z consumers
         are a force to be reckoned with.

         Consequently, researchers questioned 227 randomly
 5       selected people born between 1995 and 2015. The
         respondents were asked questions about their demographics,
         dietary preferences (such as how often they liked to eat
         meat), and how they felt about cultured meat. They were also
         asked whether they thought it was necessary to accept and         Non-essential image removed
10       consume different meat alternatives (such as insects, plant-
         based and cultured meat).

         They discovered that 72 % of respondents were not yet ready
         to consume cultured meat, defined in the survey as a lab-
         grown meat alternative made from animal cells, instead of
15       slaughtered animals.

         However, despite their lack of enthusiasm for the new meat
         alternative, 41 % believed it could be a viable nutritional
         source because of the need to transition to more sustainable food options and improve
         animal welfare.

20       59 % of participants were concerned about the environmental impact of traditional livestock
         farming; however they were not clear what specific effects it was having.

         The researchers noted that some respondents viewed cultured meat as a conspiracy
         orchestrated by the rich and powerful and they were determined not to be deceived by it.

         Several participants were also unsure whether cultured meat was truly a long-term
25       environmentally-friendly option.

          In summary, it was found that the respondents were effectively divided into two groups:
          the “against” described cultured meat as “another thing our generation has to worry about”
          while supporters described it as “money invested for a good cause” by people who are
         “advanced thinkers”.

30       What’s your beef? Generation Z’s attitudes towards cultured meat
         • 17 % of respondents rejected all alternatives, including cultured meat, seeing it as chemically
           produced and heavily processed.
         • 11 % rejected all alternatives, preferring to consume more fruit and vegetables and saying
           they would stick with a vegetarian diet.
35       • 35 % rejected cultured meat and edible insects but accepted plant-based alternatives
           because they “sounded more natural” and were “normal”.
         • 28 % believed cultured meat was acceptable or possibly acceptable if the technology could
           be mastered.
                                                    –5–                                            8822 – 2236


Text C

                                      An extract from Exit West
         The next day, at work, Saeed found himself unable to stop thinking of Nadia. Saeed’s employer
         was an agency that specialised in the placement of outdoor advertising. They owned billboards
         all around the city, rented others, and struck deals for further space with the likes of bus lines,
         sports stadiums and proprietors of tall buildings.

    5    The agency occupied both floors of a converted townhouse and had over a dozen employees.
         Saeed was among the most junior, but his boss liked him and had tasked him with turning
         around a pitch to a local soap company that had to go out by email before five. Normally Saeed
         tried to do copious amounts of online research and customise his presentations as much as
         possible. “It’s not a story if it doesn’t have an audience,” his boss was fond of saying, and for
10       Saeed this meant trying to show a client that his firm truly understood their business, could
         really get under their skin and see things from their point of view.

         But today, even though the pitch was important – every pitch was important: the economy was
         sluggish from mounting unrest and one of the first costs clients seemed to want to cut was
         outdoor advertising – Saeed couldn’t focus. A large tree, overgrown and untrimmed, reared up
15       from the tiny back lawn of his firm’s townhouse, blocking out the sunlight in such a manner that
         the back lawn had been reduced mostly to dirt and a few wisps of grass, interspersed with a
         morning’s worth of cigarette butts, for his boss had banned people from smoking indoors, and
         atop this tree Saeed had spotted a hawk constructing its nest. It worked tirelessly. Sometimes it
         floated at eye level, almost stationary in the wind, and then, with the tiniest movement of a wing,
20       or even of the upturned feathers at one wingtip, it veered.

         Saeed thought of Nadia and watched the hawk.

         When he was at last running out of time he scrambled to prepare the pitch, copying and pasting
         from others he had done before. Only a smattering of the images he selected had anything
         particularly to do with soap. He took a draft to his boss and suppressed a wince while sliding
25       it over.

         But his boss seemed preoccupied and didn’t notice. He just jotted some minor edits on the
         printout, handed it back to Saeed with a wistful smile, and said, “Send it out.”

         Something about his expression made Saeed feel sorry for him. He wished he had done a
         better job.




Disclaimer:
Content used in IB assessments is taken from authentic, third-party sources. The views expressed within them belong to their
individual authors and/or publishers and do not necessarily reflect the views of the IB.

References:
Text A		      Cohen, D., 2020. Why Kids Need to Spend Time in Nature. [online] Available at: https://childmind.org/article/why-
              kids-need-to-spend-time-in-nature/ [Accessed 1 November 2021]. Source adapted.
Text B		      Morrison, O., 2020. Gen Z not ready to eat lab-grown meat: study. [online] Available at: https://www.foodnavigator.
              com/Article/2020/09/09/Gen-Z-not-ready-to-eat-lab-grown-meat-study [Accessed 1 November 2021]. Reproduced
              with permission of the Licensor through PLSclear. Source adapted.
Text C		      Excerpt(s) from EXIT WEST: A NOVEL by Mohsin Hamid, copyright © by Margo Jefferson. Used by permission of
              Riverhead, an imprint of Penguin Publishing Group, a division of Penguin Random House LLC. All rights reserved.
