N22/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

    November / Novembre / Noviembre de
                   2022

                  English / Anglais / Inglés B


                         Higher level
                       Niveau supérieur
                        Nivel Superior


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




9 pages/páginas
                                            –2–              N22/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2022

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2022

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2022

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                –3–              N22/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

Criterion A: Language

How successfully does the candidate command written language?
• To what extent is the vocabulary appropriate and varied?
• To what extent are the grammatical structures varied?
• To what extent does the accuracy of the language contribute to effective communication?

  Marks                                         Level descriptor
     0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
             Command of the language is limited.
             Vocabulary is sometimes appropriate to the task.
    1–3      Some basic grammatical structures are used, with some attempts to use more
             complex structures.
             Language contains errors in both basic and more complex structures. Errors interfere
             with communication.
             Command of the language is partially effective.
             Vocabulary is generally appropriate to the task and varied.
    4–6      A variety of basic and some more complex grammatical structures is used.
             Language is mostly accurate for basic structures, but errors occur in more complex
             structures. Errors at times interfere with communication.
             Command of the language is effective and mostly accurate.
             Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied, including the use of idiomatic
             expressions.
    7–9
             A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used effectively.
             Language is mostly accurate. Occasional errors in basic and in complex grammatical
             structures do not interfere with communication.
             Command of the language is mostly accurate and very effective.
             Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and nuanced and varied in a manner that
             enhances the message, including the purposeful use of idiomatic expressions.
  10–12      A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used selectively in
             order to enhance communication.
             Language is mostly accurate. Minor errors in more complex grammatical structures
             do not interfere with communication.

Language
Not all errors have the same importance, and examiners should bear this in mind. Some errors
affect the communication of meaning significantly, and others do not. Also, some errors indicate a
fundamental lack of command of the language, while others may simply indicate a moment of
forgetfulness.

SLIPS – mistakes at all levels of difficulty, but erratic and occasional – eg the candidate normally
forms past tenses well, but occasionally forgets “-ed”.

FLAWS – errors occur more regularly, particularly in certain structures – eg past tenses are formed
correctly quite often, but are not really reliable, and there may be basic confusions (eg past simple
versus present perfect).

GAPS – some structures are rarely correct, or simply don’t appear – eg the past tenses are
needed, but do not appear.
                                               –4–                N22/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

Criterion B: Message
To what extent does the candidate fulfil the task?
  • How relevant are the ideas to the task?
  • To what extent are ideas developed?
  • To what extent do the clarity and organization of ideas contribute to the successful delivery of
    the message?

The “descriptor unpacked” explain the assessment criteria in greater detail. Where a candidate’s
response does not correspond exactly to a single mark band, the statements in bold should be
used as a guide for the ‘best fit’ approach.

 Marks           Level descriptor                             Descriptor unpacked
   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
         The task is partially fulfilled. The link between the response and task tends to be
                                             unclear; the reader has difficulty understanding the
         Few ideas are relevant to the       message.
         task.
                                             The response touches upon some aspects of the task but
         Ideas are stated, but with no       there is also much unrelated information.
  1–3    development.
                                             The response addresses the task in a simple manner, and
         Ideas are not clearly presented     supporting details and/or examples barely feature, if at all.
         and do not follow a logical         The ideas do not link well together; inadequate or
         structure, making the message       inappropriate use of cohesive devices confuse the
         difficult to determine.             message.
         The task is generally fulfilled.    The link between the response and the task is mostly
                                             detectable; the reader’s general understanding of the
         Some ideas are relevant to the      message is not impeded, despite some ambiguity.
         task.
                                             The response covers some aspects of the task, or
         Ideas are outlined, but are not     touches upon all aspects but superficially.
         fully developed.
  4–6                                        The response includes some supporting details and
         Ideas are generally clearly         examples.
         presented and the response is       The ideas are organized in a logical way; some cohesive
         generally structured in a logical   devices are used appropriately to aid the delivery of the
         manner, leading to a mostly         message, although there may be areas of confusion at
         successful delivery of the          times.
         message.
         The task is fulfilled.              The link between the response and the task is clear;
                                             the reader has a good understanding of the message
         Most ideas are relevant to the      conveyed.
         task.
                                             The response covers all aspects of the task, despite
         Ideas are developed well, with      losing focus at times.
  7–9    some detail and examples.
                                             The response uses supporting details and examples to
         Ideas are clearly presented and     clarify the message.
         the response is structured in a     The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive devices
         logical manner, supporting the      are used appropriately to deliver the message with little or
         delivery of the message.            no ambiguity.
         The task is fulfilled effectively. The link between the response and the task is precise
                                             and consistently evident; the reader has a clear
         Ideas are relevant to the task.     understanding of the message conveyed.
 10–12
         Ideas are fully developed,          The response covers all aspects of the task fully, and
         providing details and relevant      maintains focus throughout.
         examples.
                                                   –5–               N22/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

             Ideas are clearly presented and     The response uses well-chosen supporting details and
             the response is structured in a     examples to illustrate and explain ideas persuasively.
             logical and coherent manner         The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive devices
             that supports the delivery of the   are used appropriately to deliver the message with clarity
             message.                            and ease.


Note: When marking candidate responses, keep in mind that neither the factual accuracy of the
information presented, nor the validity of the candidates’ personal opinions, are being assessed.
Therefore, scripts that are factually inaccurate should not be marked down, provided the ideas
presented have coherence and are sufficiently developed.



Criterion C: Conceptual understanding

To what extent does the candidate demonstrate conceptual understanding?
   •       To what extent is the choice of text type appropriate to the task?
   •       To what extent are register and tone appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
           task?
   •       To what extent does the response incorporate the conventions of the chosen text type?

  Marks                                           Level descriptor
       0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
              Conceptual understanding is limited.
              The choice of text type is generally inappropriate to the context, purpose or audience.
   1–2        The register and tone are inappropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response incorporates limited recognizable conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is mostly demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is generally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   3–4        The register and tone, while occasionally appropriate to the context, purpose and
              audience of the task, fluctuate throughout the response.
              The response incorporates some conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is fully demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   5–6        The register and tone are appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response fully incorporates the conventions of the chosen text type.



Note: Examiners must balance all three elements in criterion C (choice of text type,
appropriateness of tone and register, and use of text type conventions) to arrive at the final mark.
                                                 –6–                N22/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

Question specific guidance (Criterion B and C)

Task 1

You belong to an online group interested in languages. One member has said that they feel
different when speaking English to speaking in their home language. You wish to express your
opinions to the group. Write a text to summarize the member’s ideas, compare them to your own
experiences, and express your own ideas about the relationship between language and identity.

Email              Interview                 Online forum posting


Criterion B:
• The three required elements of the task are (i) summarize the member’s ideas, (ii) compare them
  to your own experiences, and (iii) express your own ideas about the relationship between
  language and identity.
• Equal weight does not have to be given to all three elements, but all should be given some
  developed attention. If one is ignored, or given only cursory attention, no more than the 4-6 band
  should be awarded, since the task has only been ‘generally fulfilled’ at best.
• Discussion of (i) should focus principally on the ways in which the original writer felt differently
  when speaking English compared to another language.
• Coverage of (ii) may involve discussion of how their own experiences were similar to or different
  from the original member’s experiences, or both.
• Discussion of (iii) may refer to personal experiences but should also include ideas about the
  relationship between language and identity more generally.

Criterion C:
Choice of text type:
                           Text type         Rationale
Appropriate                Online forum      This text type is appropriate for an audience with
                           posting           shared interests. It allows the writer to respond
                                             personally to an existing thread, as well as contribute
                                             their own opinion for further comment.
Generally appropriate      Email             Although this text type would allow the writer to
                                             express a personal opinion to a specified group, it is
                                             not typically used to respond to an existing
                                             contribution. The choice may be considered
                                             “appropriate” if the response makes clear that the
                                             text is in reply to a previous comment.
Generally inappropriate    Interview         The text type is typically used to share ideas of
                                             another person with a mass audience. It is not
                                             usually written for a targeted audience to express
                                             one’s own views.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the stated task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”,
and the “generally inappropriate” text type can be considered “generally appropriate”.

Register and tone:
• informal or semi-formal register
• lively tone or showing personal engagement with the topic

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                 –7–                N22/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

Task 2

You read an article which claims that cities are responsible for most of the world’s carbon
emissions. You feel your city could be doing more. Write a text for your fellow citizens in which
you describe one source of carbon emissions within your city, present measures to reduce the
pollution it causes, and explain why the measures would benefit the population.

Interview                 Online forum posting                       Set of guidelines

Criterion B:
• The three required elements of the task are (i) describe one source of carbon emissions, (ii)
  present measures to reduce the pollution it causes, and (iii) explain why the measures would
  benefit the population.
• Equal weight does not have to be given to all three elements, but all should be given some
  developed attention. If one is ignored, or given only cursory attention, no more than the 4-6 band
  should be awarded, since the task has only been ‘generally fulfilled’ at best.
• To satisfy (i), the response should clearly describe at least one source of carbon emissions in the
  city. Do not automatically penalize for describing more than one source.
• Discussion of (ii) should involve at least two relevant measures, or one overarching measure that
  would tackle the problem in number of different ways.
• “benefit the population” in (iii) may be interpreted as people living in the city, or the global
  population.


Criterion C:
Choice of text type:
                           Text type         Rationale
Appropriate                Set of            This text type is suitable for reaching a wide
                           guidelines        audience located in the same geographic area to
                                             encourage collective action against an issue of
                                             specific concern to them.
Generally appropriate      Online forum      This text type is suitable for encouraging collective
                           posting           action, but it is usually shared with a narrower
                                             audience with shared interests. The choice may be
                                             considered “appropriate” if the response makes clear
                                             the text is addressing a wide audience (‘fellow
                                             citizens’).
Generally inappropriate    Interview         The text type is typically used to share ideas of
                                             another person, rather than the writer’s own. It is not
                                             usually used to encourage collective action.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the stated task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”,
and the “generally inappropriate” text type can be considered “generally appropriate”.

Register and tone:
• Semi-formal or formal register
• Firm, convincing and persuasive tone

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                 –8–                N22/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

Task 3

A building of great cultural significance has fallen into a state of neglect. The local council is now
proposing to demolish it and replace it with a public park. You want to stop the council from going
ahead with this plan. Write a text in which you explain why you oppose the demolition, suggest an
alternative use for the building, and justify why your suggestion would be more useful for the
community.

Email            Letter to the editor             Set of guidelines


Criterion B:
• The three required elements of the task are (i) explain why you oppose the demolition, (ii) suggest
  an alternative use for the building, and (iii) justify why your suggestion would be more useful for
  the community.
• Equal weight does not have to be given to all three elements, but all should be given some
  developed attention. If one is ignored, or given only cursory attention, no more than the 4-6 band
  should be awarded, since the task has only been ‘generally fulfilled’ at best.
• Discussion of (i) should focus principally on opposing the demolition, rather than on objecting to
  the public park. Reasons for opposing should include ideas related to the building’s cultural
  significance, but other reasons may also be given.
• Suggestion in (ii) should focus on alternative “use” for the building, i.e. it should be a suggestion
  that keeps at least some form of the original building, if not all.
• The term “useful” in (iii) may be interpreted broadly, beyond functions with practical value,
  provided these are well justified.


Criterion C:
Choice of text type:
                           Text type         Rationale
Appropriate                Email             The text type is appropriate to a professional
                                             communication to a local government body. It would
                                             allow the writer to develop a clearly supported and
                                             justified argument.
Generally appropriate      Letter to the     This text type is suitable for expressing a clearly
                           editor            developed and justified argument, but it is usually
                                             designed to reach a wide audience. The choice may
                                             be considered “appropriate” if the response makes
                                             clear that they are indirectly addressing the local
                                             council.
Generally inappropriate    Set of            This text type is typically used to give instruction. It is
                           guidelines        not usually used to persuade local councils.


Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the stated task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”,
and the “generally inappropriate” text type can be considered “generally appropriate”.

Register and tone:
• Formal register
• Polite and concerned tone

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                              –9–             N22/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

Appendix: Text type conventions (Criterion C)

The most common and recognisable conventions of the text types are given below:

Email
  • clear sense of address to a specific person
  • statement of Subject in the heading
  • appropriate opening and closing salutations


Interview

  Embedded
  • relevant headline/title
  • style aimed at involving and interesting the reader
  • references to the interview, including direct quotations and/or reported speech

  Transcribed
  • Relevant headline / title
  • Clear introduction, to explain context
  • Question and response structure, showing the speakers’ alternating speeches


Letter to the editor
  • appropriate opening and closing salutations
  • reference to the original article/issue raised
  • interesting and engaging style


Online forum posting
  • first person narration/statement
  • seek to engage the reader, e.g. direct address, lively and interesting style
  • may include typical online communication techniques, e.g. references to other postings,
     members and forums, hashtags, @references, and ‘likes’ etc.


Set of guidelines
  • clear and focused heading/title
  • clearly set-out format e.g. bullets, sub-headings, numbering, etc.
  • short introduction and conclusion.
