© International Baccalaureate Organization 2022

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2022

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2022

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
English ab initio – Standard level – Paper 2 – Reading comprehension
Anglais ab initio – Niveau moyen – Épreuve 2 – Compréhension écrite
Inglés ab initio – Nivel Medio – Prueba 2 – Comprensión de lectura
Monday 7 November 2022 (afternoon)
Lundi 7 novembre 2022 (après-midi)
Lunes 7 de noviembre de 2022 (tarde)

1h


Text booklet – Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this booklet until instructed to do so.
y This booklet accompanies paper 2 reading comprehension.

Livret de textes – Instructions destinées aux candidats
y N’ouvrez pas ce livret avant d’y être autorisé(e).
y Ce livret accompagne la partie de l’épreuve 2 portant sur la compréhension écrite.

Cuadernillo de textos – Instrucciones para los alumnos
y No abra este cuadernillo hasta que se lo autoricen.
y Este cuadernillo acompaña a la parte de comprensión de lectura de la prueba 2.




                                                                                              8822 – 2812
     4 pages/páginas                                      © International Baccalaureate Organization 2022
                                                    –2–                                             8822 – 2812


Text A

                                      Triply: The App of the Day



                                            Non-essential image removed




   1     The app* Triply is the answer to a problem that many young people are familiar with. What’s
         the easiest way to get to events or festivals if these events are in the countryside or if you live
         outside the city where the events are taking place?

   2     Thanks to Triply, young people can easily find transportation to and from such events. They
         indicate on the app when they will arrive at the train station nearest to the event and Triply then
         arranges for local trains or shuttle buses to take them in groups to and from the event itself. In
         this way, the last part of the journey is both easy and inexpensive.

   3     The app is also very useful for organizers of these large events. It solves the problems of a lack
         of parking spaces and of possible traffic congestion caused by visitors who all go there by car.
         In other words, the app is both practical and environmentally friendly.

   4     Co-founder, Sebastian Tanzer, explains the idea.

   5     [–2–]
         It provides a practical transportation service that lets young people travel to and from events
         easily. Our goal now is to make travelling easier in rural areas because elderly and young
         people in those areas need transportation services in order to become more mobile.

   6     [–3–]
         Many transport apps focus on urban areas. We focus on the countryside and connections
         between the countryside and cities.

   7     [–4–]
         Not so difficult. We received some financial help, so the start was relatively easy.

   8     [–5–]
         Our team has already participated in 17 events. In one event, we helped more than two
         thousand students get to a nightclub.

   9     What can we expect for Triply in a year from now?
         We’re hoping that our app will be widely used and that we can offer transportation to
         additional areas.



* app: software application
                                                    –3–                                            8822 – 2812


Text B

                                 Youth Hostels Past and Present
         It was a stormy night in 1909 when the youth hostelling
         movement was born. German schoolteacher, Richard
         Schirrmann, was on an eight-day hiking trip with his
         students. They usually slept in a farm building but on this
 5       night, the farmer couldn’t give them shelter. Therefore,
         the headmaster of the village school offered to let them
         sleep in an empty classroom.

         Later Richard Schirrmann imagined a network of schools
         all across the world to offer overnight accommodation
10       to young people. “Villages could have a youth hostel              Non-essential image removed
         to welcome young hikers,” he wrote in an article. “Two
         classrooms are enough, one for boys and one for girls.
         The desks can be moved out and 15 beds put into the
         classroom. Each child will keep their own sleeping place
15       clean and tidy.”

         Since then, youth hostelling has come a long way.
         Today, hikers are called backpackers and Hostelling
         International (HI) is a global network. Australia has more
         than 70,000 members and 120 HI hostels. Australia is
20       also leading the way in the development of a new style of hostels. Sydney Central hostel, for
         example, was one of the first to have keycard room entry. It is also one of the biggest hostels in
         the world, with 550 beds in 151 rooms, a rooftop pool and a full-time activities officer. The hostel
         still provides, however, self-catering kitchens and communal living areas. The Sydney Central
         hostel even has a free garage to store bikes and provides hostellers with transport to town.

25       A youth hostel offers cheap accommodation but it is different from other low-cost
         accommodation because there is a sense of community. Most youth hostels in Australia, for
         example, celebrated the anniversary of the youth hostel movement with a giant barbecue for all.
         The Australian youth hostel chief executive, Julian Ledger, says “Sharing a room is how you
         meet people - it is fun, communal and economical.”




                                                                 Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                     –4–                 8822 – 2812


Text C




         Removed for copyright reasons





Disclaimer:
Content used in IB assessments is taken from authentic, third-party sources. The views expressed within them belong to their
individual authors and/or publishers and do not necessarily reflect the views of the IB.

References:
Text A		      Suntinger, H., 2020. Start-up of the Day: Triply arranges transport for youth to festivals & events. [online]
              Available at: https://innovationorigins.com/start-up-of-the-day-triply-arranges-transport-for-youth-to-festivals-
              events. [Accessed 30 September 2020]. Source adapted.
Text B		      Southerden, L., 2012. One hundred years young: youth hostels celebrate a century. [online] Available at:
              https://www.traveller.com.au/one-hundred-years-young-youth-hostels-celebrate-a-century-etne. [Accessed
              21 October 2019]. Source adapted.
