N18/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

November / Novembre / Noviembre de 2018


                  English / Anglais / Inglés A:
                   language and literature /
                     langue et littérature /
                       lengua y literatura


                         Higher level
                       Niveau supérieur
                        Nivel superior

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1


5 pages/páginas
                              –2–           N18/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are the property of the International
Baccalaureate and must not be reproduced or distributed to
any other person without the authorization of the IB Global
Centre, Cardiff.

Ces remarques pour la notation sont la propriété du
Baccalauréat International. Toute reproduction ou distribution à
de tierces personnes sans l’autorisation préalable du centre
mondial de l’IB à Cardiff est interdite.

Estas notas para la corrección son propiedad del Bachillerato
Internacional y no deben reproducirse ni distribuirse a ninguna
otra persona sin la autorización del centro global del IB en
Cardiff.
                                                –3–             N18/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


General marking instructions

 These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking. They are not
 offered as an exhaustive and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must
 rigidly adhere.
 Good ideas or angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate.
 Similarly, answers which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here should be
 rewarded appropriately.

 Of course, some of the points listed will appear in weaker papers, but are unlikely to be
 developed.


Instructions générales pour la notation

 Ces remarques sont de simples lignes directrices destinées à aider les examinateurs lors de la
 notation. Elles ne peuvent en aucun cas être considérées comme un ensemble fixe et exhaustif
 de réponses ou d’approches de notation auxquelles les réponses doivent strictement
 correspondre.
 Les idées ou angles valables qui n’ont pas été proposés ici doivent être reconnus et
 récompensés de manière appropriée.
 De même, les réponses qui ne comprennent pas toutes les idées ou approches mentionnées ici
 doivent être récompensées de manière appropriée.

 Naturellement, certains des points mentionnés apparaîtront dans les épreuves les moins bonnes
 mais n’y seront probablement pas développés.


Instrucciones generales para la corrección

 El objetivo de estas notas para los examinadores es servir de directrices para ayudar en la
 corrección. Por lo tanto, no deben considerarse una colección fija y exhaustiva de respuestas y
 enfoques por la que deban regirse estrictamente todas las respuestas.
 Los buenos enfoques e ideas que no se mencionen en las notas para la corrección deben recibir
 el reconocimiento y la valoración que les corresponda.
 De igual manera, las respuestas que no incluyan todas las ideas o los enfoques que se sugieren
 en las notas deben valorarse en su justa medida.

 Por supuesto, algunos de los puntos que se incluyen en las notas aparecerán en exámenes
 más flojos, pero probablemente no se habrán desarrollado.
                                                –4–              N18/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.    Text A and text B

This question asks candidates to compare a personal account by Daniel Carruthers of a cycling
competition in Taiwan, from cyclingtips.com in 2012, to an infographic by Jonathan Hart for the
Atlanta Bicycle Coalition, a nonprofit organization promoting all aspects of cycling in the city of
Atlanta Georgia, in 2012.

An adequate to good analysis will:

 note that although the idea of promoting cycling is common to both texts, this theme is explored
  in different ways (e.g. point of view, format, length, tone, etc)
 comment on the audience and purpose of the two text types, the personal account on
  cyclingtips.com is targeting a specific audience of active cyclists with the intent to encourage
  cyclists to participate in future KOM races, while the infographic addresses the general public,
  primarily in Atlanta Georgia, with an aim of promoting cycling and public health
 explore some of the features of the personal account: use of first person, substantial
  introduction of self and situation, use of cycling jargon/argot, use of imagery and figurative
  language, use of a photograph, close focus on one event, etc
 explore some of the features of the infographic: heading, use of colour, layout, graphic
  elements, grid-like format, eye-appeal, third-person point of view, facts and figures, brief and
  succinct language, use of secondary sources to add credibility, etc
 address ways in which the different text types shape meaning for different audiences.


A good to excellent analysis may also:

 note the use of both positive and negative imagery in Text A and a purely positive focus in Text
  B
 analyse the types of appeal used in Text A to encourage people to do the race and in Text B to
  persuade people to take up cycling
 comment on the attention paid in Text B to both the individual and the community
 comment on the balance between the informative and persuasive purposes of the two texts
 comment on the relevance of geographical location (i.e. Taiwan, Georgia, USA) to audience
  and purpose
 offer a more thorough and detailed analysis of the visual aspects of the two texts
 compare and contrast the views of cycling proposed in the two texts
 show a nuanced understanding of how the divergent text types shape meaning.
                                                 –5–              N18/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.    Text C and text D

This question asks candidates to compare a Filipino legend of unknown origins about the waling-
waling orchid to an article in a local Philippine website, Doon Po Sa Amin, about the significance of
the waling-waling orchid to the Philippines in 2017.

An adequate to good analysis will:

 consider that both text types deal in some way with the significance of the waling-waling orchid:
  both consider the orchid of interest and value to the Filipino people, but each is unique in
  audience and purpose
 consider some of the contrasts between the two texts: old versus new, fiction versus fact, myth
  versus science, etc
 consider the style and technique of the legend in Text C: story-telling tradition (originally oral,
  set “long, long ago”); narrative accounting for a naturally occurring phenomenon; the use of
  archetypes: rich and powerful king, poor fisherman, and delicate and beautiful daughter, etc
 consider the style and technique of Text D: use of large photo of the orchid, heading relating
  orchid to a queen, the use of a list, use of introduction to lay context, use of detail, description,
  history, citing of authority, figurative language, conclusion with an appeal to the public, etc.

A good to excellent analysis may also:

 offer a closer comparison/contrast of these two text-types with regard to audience and purpose
 offer a more detailed and insightful discussion of the style and techniques used in Text C: for
  instance, use of pronouns (e.g. “our”); the way in which the conclusion both destroys and
  immortalizes the daughter; depictions of beauty; and the representation of individuals and
  groups with regard to gender and/or class
 offer a more detailed and insightful discussion of the style and techniques used in Text D: for
  instance, short, accessible chunks of equal-length text under bold subheadings; scientific
  language, etc.
 discuss overlapping features of the texts: for example, how both texts mention specific places
  in the Philippines; and how both explore themes of protection and conservation (the ancient
  legend and the modern article are both concerned with conserving something that is unique to
  their homeland).
