N18/1/AXENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX




English A: literature – Higher level – Paper 2
Anglais A : littérature – Niveau supérieur – Épreuve 2
Inglés A: literatura – Nivel superior – Prueba 2

Friday 2 November 2018 (morning)
Vendredi 2 novembre 2018 (matin)
Viernes 2 de noviembre de 2018 (mañana)

2 hours / 2 heures / 2 horas


Instructions to candidates
 Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on at least two of the part 3 works
  you have studied and compare and contrast these works in response to the question. Answers
  which are not based on a discussion of at least two part 3 works will not score high marks.
 You are not permitted to bring copies of the works you have studied into the examination room.
 The maximum mark for this examination paper is [25 marks].

Instructions destinées aux candidats
 N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
 Traitez un seul sujet de composition. En basant votre réponse sur au moins deux des œuvres
  de la troisième partie que vous avez étudiées, vous devez comparer et opposer ces œuvres
  dans le cadre du sujet. Les réponses qui ne sont pas basées sur au moins deux des œuvres de
  la troisième partie n’obtiendront pas une note élevée.
 Vous n’êtes pas autorisé(e) à apporter des exemplaires des œuvres que vous avez étudiées
  dans la salle d’examen.
 Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est de [25 points].

Instrucciones para los alumnos
 No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
 Conteste una sola pregunta de redacción. Base su respuesta en al menos dos de las obras
  estudiadas de la parte 3, comparándolas y contrastándolas en relación con la pregunta.
  Las respuestas que no se basen en al menos dos obras de la parte 3 no recibirán una
  puntuación alta.
 No está permitido traer copias de las obras estudiadas a la sala de examen.
 La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [25 puntos].




                                                                                             8818 – 0058
     3 pages/páginas                                     © International Baccalaureate Organization 2018
                                                 –2–                 N18/1/AXENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on at least two of the part 3 works you
have studied and compare and contrast these works in response to the question. Answers which are
not based on a discussion of at least two part 3 works will not score high marks.

Drama

1.   Sometimes plays can allow us to view the errors of others and the resulting chaos. With reference
     to the work of at least two playwrights you have studied, by what means have dramatists presented
     such errors and to what effect?


2.   In what ways and with what effects have at least two playwrights you have studied used dramatic
     irony?


3.   With reference to the work of at least two playwrights you have studied, compare the techniques
     used to introduce and create the initial impact of main characters.



Poetry

4.   Compare by what means at least two poets you have studied evoke atmosphere, for example,
     to create a sense of place or situation.


5.   With what techniques do at least two poets you have studied create an unsettling view of love?


6.   Compare the techniques used to tell a story in the work of at least two poets you have studied.
                                                   –3–                  N18/1/AXENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Prose: novel and short story

7.    With reference to the works of at least two authors you have studied, compare the ways in which
      minor characters may be seen as key in the creation of narrative interest.


8.    In what ways are contrasts between various kinds of light and dark presented in the works by at
      least two authors you have studied, and with what effects?


9.    In the work of at least two authors you have studied, compare how the physical setting creates a
      tension that sustains the reader’s interest.



Prose other than fiction

10.   The means by which a journey takes place can be an essential part of the experience. In works of
      prose other than fiction by at least two authors you have studied, explore the techniques used to
      present, and the impact of, the mode of travel.


11.   With reference to the work of at least two authors of prose other than fiction you have studied,
      discuss the narrative techniques used to engage the reader in the ideas being presented and to
      convince them of their validity.


12.   In the works of at least two authors of prose other than fiction you have studied, explore
      the presentation of one culture observing another, and the effects created.




