© International Baccalaureate Organization 2021

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2021

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2021

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Sports, exercise and health science
Higher level
Paper 1

Tuesday 4 May 2021 (morning)


1 hour


Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y Answer all the questions.
y For each question, choose the answer you consider to be the best and indicate your choice on
  the answer sheet provided.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [40 marks].




                                                                                             2221 – 6601
     14 pages                                            © International Baccalaureate Organization 2021
                                                 –2–                                        2221 – 6601


1.   Which bones of the vertebral column are fused?

     A.   Thoracic, sacral

     B.   Lumbar, coccyx

     C.   Sacral, coccyx

     D.   Thoracic, cervical


2.   Which statement is correct about the insertion of a skeletal muscle?

     A.   The attachment of a muscle tendon to a moveable bone

     B.   The attachment of a muscle tendon to a stationary bone

     C.   The attachment of a muscle tendon at the proximal end

     D.   The attachment of a muscle tendon on the anterior aspect


3.   The diagram shows the skeletal muscles in the anterior upper leg. Which muscle is labelled X?




                                      X




     A.   Rectus femoris

     B.   Vastus medialis

     C.   Sartorius

     D.   Vastus lateralis
                                                   –3–                            2221 – 6601


4.   Which is a definition of vital capacity?

     A.    Volume of air in the lungs after a maximum inhalation

     B.    Maximum volume of air that can be exhaled after a maximum inhalation

     C.    Volume of air in excess of tidal volume that can be forcibly exhaled

     D.    Volume of air breathed in and out in any one breath


5.   What causes an increase in ventilation?

     A.    A decrease in carbon dioxide content in the blood

     B.    A decrease in hydrogen ions in the blood

     C.    A decrease in blood pH

     D.    A decrease in blood acidity


6.   What is the primary role of platelets?

     A.    Supporting immune function

     B.    Carrying dissolved substances

     C.    Transporting oxygen

     D.    Blood clotting and preventing bleeding


7.   What does systolic blood pressure measure?

     A.    The force exerted on venous walls during atrial contraction

     B.    The force exerted on arterial walls during atrial contraction

     C.    The force exerted on venous walls during ventricular contraction

     D.    The force exerted on arterial walls during ventricular contraction




                                                                                  Turn over
                                                    –4–                                       2221 – 6601


8.    How do glucose molecules combine to form a disaccharide?

      A.    Condensation reaction

      B.    Catabolic reaction

      C.    Anaerobic catabolic reaction

      D.    Aerobic glycolysis


9.    Which is a source of saturated fat?

      A.    Palm oil

      B.    Olive oil

      C.    Sunflower oil

      D.    Canola (rapeseed) oil


10.   What is a function of adrenaline?

      A.    Increases stimulation of the parasympathetic nervous system

      B.    Increases heart rate

      C.    Decreases glycogenolysis

      D.    Decreases heart rate


11.   What is the definition of cell respiration?

      A.    The controlled release of energy in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) from organic
            compounds in cells

      B.    The controlled release of energy in the form of adenosine diphosphate (ADP) from organic
            compounds in cells

      C.    The controlled release of energy in the form of glycogen from organic compounds in cells

      D.    The controlled release of energy in the form of carbon dioxide from organic compounds
            in cells
                                                  –5–                                       2221 – 6601


12.   What shortens during muscular contraction according to the sliding filament theory?

      A.   Z line

      B.   A band

      C.   H zone

      D.   Actin


13.   What is an example of an isotonic eccentric contraction for the triceps?

      A.   Lowering phase (elbow flexion) in a push-up

      B.   Lifting phase (elbow extension) in a push-up

      C.   Execution phase (elbow extension) when throwing a ball

      D.   Preparation phase (elbow flexion) when throwing a ball


14.   Which term describes a scalar quantity?

      A.   Acceleration

      B.   Distance

      C.   Displacement

      D.   Velocity




                                                                                            Turn over
                                                     –6–                                       2221 – 6601


15.   The diagram shows a pole vaulter clearing the bar. Which number represents the correct
      position of the centre of mass?

                                                          1

                                                     4           2


                                                                           Bar
                                                          3




                     [Source: HAY JAMES G., THE BIOMECHANICS OF SPORTS TECHNIQUES,
                          4th Ed., ©1993 Reprinted by permission of Pearson Education, Inc.]

      A.   1

      B.   2

      C.   3

      D.   4


16.   What is an example of a first-class lever?

      A.   Triceps contracting, moving the elbow

      B.   Biceps contracting, moving the elbow

      C.   Quadriceps contracting, moving the knee

      D.   Hamstrings contracting, moving the knee


17.   What does ability refer to?

      A.   The production of goal-orientated movements

      B.   The way in which a sports skill is performed
                                                     –7–                                      2221 – 6601


      C.   A learned skill that is specific to the task

      D.   The general trait or capacity of the individual


18.   The diagram shows Welford’s model of information processing. What does X represent?

                                       WELFORD’S MODEL 1968




                 Sense
                 organs
                                  Perception




                                                                                  Effectors
               receiving
                 stimuli                                      X
                from the
                 outside




                Internal
                sensors


      A.   Short-term store

      B.   Decision making

      C.   Effector control

      D.   Long-term store




                                                                                              Turn over
                                                               –8–                                   2221 – 6601


19.    The diagram shows a learning curve. What type of learning is occurring during X?

                     1


                    0.8
                                                               X
      Proficiency




                    0.6


                    0.4


                    0.2


                     0

                          0          0.5             1             1.5      2           2.5          3

                                                         Time periods

       A.           Plateau

       B.           Linear

       C.           Positive acceleration

       D.           Negative acceleration


20.    Which describes practice to performance transfer in tennis?

       A.           Hitting against a ball machine

       B.           Understanding the biomechanics of hitting

       C.           Training for strength to improve hitting

       D.           Hitting right-handed and left-handed


21.    Which is an example of a reciprocal teaching style?

       A.           The coach explicitly selects content and methods of what must be completed.

       B.           The coach sets the agenda and the athletes work in pairs to provide each other
                    with feedback.

       C.           The coach sets a task for the athlete to solve.

       D.           The athletes coach themselves.
                                                   –9–                                       2221 – 6601


22.   An athlete completed five timed trials of a 20 m sprint test. What is the mean time?



                                        Trial           Time (s)

                                          1              3.95

                                          2              4.05

                                          3              3.80

                                          4              4.00

                                          5              4.20

      A.   3.90 s

      B.   3.95 s

      C.   4.00 s

      D.   4.05 s


23.   What does a large standard deviation indicate?

      A.   The data is clustered closely to the mean.

      B.   The data is spread widely around the mean.

      C.   The data is normally distributed.

      D.   The data is not normally distributed.


24.   Which is a performance-related fitness component?

      A.   Body composition

      B.   Agility

      C.   Flexibility

      D.   Muscular endurance




                                                                                             Turn over
                                                    – 10 –                                 2221 – 6601


25.   What does the training principle of reversibility refer to?

      A.    The gradual increase of intensity in training demands

      B.    The variability of training loads and skills

      C.    The replication of performance demands in training

      D.    The training benefits are lost if training ceases


26.   The diagram below shows the generalized structure of the skin. What is labelled X?




                                                                      X




      A.    Dermis

      B.    Hair follicles

      C.    Glands

      D.    Fat
                                                  – 11 –                                2221 – 6601


27.   The diagram shows the left lateral view of the brain. Which lobe is labelled X?


                                                                            X




      A.   Frontal lobe

      B.   Parietal lobe

      C.   Occipital lobe

      D.   Temporal lobe


28.   Which endocrine organs are found in the head?

      A.   Pineal, pancreas

      B.   Thyroid, adrenal

      C.   Pineal, hypothalamus

      D.   Hypothalamus, thyroid


29.   How are circulating hormone levels regulated?

           I.     Feedback loops
           II.    Signals from the nervous system
           III.   Chemical changes in the blood and other hormones

      A.   I and II only

      B.   I and III only

      C.   II and III only

      D.   I, II and III




                                                                                        Turn over
                                                     – 12 –                                       2221 – 6601


30.   What is the definition of fatigue in sports?

      A.    A reversible, exercise-induced decline in performance

      B.    A depletion of muscle creatine phosphate stores

      C.    A reduction in reaction time to a stimulus

      D.    A decrease in the production of lactate


31.   What is a cause of peripheral fatigue for an athlete completing a 100 m sprint?

      A.    Depletion of muscle and liver glycogen

      B.    Depletion of creatine phosphate and ATP

      C.    Reduction of Ca2+ release

      D.    Dehydration


32.   What is drag?

      A.    A dimensionless scalar quantity, which is the ratio of friction and normal reaction force

      B.    A force applied to attempt to move a stationary object

      C.    A force that acts parallel to the interface of two surfaces that are in contact

      D.    A force acting to oppose the motion of an object through a fluid


33.   What is an example of an athlete reducing form drag?

      A.    A cyclist adopting a low profile position

      B.    A swimmer staying underwater for as long as possible at the start of the race

      C.    A swimmer using a shark-skin suit

      D.    A soccer player using soccer boots on a grass surface


34.   Which is a feature of non-linear pedagogy in sport?

      A.    Content-focused learning

      B.    Coach-led learning

      C.    Development of creative processes in athletes

      D.    Transmission of fixed knowledge from a coach
                                                  – 13 –                                     2221 – 6601


35.   What are the reasons for using notational analysis?

           I.     Provide consistent and reliable feedback
           II.    Provide tactical and technical evaluations
           III.   Provide an objective method of recording performance

      A.   I and II only

      B.   I and III only

      C.   II and III only

      D.   I, II and III


36.   The diagram shows where shots were taken from during a basketball game. What type of
      simple notation system was used?




      A.   Scattergram

      B.   Frequency table

      C.   Sequential system

      D.   Flow chart




                                                                                         Turn over
                                                      – 14 –               2221 – 6601


37.   Which statement is correct?

      A.    Children inherit all of their genes from their mother.

      B.    All human characteristics are expressed developmentally.

      C.    Some characteristics require an environmental switch.

      D.    Genotypes are determined by phenotypes.


38.   Which is an environmental factor that influences performance?

      A.    Training

      B.    Muscle fibre type

      C.    Height

      D.    Lung capacity


39.   What is a function of the immune system?

      A.    To sustain increased levels of cortisol

      B.    To lower leucocyte numbers

      C.    To increase levels of adrenaline

      D.    To protect the body against pathogens


40.   Which strategy can athletes use to reduce their risk of infection?

      A.    Maintain close contact with people

      B.    Maintain oral hygiene

      C.    Maintain high-intensity training

      D.    Maintain high-frequency of training
References:

15.       [Physics pole vault] HAY JAMES G., THE BIOMECHANICS OF SPORTS TECHNIQUES, 4th Ed., ©1993 Reprinted
          by permission of Pearson Education, Inc.

26.       [Layers of skin] De Agostini Picture Library/Getty Images.

All other texts, graphics and illustrations © International Baccalaureate Organization 2021
