M12/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                               May 2012



      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN A
            GLOBAL SOCIETY



                         Higher Level



                               Paper 3




12 pages
                              –2–             M12/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                               –3–             M12/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Examiners should be aware that in some cases, candidates may take a different approach, which if
appropriate should be rewarded. If in doubt, check with your Team Leader.

In the case of an “identify” question read all answers and mark positively up to the maximum marks.
Disregard incorrect answers. In all other cases where a question asks for a certain number of facts
e.g. “describe two kinds”, mark the first two correct answers. This could include two descriptions,
one description and one identification, or two identifications.
                                                  –4–               M12/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.   (a)   Define the term cookie.                                                                [2 marks]

           A cookie is:
            information stored by your browser on your computer
            A small text file stored by the browser on the user’s computer.

           Award [1 mark] for either of the correct statements above.

           A cookie also:
            contains information about a web site that has been visited
            contains name-value pairs of information, e.g. ID – id number
            can be linked to the web site’s database that contains data about your visits,
             such as preferences, location, pages visited. Other information such as login
             information, last page visited, preferences to customize the web site such as
             colour, language
            is non-executable
            can have expiry dates or persist until deleted by the user
            can be encrypted for security and privacy reasons
            can be used to enhance a user’s visit to a web site as information is stored that
             is used to customize the visit
            can help load a webpage quickly with your preferences from previous visits.

           Award [1 mark] for further development about information contained in a cookie.

     (b)   Describe how a cookie could enhance the experience of the user on the
           PTC web site.                                                         [2 marks]

           The information stored in the cookie is used to enhance the user’s next visits
           to the theatre web site by retrieving details of:
            which language was used in the last visit, which will avoid the necessity to
              select the desired language on the web site
            previous bookings and to present the current plays being performed at the last
              theatre visited, which is assumed to be the user’s preferred theatre
            payment methods and personal details so they do not need to be entered again
            special needs, such as the address to send the tickets to as the user does not
              have the facility to print the tickets themselves
            the favourite genre of the user so that current and future plays of that genre can
              be suggested to the user
            the ID number so that the user does not need to remember it to receive these
              benefits.

           Award [1 mark] for a general description or indirect enhancement of how
           recorded information can be used to customize the theatre booking experience for
           the user based on the previous visit to the web site, e.g. that an ID is used to
           retrieve the user’s previous preferences.

           Award [2 marks] for a description of a specific benefit, similar to those above,
           that clearly describes how the user’s experience is enhanced.
           Only one enhancement is required.
                                                  –5–               M12/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   The database used by the PTC needs to conform to the ACID (atomicity,
     consistency, isolation and durability) rules.

     With reference to a customer making an online booking with the PTC for seats
     using a credit card, explain how the lack of conformity with two of the ACID rules
     affects the successful functioning of the PTC database booking system.             [6 marks]

     These rules are needed to ensure the reliability and integrity of the data stored in
     a database. The following transactions and problems are only samples of what
     could happen.

      Atomicity
       Rule – Atomicity means that a transaction is not finally accepted into the database
       until the processing of the data in the transaction is complete for all fields and the
       data has satisfied all the rules of the database. If any part fails due to problems with
       the data processing, the database system or the hardware, the transaction is
       rolled back.
       Problems – If one part of this transaction was not completed the database may
       contain a seat that has not been booked but has been paid for or a seat that has been
       booked but not paid for.

      Consistency
       Rule – There must be consistency between data fields in a record, as well as
       consistency of individual data in a particular field with the validation rules of
       the database.
       Problems – If some of the data entered by the user when paying for the seats is not
       valid then the whole transaction will be rejected, e.g. the credit card number is not a
       valid number, or the date is not a valid date. If this happens, the theatre will not
       receive the money for the seat or the buyer may not receive the tickets for the
       date wanted. Another type of consistency problem would occur if a patron decided
       to not subscribe to the theatre for that year. The record of the patron should be
       deleted and also any reference to the patron in the section of the database that is used
       to send out a newsletter each month; otherwise extra newsletters would be sent out
       causing a waste of time and money.

      Isolation
       Rule – Data cannot be accessed and used in other database operations until a
       transaction has been fully completed. Hence concurrent transactions on the same
       record in the database cannot be performed at the same time.
       Problems – If the transaction described above is not isolated from other transactions
       by marking/locking it in the process of being booked, then a double transaction for
       the same seat can occur. This could result in one person booking the seat and
       another person paying for it; or one person thinking that two seats have been booked
       but actually only one has been booked and paid for.
                                             –6–                M12/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


 Durability
  Rule – Durability is the guarantee that the data changes from a fully completed
  transaction will survive a failure of the system (hardware and software).
  A transaction log is one way that this can be achieved, or a real-time back-up can
  be used.
  Problems – If during the transaction there is a power surge, or some other equipment
  or software problem, the transaction may not be complete, i.e. all parts of the
  transaction have been entered into the database, checked and confirmed. This could
  result in the seat being booked but not paid for or vice versa; or the transaction not
  being processed at all, but a confirmation message being sent to say that it has been.

Two rules need to be identified and explained for the maximum [6 marks]. If only one
is discussed the maximum that can be awarded for this question is [3 marks].

For each rule:
[1 mark]
The answer defines the rule.

[2–3 marks]
The answer identifies how the rule applies to a theatre database booking system and
explains how the lack of conformity would affect the reliability and integrity of the data.
                                                   –7–              M12/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   Discuss the features of an appropriate user interface for the PTC online booking
     system that would create a quality experience for the user.                      [8 marks]

     List of features of the booking system web site that were highlighted in the
     case study:
      interactive selection of seats from a live theatre plan
      intuitive interface and structure – the student may discuss features here such as use of
        colour, spacing and alignment, titles, use of blocks of text, instructions
      users will be able to select preferred language from the four national languages,
        French, German, Romansh and Italian, and English, and if tourism increases, Russian
        and Arabic
      be compatible with all browsers – impact of lack of compatibility should be included
        in discussion
      secure online payment facility
      each theatre company needs a section for themselves
      an opening screen that integrates the main features of the web site – search, selection
        of theatres, current productions, future productions, etc.
      be able to switch from one language to another
      no need for additional software such as plug-ins and other client side software
      printing of tickets by users
      other payment systems for those who do not have a credit card
      special needs – for those who do not have easy access to computer equipment
        (through physical disability or some other reason), or may not be familiar with online
        booking systems
      use of video, animations and other multimedia features on the web site.

     Other features may be added if appropriate.

     In this question it is expected there will be a balance in the ITGS terminology between
     IT technical terminology and the terminology related to social and ethical impacts.
     For this question the answer will need to focus on the impact on the user as he/she
     uses the booking system to research productions, and to book and pay for tickets.

     N.B. Award no more than [3 marks] if no new information is added to that in the
     Case Study.
                                       –8–              M12/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


SL and HL paper 1 part (c) and HL paper 3 question 3 markband
        Marks            Level descriptor
                        •   A response with no knowledge or understanding of the
      No marks              relevant ITGS issues and concepts.
                        •   A response that includes no appropriate ITGS terminology.
                        •   A response with minimal knowledge and understanding of
                            the relevant ITGS issues and concepts.
                        •   A response that includes minimal use of appropriate
                            ITGS terminology.
        Basic
                        •   A response that has no evidence of judgments and/or
      1–2 marks             conclusions.
                        •   No reference is made to the scenario in the stimulus material
                            in the response.
                        •   The response may be no more than a list.
                        •   A descriptive response with limited knowledge and/or
                            understanding of the relevant ITGS issues and/or concepts.
                        •   A response that includes limited use of appropriate
                            ITGS terminology.
      Adequate          •   A response that has evidence of conclusions and/or
      3–4 marks             judgments that are no more than unsubstantiated statements.
                            The analysis underpinning them may also be partial
                            or unbalanced.
                        •   Implicit references are made to the scenario in the stimulus
                            material in the response.
                        •   A response with knowledge and understanding of the
                            relevant ITGS issues and/or concepts.
                        •   A response that uses ITGS terminology appropriately
                            in places.
      Competent
                        •   A response that includes conclusions and/or judgments that
      5–6 marks
                            have limited support and are underpinned by a balanced
                            analysis.
                        •   Explicit references to the scenario in the stimulus material
                            are made at places in the response.
                        •   A response with a detailed knowledge and understanding of
                            the relevant ITGS issues and/or concepts.
                        •   A response that uses ITGS terminology appropriately
      Proficient            throughout.
      7–8 marks         •   A response that includes conclusions and/or judgments that
                            are well supported and underpinned by a balanced analysis.
                        •   Explicit references are made appropriately to the scenario in
                            the stimulus material throughout the response.
                                                –9–               M12/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   The development of the IT system is due to start in June 2012 and be handed over
     on 1 March 2014. Formulate a development strategy that will enable the
     customized IT system to be delivered to the theatres that meets their requirements
     on time and within budget.                                                         [12 marks]

     It should be recognized that, given time constraints, answers are likely to include a
     much narrower range of issues and concepts than identified below. There is no
     “correct” answer.

     Examiners must be prepared to award full marks to answers which synthesize and
     evaluate even if they do not examine all the stimulus materials.

     The development strategy must address the following:
      the development and implementation of the IT system
      the requirements of the IT system
      the agreed time requirements
      the agreed budget requirements.

     The case study provides the following requirements which should be addressed in
     the response:
      The theatres have a limited budget and are aware that the solution may require
        compromises in terms of features and functionality.
      Centralized web site for information about the venues, the productions, ticketing and
        seat selection:
        the web site has five languages
         the web site has interactive seat selection
         online payment facility
         user friendly and includes consideration of customers with special needs, is
           compatible with many browsers and contains multimedia features (preferably with
           no plug-ins needed).
      Each theatre company needs to be able to manage its own part of the web site, and
        have access to sales and customer data for analysis and customer relationship
        management:
         production of analysis reports, hopefully using business intelligence software
         use of customer relationship management system software
         the migration of data about current customers to the new system
         using a content management system to manage the web site.
      The new system needs to be up and running by 1 March 2014.
      The choice of supplier, including the choice of the customization of an existing
        system or the development of a completely new system.
      Data integrity issues – security of data access and use, backup of data.
      The new system could be based on one of the two options listed below:
         a distributed database system
         a centralized database system, in association with a Virtual Private
           Network (VPN).

     The candidate must demonstrate an understanding of the application of the SDLC and
     Project Management in the context of the needs of the PTC – requirements, timeline
     and budget. The strategy should provide details of the developmental process to be
     followed and a justification of the process, including how the requirements above will
     be achieved.
                                           – 10 –             M12/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The response should refer to the ideas stated below, but may not address all within the
time constraint.

Choice of development methodology
The candidate justifies the development methodology, Waterfall, Agile or a hybrid of
both.
It is likely that the Waterfall method will be used and this may be inferred if the
response shows a sequential development.
The length of time for each stage, assuming the Waterfall method is used, should be
realistic.

Analysis stage
Performed by the PTC committee, or a sub-group, who need to engage the services of a
systems analyst.
 Data collection – e.g. questionnaires, interviews, observation, literature searches to
   provide analysis of current situation and organizational requirements.
 Identification of suitable system(s) is made – both customization of a product and
   development of a new system from the ground up.
 Identification of possible suppliers is made as well.
 Feasibility study.

This report will need to go to the full PTC committee who will make the final decision.
Customization of a product or development from the ground-up, a choice of supplier(s)
is made and requirements specification documents are produced.

Design stage
The supplier will take the requirements specification documents and develop a plan and
a design that satisfies the requirements and the constraints imposed by the budget,
timeline and the various features required.
 Project plan (who, why, what, when and how) part of the project is developed by the
   systems analyst.
 Detailed designs are produced.
 Choice of developmental strategy – e.g. waterfall, agile or a mixture of both –
   is also determined in the design stage.
 Acceptance of the plan.

The design is accepted by the full PTC committee and development starts.

Development stage
 Development of the IT solution – choice of suppliers and developers of specialized
  parts of the system are selected, e.g. network and hardware suppliers, specialized
  database and web site developers, etc.
 Development of the web site – database and setting up of the hardware and software
  ready for comprehensive testing.
 Initial testing, alpha testing – would most likely take place in the premises of the
  supplier and must satisfy the requirements specified.
                                             – 11 –             M12/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


 Implementation stage
 Training and support of staff, documentation to support the new IT system.
 Changeover methods.
 Beta testing – the testing of the system in situ at the theatres which should utilize the
   staff as well. It would need to be thorough and include all areas of operation,
   including data security, backups and disaster recovery plans. Beta testing would
   also include the use of “real data” migrated from the records of previous
   performances and productions in the two theatres.
 Maintenance – maintenance contracts should have been part of the original
   negotiations.
                                            – 12 –              M12/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


HL paper 3 question 4 markband
        Marks            Level descriptor
                         •   A response with no knowledge or understanding of the relevant
       No marks              ITGS issues and concepts.
                         •   A response that includes no appropriate ITGS terminology.
                         •   A response with minimal knowledge and understanding of the
                             relevant ITGS issues and concepts.
                         •   A response that includes minimal use of                   appropriate
                             ITGS terminology.
         Basic
                         •   A response that has no evidence of judgments, conclusions or
       1–3 marks             future strategies.
                         •   No reference is made to the information in the case study or
                             independent research in the response.
                         •   The response may be no more than a list.
                         •   A descriptive response with limited knowledge and/or
                             understanding of the relevant ITGS issues and/or concepts.
                         •   A response that         includes    limited   use   of    appropriate
                             ITGS terminology.
       Adequate
                         •   A response that has evidence of conclusions, judgments or future
       4–6 marks
                             strategies that are no more than unsubstantiated statements. The
                             analysis underpinning them may also be partial or unbalanced.
                         •   Implicit references are made to the information in the case study
                             or independent research in the response.
                         •   A response with knowledge and understanding of the relevant
                             ITGS issues and/or concepts.
                         •   A response that uses ITGS terminology appropriately in places.
       Competent         •   A response that includes future strategies, conclusions and/or
       7–9 marks             judgments that have limited support and are underpinned by a
                             balanced analysis.
                         •   Explicit references to the information in the case study or
                             independent research are made at places in the response.
                         •   A response with a detailed knowledge and understanding of the
                             relevant ITGS issues and/or concepts.
                         •   A response       that   uses   ITGS    terminology       appropriately
                             throughout.
       Proficient        •   A response that includes conclusions, judgments or future
      10–12 marks            strategies that are well supported and underpinned by a
                             balanced analysis.
                         •   Explicit references are made appropriately to the information in
                             the case study and independent research throughout
                             the response.
