M12/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                               May 2012



      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN A
            GLOBAL SOCIETY



           Higher Level and Standard Level



                               Paper 2




12 pages
                              –2–             M12/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                                  –3–               M12/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Using assessment criteria for external assessment

For external assessment, a number of assessment criteria have been identified. Each assessment criterion
has level descriptors describing specific levels of achievement, together with an appropriate range
of marks. The level descriptors concentrate on positive achievement, although for the lower levels failure
to achieve may be included in the description.

Examiners must judge the externally assessed work at SL and at HL against the four criteria (A–D) using
the level descriptors.

  The same assessment criteria are provided for SL and HL.

  The aim is to find, for each criterion, the descriptor that conveys most accurately the level attained by
  the candidate, using the best-fit model. A best-fit approach means that compensation should be made
  when a piece of work matches different aspects of a criterion at different levels. The mark awarded
  should be one that most fairly reflects the balance of achievement against the criterion. It is not
  necessary for every single aspect of a level descriptor to be met for that mark to be awarded.

  When assessing a candidate’s work, examiners should read the level descriptors for each criterion until
  they reach a descriptor that most appropriately describes the level of the work being assessed. If a
  piece of work seems to fall between two descriptors, both descriptors should be read again and the one
  that more appropriately describes the candidate’s work should be chosen.

  Where there are two or more marks available within a level, examiners should award the upper marks
  if the candidate’s work demonstrates the qualities described to a great extent. Examiners should award
  the lower marks if the candidate’s work demonstrates the qualities described to a lesser extent.

  Only whole numbers should be recorded; partial marks, that is fractions and decimals, are not
  acceptable.

  Examiners should not think in terms of a pass or fail boundary, but should concentrate on identifying
  the appropriate descriptor for each assessment criterion.

  The highest level descriptors do not imply faultless performance but should be achievable by
  a candidate. Examiners should not hesitate to use the extremes if they are appropriate descriptions of
  the work being assessed.

  A candidate who attains a high level of achievement in relation to one criterion will not necessarily
  attain high levels of achievement in relation to the other criteria. Similarly, a candidate who attains a
  low level of achievement for one criterion will not necessarily attain low achievement levels for the
  other criteria. Examiners should not assume that the overall assessment of the candidates will produce
  any particular distribution of marks.

  The assessment criteria must be made available to candidates prior to sitting the examination.
                                                   –4–                M12/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                              Topic: Politics and government

Criterion A — The issue and stakeholder(s)                                                          [4 marks]

1.   (a)   Describe one social/ethical concern related to the IT system in the article.

           Social/ethical concerns may include the following:
             reliability of data input – errors could occur when police enter a registration
             number resulting in retrieval of incorrect car owner details
             reliability if data is not updated at the server - a search retrieves out-dated
             information about the car owner eg an unpaid fine
             reliability of network/device – out of range/connection slow – police are unable
             to carry out their job/drivers are subjected to long waits
             integrity of results of searches – data could be lost/changed/corrupted when
             transmitted from the central computer to the hand-held device resulting in
             problems for police accessing car owner records
             Integrity of car owner information - if more than one person is able to access
             and change a record at the same time then car owner details may be incorrect
             privacy/security of car owner information stored in the central database –
             owner details/criminal records could be accessed by hackers
             privacy/security of data during transmission – hackers could access sensitive
             data (e.g. criminal records) as it is transmitted from the server to the hand-held
             computer
             privacy of sensitive data - if the device is found by an unauthorised person who
             can access the data
             privacy of sensitive data - if police perform unauthorised searches eg look up
             information about neighbours
             surveillance – car owners could be monitored and tracked by police as a
             driver’s location will be recorded at a certain date and time
             surveillance – using the GPS functionality the police superintendent could
             track the police officers who are on duty.
             car owner cannot easily check when registration expires – this may have
             implications if it is not renewed on time and the owner is driving an
             unregistered car
             accessibility to the database for police officers outside the city - police officers
             who work both in the city and the country and may need to use both the old
             system and the new system
             authenticity of the person using the device - if police are not required to log on
             to the device with a user ID and password then there is no prevention of
             unauthorised access to car owners’ data
             cost to the government to implement the system - money is needed for
             hardware, software, network coverage, police training
                                                –5–               M12/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



 (b)    Describe the relationship of one primary stakeholder to the IT system in
        the article.

        Primary stakeholders may include the following:
           police officers plus description eg who are using the hand-held devices to
           perform the driver searches/who are trained to use the hand held device
           car owners plus description eg whose details are being searched/who access the
           government website to check their registration details
           the police department/administrators who oversee the implementation of the
           system/supervise the police officers on duty.
           the Government - ie people ultimately responsible for police actions/citizens’
           rights
           citizens in Western Australia whose criminal records and photos can be
           accessed
           the software company responsible for designing a user-friendly and secure
           system


Marks                                          Level descriptor

 0          The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

 1          Either an appropriate social/ethical concern or the relationship of one primary
            stakeholder to the IT system in the article is identified.

 2          Either an appropriate social/ethical concern or the relationship of one primary
            stakeholder to the IT system in the article is described or both are identified.

 3          Either an appropriate social/ethical concern or the relationship of one primary
            stakeholder to the IT system in the article is described; the other is identified.

 4          Both an appropriate social/ethical concern and the relationship of one primary
            stakeholder to the IT system in the article are described.
                                                  –6–               M12/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Criterion B — The IT concepts and processes                                                       [6 marks]

2.   (a)   Describe, step by step, how the IT system works.
           IT system: using handheld computers, wireless network and central database

           Answers provided in the article include the following:
             on payment of the car registration fee the owners’ details are added to the car
             registration database
             police input the car registration number into a hand-held computer
             information about the owner is retrieved and displayed on the device screen

           Answers with additional information to that in the article may include the
           following:
              input is via a stylus or touch screen or keyboard
              the police officer is authenticated with logon and password/built-in biometric
              finger print reader in order to access the database
              the device uses installed software or firmware
              the hand-held computer connects (via radio link) to a secure wireless police
              network/uses the mobile phone system/uses a VPN
              any additional details relating to the hand-held computer and its connection to
              the main computer
              a client server is used - police central computer is the server and handhelds are
              clients
              data is encrypted during transmission/decrypted at the server
              the registration number is uploaded to the central police server /a query is
              performed using the registration number
              the registration number is used as a key field to search the database
              a matching record is found for the car owner
              a description of owner details (eg registration expiry date) which are sent back
              to the police officer’s hand-held computer.
                                             –7–               M12/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



(b)   Explain the relationship between the IT system and the social/ethical concern
      described in Criterion A.

      Answers may include the following:
      Privacy would be a concern if:
         data is intercepted by hackers during transfer of sensitive driver details from
         the server to the hand-held device
         an unauthorized person is able to access data on the hand-held device eg a
         policeman has not logged out and the system is not password protected
         an unauthorized person is able to access the central database
         police officers abuse/misuse information - eg perform a query using the
         registration number of a neighbour to retrieve the neighbour’s record and hence
         find out private information about him

      Reliability would be a concern if:
        the police officer types in the wrong registration number and therefore retrieves
        an incorrect owner record from the central database
        reliability of the network /device - owner details are not available due to server
        crash/network unavailable/hardware problems with the handheld device
        data is not updated on the owner record if registration details have changed – a
        search retrieves out of date information

      Surveillance would be a concern if:
        GPS functionality is used to track the location of a police officer without the
        police officer’s knowledge/without a valid reason.

      Integrity would be a concern if:
         The database is not able to accommodate multiple users - 2 users are trying to
         update the same record at the same time

      Accessibility would be a concern if:
        the Wi-Fi coverage does not extend to the local area, there are problems with
        overloading/bandwidth

      Candidates are expected to make reference to relevant stakeholders, information
      technologies, data and processes. Candidates will be expected to refer to
      “how the IT system works” using appropriate IT terminology.
                                         –8–               M12/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




Marks                                     Level descriptor

  0     The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

 1–2    There is little or no understanding of the step-by-step process of how the
        IT system works and does not go beyond the information in the article.
        The major components of the IT system are identified using minimal technical IT
        terminology.

 3–4    There is a description of the step-by-step process of how the IT system works that
        goes beyond the information in the article.
        Most of the major components of the IT system are identified using some technical
        IT terminology.
        The relationship between the IT system referred to in the article and
        the concern presented in criterion A is identified, with the some use of
        ITGS terminology.

5–6     There is a detailed description of the step-by-step process that shows a clear
        understanding of how the IT system works that goes beyond the information in the
        article.
        The major components of the IT system are identified using appropriate technical IT
        terminology.
        The relationship between the IT system referred to in the article and
        the concern presented in criterion A is explained using appropriate
        ITGS terminology.
                                                 –9–               M12/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Criterion C — The impact of the social/ethical issue(s) on stakeholders                          [8 marks]

3.   Evaluate the impact of the social/ethical issues on the relevant stakeholders.

     Car owner advantages may include the following:
       citizens all benefit from a more efficient police force – police officers have more
       time to be on patrol/car checks are faster
       stolen cars can be more quickly identified – returned to owners faster
       the cost savings to the government could be passed on to car owners – e.g. reduced
       registration fees.
       owners can check registration when away from their car eg overseas on holiday

     Car owner disadvantages may include the following:
       car owners could be wrongly accused of lapsed registration/outstanding fines if the
       police officer mistypes the registration number/if data is not kept up to date
       personal details (e.g. home address) could become accessible to unauthorized
       persons if data is not secured at the server/during transmission – this information
       could be misused/changed
       data matching through linked databases allows access to more sensitive data, e.g.
       criminal records – poor security could compromise the owner’s privacy/safety
       without a registration sticker as a reminder an owner may be late paying car
       registration – resulting in implications for fines, lack of insurance
       a car owner/driver’s whereabouts can be tracked as police record date, time, location
       of the driver - drivers may feel that they are under surveillance
       Lost/stolen devices could be used by unauthorised people to access car owners’ data
       reliability issues (device or network) could result in long waits for motorists
       lack of computer/Internet access/Government web site unavailable – could result in
       difficulty checking the registration expiry date
       privacy is at stake if police perform unauthorised searches on individuals

     Police department/police officer advantages may include the following:
       increased efficiency – immediate responses to searches allows police officers to
       perform their job more effectively
       easier to identify crimes such as stolen cars
       less tedious paper work – there is more time to perform other duties
       greater accuracy – an automated system ensures less police errors
       it is easier to read a registration plate from a distance – going up to a car to read a
       sticker may have safety implications
       police officers can use a hand-held device outside the police car – there is no need to
       be in the car to access the radio
       safety during field work – if trouble arises the police officer’s location can be
       immediately pinpointed and help sent
       cost saving – the police officer can perform the search without needing a second
       person at central office
       the information is more secure on a hand-held device than it is being transcribed to
       paper – less liability for police department/police officers.
       easy access to more information about drivers
       by accessing criminal records police are alerted to potential dangerous criminals
       before confronting them
                                           – 10 –             M12/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



  Police department/police officer disadvantages may include the following:
  surveillance – police officers could be under constant surveillance as their superiors
  can potentially track their whereabouts
  due to GPS tracking hackers could gain information about location of police
  cost to implement the system – initial purchase, network infrastructure, upgrades,
  training
  responsibility/cost of maintaining security and reliability of the network
  reliability issues (device/network) will make the job difficult for police
  reliability of data - police may pursue/fine the wrong driver if data is not accurate
  system crash may result in loss of data – police are responsible for keeping data
  secure
  legal disputes may arise if owners are fined due to incorrect information in the
  database
  time factor – police officers need to spend time on training
  security of the police officer who may need to concentrate on the hand-held device –
  this could make the police officer more vulnerable if a driver becomes abusive
  lost/stolen devices could be used by unauthorised people to access data - police are
  responsible for maintaining security of the devices
  job loss – less police required - police are not needed to ‘run a search’
  health issues from constant use of the device
  limited coverage of the device to city areas means country police have a more
  difficult job
  difficulties for police working between city and country as they may need to use both
  the old and new system
  repercussions on the police department if police abuse the device’s capabilities and
  perform unauthorised searches
  safety concerns if police are using the device whilst driving
  lack of familiarity with the technology causing stress

If the evaluation does not provide any additional information to that in the article,
the candidate will be awarded a maximum of [2 marks].

Marks                                       Level descriptor
  0         The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
            The impact of the social/ethical issues on stakeholders is described but not
 1–2        evaluated. Material is either copied directly from the article or implicit references
            are made to it.
            The impact of the social/ethical issues on stakeholders is partially analysed, with
            some evaluative comment. Explicit references to the information in the article are
 3–5
            partially developed in the response. There is some use of appropriate ITGS
            terminology.
            The impact of the social/ethical issues on stakeholders is fully analysed and
            evaluated. Explicit, well-developed references to information in the article are
 6–8
            made appropriately throughout the response. There is use of appropriate ITGS
            terminology.
                                                  – 11 –             M12/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Criterion D — A solution to a problem arising from the article                                     [8 marks]

4.   Evaluate one possible solution that addresses at least one problem identified
     in Criterion C.

     Answers may include the following:
     Solutions to the problem of security/privacy:
        authentication to access the central database/handheld device – ID and password /
        inbuilt biometric fingerprint reader
        access to the database is time restricted - afterhours access is not available to police
        software is used to track and record access to the database - time, user, data viewed-
        monitoring software could be loaded onto the hand held device
        policies are in place to ensure police officers only access relevant information – e.g.
        access to criminal records may not be appropriate for an expired registration
        data is stored in a relational database and tables have access permissions - only
        certain tables can be viewed by traffic police
        use of a virtual private network (VPN)/secure police-owned private network
        a firewall is installed on the police server
        a decoy server is set up to protect the actual server
        car owner data is encrypted during transmission / on the central server
        the hand-held device screen locks after a certain time if no input is detected
        lost or stolen hand-held devices can be tracked via GPS and disabled
        data is wiped if the device is not turned on after a certain time
        police can turn off GPS tracking when off duty

     Solutions to the problem of reliability:
        automated license plate recognition using a camera – overcomes issues with
        reliability of manual data entry/less distraction for police than typing in registration
        numbers
        data is validated on entry - eg registration number field is alphanumeric
        data is verified by typing in the registration number twice (at data entry/when
        checking a car)/staff are employed to check data input/owner is given the opportunity
        to check his/her record
        details returned to the hand-held computer include the car registration number,
        allowing a further check to ensure the police officer has entered the correct number
        the database is downloaded to the device and regularly updated – data is accessible
        even if the network is out of range
        a distributed database is used so the data is duplicated and distributed across many
        computers to improve the speed and reliability in case of a server crash
        a backup regime is in place if data is lost
        increased network coverage - to solve the problem of limited access of handheld
        devices
        testing of handheld device/debugging of software to minimise reliability problems

     Solutions to the problem of control:
        the police officer can disable the GPS tracking, e.g. during coffee/lunch breaks
        implementation of policies on GPS tracking which are agreed to by all parties and
        made available to those affected.
                                            – 12 –             M12/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Solution to problem of missed expiry dates
   implementation of an optional mail-out system

Solution to problem of lack of familiarity with the device
   the police administrators run courses for all police involved with the technology


If the evaluation does not provide any additional information to that in the article,
the candidate will be awarded a maximum of [2 marks].


Marks                                        Level descriptor

  0          The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
             One feasible solution to at least one problem is proposed and described.
 1–2         No evaluative comment is offered. Material is either copied directly from the
             article or implicit references are made to it.
             One appropriate solution to at least one problem is proposed and partially
             evaluated. The response contains explicit references to information in the
 3–5
             article that are partially developed. There is some use of appropriate ITGS
             terminology.
             One appropriate solution to at least one problem is proposed and fully
             evaluated, addressing both its strengths and potential weaknesses. Areas for
 6–8         future development may also be identified. Explicit, fully developed references
             to the information in the article are made appropriately throughout the response.
             There is use of appropriate ITGS terminology.
