M12/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX




     22125602

Philosophy
Higher level AND STANDARD LEVEL
PAPER 2

Thursday 3 May 2012 (morning)

1 hour


INSTRUCTIONS to candidates

 Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Answer one question.
 The maximum mark for this examination paper is [30 marks].




2212-5602                                                                                          4 pages
                                                           © International Baccalaureate Organization 2012
                                                    –2–                   M12/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

In your answer you are expected to:

     • present an argument in an organized way
     • use clear, precise and appropriate language, demonstrating that you understand the author’s specific
       terminology
     • show an understanding of the specific demands of the question
     • give detailed references to the ideas and arguments presented in the text
     • provide relevant supporting material and examples where appropriate
     • analyse the supporting material
     • develop a critical evaluation of the ideas and arguments of the text
     • state a clear, personal response to the position expressed by the author.

Answer one question.  Each question is worth [30 marks].

Bhagavad Gita

1.     To what extent is there a need to be in control of one’s physical body in order to encounter one’s
       true self?


2.     Explain and discuss the nature of heaven and hell.



Confucius: The Analects

3.     “If one does not understand fate, one has no means of becoming a gentleman; if one does not
       understand the rites, one has no means of taking one’s stand; if one does not understand words,
       one has no means of understanding people.” Discuss and evaluate.


4.     Evaluate the claim that a humane person is hesitant in speech and deferential in attitude.



Lao Tzu: Tao Te Ching

5.     Explain and discuss the view that when the world loses the Tao then the “cavalry ravage
       the countryside”.


6.     Evaluate the claim that “by doing nothing everything gets done”.




2212-5602
                                                     –3–                      M12/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Plato: The Republic, Books IV–IX

7.    Evaluate Socrates’s claim that, for those with just souls, behaving according to the conventional rules
      of justice is not the result of blind adherence to the rules, but of an intention to preserve the order in
      their souls.


8.    Evaluate the claim that in the Form of the Good the theoretical purposes of philosophers are unified
      with the moral expertise required of rulers.



René Descartes: Meditations

9.    Evaluate the claim that error originates from the relation between intellect and will.


10.   Explain and discuss Descartes’s idea that from the fact that I cannot think of God except as existing,
      it follows that existence is inseparable from God, and hence God really exists.



John Locke: Second Treatise on Government

11.   “The Second Treatise on Government restricts the extent and power of the state and gives the
      people sovereignty.” Discuss and evaluate this claim.


12.   To what extent does Locke’s conception of the role of the state rest on his conception of property?



John Stuart Mill: On Liberty

13.   Explain and discuss the limits placed on the state in its involvement with the life of the individual.


14.   Evaluate the claim that dissent is essential for a civilized society.



Friedrich Nietzsche: The Genealogy of Morals

15.   Evaluate the claim that the values of justice, equality and compassion are the result of the violent
      struggle between master morality and slave morality.


16.   Explain and discuss Nietzsche’s statement that the person who makes a promise has to have a memory
      created for him or her.

2212-5602                                                                                           Turn over
                                                   –4–                  M12/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Bertrand Russell: The Problems of Philosophy

17.   Evaluate the claim that all a priori knowledge deals exclusively with universals and their relations.


18.   Evaluate Russell’s analysis of matter.



Hannah Arendt: The Human Condition

19.   Evaluate the distinction between work and labour.


20.   Discuss and evaluate the importance of the public sphere to the life of an individual human being.



Simone de Beauvoir: The Ethics of Ambiguity

21.   Evaluate the claim that the individual is only defined by his or her relationship to the world and to
      other individuals.


22.   Explain and discuss the necessity to understand a child’s view of freedom in explaining
      human anxiety.



Charles Taylor: The Ethics of Authenticity

23.   Explain and discuss the “worry” raised by individualism.


24.   Explain and discuss the problems associated with attaining authenticity in the modern age.




2212-5602
