M12/3/PHILO/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




     22125601

Philosophy
Higher level
PAPER 1

Wednesday 2 May 2012 (afternoon)

2 hours 30 minutes


INSTRUCTIONS to candidates

   Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
   Section A: answer one question.
   Section B: answer two questions, each chosen from a different Optional Theme.
   The maximum mark for this examination paper is [90 marks].




2212-5601                                                                                           5 pages
                                                            © International Baccalaureate Organization 2012
                                                              –2–                       M12/3/PHILO/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

In your answers you are expected to:

     • present an argument in an organized way
     • use clear, precise and appropriate language
     • identify any assumptions in the question
     • develop a clear and focused argument
     • identify the strengths and weaknesses of your response
     • identify counter-arguments to your response, and address them if possible
     • provide relevant supporting material, illustrations and/or examples where appropriate
     • develop a critical evaluation of ideas and arguments
     • conclude by making a clear, concise and philosophically informed personal response to the
     examination question.

                                                         SECTION A

Answer one question from this section. Each question in this section is worth [30 marks].

Core Theme: What is a human being?

1.     Read the following passage and develop your response as indicated below.

       Friendship circles were largely mutual: my friend’s close friends tended to be my close friends. My
       friends and I formed a social group that were dependent upon each other. Increasingly in our present
       age and into the future many people interact through a computer. We can make relationships with
       people on the other side of the world as easily as making friends with our next-door neighbour.
       However, these virtual friendships become so weak and superficial that new ones are established
       completely independently from those that already exist. In the “chat room” everyone is equally
       available and accessible; people come and go almost at random because they have little investment
       in the connections being made. In the “caveman world” friends depended and relied on each other.
       Digital friendships are virtual not mutual.

       [Source: adapted from P. Ball (2004) Critical Mass: How One Thing Leads to Another, Arrow Books, London, pp. 458–460.]



       Write a response (of approximately 800 words) in which you:

       • identify a central philosophical concept or philosophical issue in this passage that addresses
         the question, “what is a human being?”
       • investigate two different philosophical approaches to the philosophical concept or philosophical
         issue you identified
       • explain and evaluate the philosophical concept or philosophical issue you identified.




2212-5601
                                                 –3–                   M12/3/PHILO/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

2.    Look at the following picture and develop your response as indicated below.


                               Brain Bisecting and Transplanting Ward




                                Me           Brainless Body         Brainless Body




                             Bed 1
                                                                       Bed 3
                                                  Bed 2




                         After my brain has been removed, bisected,
                       and transplanted into the bodies in Beds 2 and 3
                      (half into each), shall I be dead in Bed 1, or alive in
                      Bed 2, or alive in Bed 3, or alive in Beds 2 and 3 ?




      Write a response (of approximately 800 words) in which you:

      • identify a central philosophical concept or philosophical issue in this picture that addresses
        the question, “what is a human being?”
      • investigate two different philosophical approaches to the philosophical concept or philosophical
        issue you identified
      • explain and evaluate the philosophical concept or philosophical issue you identified.




2212-5601                                                                                    Turn over
                                                    –4–                  M12/3/PHILO/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                               SECTION B

Answer two questions from this section, each chosen from a different Optional Theme. Each question in
this section is worth [30 marks].

Optional Theme 1: Grounds of epistemology

3.    Explain and discuss the view that the truth of a proposition can only come from the way it is verified.


4.    Evaluate the claim that knowledge can be innate.



Optional Theme 2: Theories and problems of ethics

5.    Evaluate the claim that there are some ethical principles that are universal.


6.    With reference to one or more example(s) from applied ethics, evaluate the claim that human beings
      are the sole concern of ethical theory and ethical action.



Optional Theme 3: Philosophy of religion

7.    Evaluate the claim that any proof for the existence of God is based on the experience of the individual.


8.    To what extent is it possible to speak about religious ideas and practices without speaking about a
      particular culture?



Optional Theme 4: Philosophy of art

9.    Evaluate the view that beauty is an objective property of works of art.


10.   To what extent is authenticity important to the judgment of what constitutes good art?




2212-5601
                                                    –5–                   M12/3/PHILO/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Optional Theme 5: Political philosophy

11.   Evaluate the idea that for punishment to be just its severity must reflect the gravity of the offence.


12.   Evaluate the idea that democracy is the best form of government.



Optional Theme 6: Non-Western traditions and perspectives

13.   Explain and discuss philosophical ideas concerning self-fulfilment in one or more of the non-Western
      traditions you have studied.


14.   Explain and discuss the most important philosophical contribution(s) to an understanding of society
      and culture in one or more of the non-Western traditions you have studied.



Optional Theme 7: Contemporary social issues

15.   Evaluate the claim that the information age is not an age of freedom but an age of oppression.


16.   Evaluate the claim that the right to work should be protected.



Optional Theme 8: People, nations and cultures

17.   Evaluate philosophically the effects on a sense of national identity created by immigration.


18.   Evaluate the view that the purpose of culture is primarily to serve the material needs of the individual.




2212-5601
