M12/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                           May 2012



                      PSYCHOLOGY



          Higher Level and Standard Level



                               Paper 1




9 pages
                              –2–            M12/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                                  –3–              M12/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


                                              SECTION A

Biological level of analysis

1.   Describe one study related to localization of function in the brain.                         [8 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands below when awarding marks.

     The command term “describe” requires candidates to give a detailed account of one
     study related to localization of function in the brain. Animal research is also acceptable
     for this response.

     Descriptions should include the aim, method (which may include the sample, research
     method used and/or the procedure) and results/findings, with a clear link to localization
     of function. Candidates should clearly identify the specific part of the brain and its
     function.

     If Sperry and Gazzaniga’s study of split-brain patients is described, it is important that
     the focus be on localization of function.

     If a candidate describes more than one study, credit should be given only to the
     first description.


     Section A markbands

     Marks          Level descriptor

     0              The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

     1 to 3         There is an attempt to answer the question, but knowledge and
                    understanding is limited, often inaccurate, or of marginal relevance to
                    the question.

     4 to 6         The question is partially answered. Knowledge and understanding is
                    accurate but limited. Either the command term is not effectively
                    addressed or the response is not sufficiently explicit in answering
                    the question.

     7 to 8         The question is answered in a focused and effective manner and meets
                    the demands of the command term. The response is supported by
                    appropriate and accurate knowledge and understanding of research.
                                                    –4–               M12/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Cognitive level of analysis

2.   Describe one ethical consideration related to one research study at the cognitive
     level of analysis.                                                                [8 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands below when awarding marks.

     The command term “describe” requires candidates to give a detailed account of one
     ethical consideration in relation to one research study at the cognitive level of analysis.
     Ethical considerations can be positive (what guidelines could be followed) or negative
     (what guidelines were not followed).

     The focus of the response should be on the ethical consideration and not on the
     description of a study.

     Research studies could include traditional cognitive studies but could also include
     studies that investigate biological or sociocultural factors that affect cognitive processes.
     However, responses should clearly relate the study to the cognitive level of analysis.

     If a candidate describes more than one ethical consideration in relation to one or more
     research studies, credit should be given only to the first ethical consideration described
     in relation to the first research study used.

     If a candidate describes an ethical consideration but with no link made to a research
     study at cognitive level of analysis, a maximum of [3 marks] should be awarded.

     If a candidate describes a study but there is no link to an ethical consideration,
     [0 marks] should be awarded.


     Section A markbands

     Marks          Level descriptor

     0              The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

     1 to 3         There is an attempt to answer the question, but knowledge and
                    understanding is limited, often inaccurate, or of marginal relevance to
                    the question.

     4 to 6         The question is partially answered. Knowledge and understanding is
                    accurate but limited. Either the command term is not effectively
                    addressed or the response is not sufficiently explicit in answering
                    the question.

     7 to 8         The question is answered in a focused and effective manner and meets
                    the demands of the command term. The response is supported by
                    appropriate and accurate knowledge and understanding of research.
                                                  –5–               M12/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Sociocultural level of analysis

3.   Outline how one principle that defines the sociocultural level of analysis has been
     demonstrated in one example of research (theory or study).                          [8 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands below when awarding marks.

     The command term “outline” requires candidates to give a brief account or summary
     that clearly illustrates how the selected theory or study is representative of one of the
     defining principles of the sociocultural level of analysis.

     Appropriate principles may include, but are not limited to:
      social and cultural factors influence individual behaviour
      individuals want connectedness with, and a sense of belonging to, others
      individuals construct conceptions of the individual and social self
      individual behaviour is influenced by other people.

     Principles should not simply be stated, but a brief outline should clarify its meaning.
     Candidates are not required to give an in-depth account of the theory or study, but must
     focus on the link between the principle and the theory or study – e.g. how Asch’s
     conformity study demonstrates social influence on an individual’s behaviour.

     If a candidate outlines more than one principle in relation to one or more theories or
     studies, credit should be given only to the first principle outlined in the first theory or
     study used.


     Section A markbands

     Marks          Level descriptor

     0              The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

     1 to 3         There is an attempt to answer the question, but knowledge and
                    understanding is limited, often inaccurate, or of marginal relevance to
                    the question.

     4 to 6         The question is partially answered. Knowledge and understanding is
                    accurate but limited. Either the command term is not effectively
                    addressed or the response is not sufficiently explicit in answering
                    the question.

     7 to 8         The question is answered in a focused and effective manner and meets
                    the demands of the command term. The response is supported by
                    appropriate and accurate knowledge and understanding of research.
                                                   –6–               M12/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Section B assessment criteria

A — Knowledge and comprehension

Marks         Level descriptor

0             The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

1 to 3        The answer demonstrates limited knowledge and understanding that is of
              marginal relevance to the question. Little or no psychological research is used
              in the response.

4 to 6        The answer demonstrates limited knowledge and understanding relevant to the
              question or uses relevant psychological research to limited effect in
              the response.

7 to 9        The answer demonstrates detailed, accurate knowledge and understanding
              relevant to the question, and uses relevant psychological research effectively in
              support of the response.


B — Evidence of critical thinking: application, analysis, synthesis, evaluation

Marks         Level descriptor

0             The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

1 to 3        The answer goes beyond description but evidence of critical thinking is not
              linked to the requirements of the question.

4 to 6        The answer offers appropriate but limited evidence of critical thinking or offers
              evidence of critical thinking that is only implicitly linked to the requirements of
              the question.

7 to 9        The answer integrates relevant and explicit evidence of critical thinking in
              response to the question.


C — Organization

Marks         Level descriptor

0             The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

1 to 2        The answer is organized or focused on the question. However, this is not
              sustained throughout the response.

3 to 4        The answer is well organized, well developed and focused on the question.
                                                  –7–              M12/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


                                              SECTION B

4.   Discuss one example of how cognition and physiology interact to affect behaviour. [22 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered review,
     supported by appropriate evidence, of one way in which cognition and physiological
     processes interact to affect behaviour.

     In discussing interaction, examples may be either one-directional or bi-directional, but
     candidates are not required to make the distinction.

     Examples of one-directional (that is, one factor influences the other factor) include, but
     are not limited to:
      the role of acetylcholine or beta-amyloid proteins on Alzheimer’s disease
      the effect of meditation on physiological processes (e.g. Davidson, Luders,
        University of Wisconsin)
      the role of the hippocampus in memory dysfunction and/or creation (e.g. Maguire,
        Milner).

     Examples of bi-directional (that is, looking at the true interdependence of both factors)
     include, but are not limited to:
      models of emotions (e.g. LeDoux, Schachter and Singer)
      Ramachandran on perception and pain in phantom limb syndrome
      positive feedback loops to explain psychological disorders (e.g. panic attacks,
        depression, eating disorders).

     If a candidate discusses more than one example of how cognition and physiology
     interact to affect behaviour, credit should be given only to the first discussion.
                                                  –8–              M12/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


5.   Discuss the use of technology in investigating one cognitive process.                        [22 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered review,
     supported by appropriate evidence, of the ways in which technology is used in
     investigating a cognitive process.

     Studies referenced should be clearly focused on cognitive functioning.

     Examples include, but are not limited to:
      The use of EEG to determine the relationship between brain activity and particular
       cognitive processes (e.g. the sleep-wake relationship) by measuring the type of brain
       waves associated with various levels of awareness.
      The use of PET scans to monitor changes in brain function during cognitive
       functioning, e.g. Maguire’s use of PET to help clarify the role of the hippocampus in
       “route recall” in taxi drivers.
      The use of computer-assisted presentation of stimulus material to aid standardization
       of procedures in cognitive research, e.g. the ability to present words at precisely
       determined intervals, such as in the presentation of a serial word list, or of the words
       used to demonstrate the Stroop Effect.

     Discussion may include, but is not limited to:
      ethical considerations of the use of technology
      efficacy of technology in measuring cognitive processes
      cost/benefit analysis
      issue of reductionism
      comparison of technologies.

     The focus of the response should be on the use of technology in investigating cognitive
     processes. Candidates should not simply evaluate studies in which technology has been
     used.

     If a candidate discusses the use of technology in investigating more than one cognitive
     process, credit should be given only to the first discussion.
                                                     –9–          M12/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


6.   Evaluate research (theories and/or studies) on conformity.                               [22 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “evaluate” requires candidates to make an appraisal of the strengths
     and limitations of research on conformity. Although a discussion of both strengths and
     limitations is required, it does not have to be evenly balanced to gain high marks.

     Theories may include, but are not limited to:
      informational social influence
      normative social influence
      social comparison.

     A wide range of studies may be considered, including but not limited to:
      Asch
      Moscovici on minority influence
      Berry’s study of the Temne and Inuits.

     Evaluation of research may include methodological, cultural, ethical or gender
     considerations, applications of the theory, comparison to other theories, or contrary
     findings or explanations.

     Candidates may evaluate a smaller number of theories and/or studies in order to
     demonstrate depth of knowledge, or may evaluate a larger number of theories and/or
     studies in order to demonstrate breadth of knowledge. Both approaches are equally
     acceptable.

     If a candidate discusses only strengths or only limitations, the response should be
     awarded up to a maximum of [5 marks] for criterion B, critical thinking, and up to a
     maximum of [2 marks] for criterion C, organization. Up to full marks may be awarded
     for criterion A, knowledge and comprehension.
