M12/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




     22125801

SOCIAL AND CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
HIGHER LEVEL
PAPER 1

Friday 18 May 2012 (afternoon)

1 hour


INSTRUCTIONS to candidates

 Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Read the passage carefully and then answer all the questions.
 The maximum mark for this examination paper is [20 marks].




2212-5801                                                                                          3 pages
                                                           © International Baccalaureate Organization 2012
                                                       –2–                  M12/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Texts in this examination paper have been edited: word additions or explanations are shown in square
brackets [ ]; substantive deletions of text are indicated by ellipses in square brackets […]; minor changes
are not indicated.

Cipollari, C. (2010) “Can Tourists Purchase ‘the Past’? The Past as a Commodity in Tourist Sites”.
Anthropological Notebooks, 16 (1): 23–35. Published by Slovene Anthropological Society 2010.
Used with permission.

            Botiza, a small-scale tourist destination, is in the mountainous region of Maramureş in
            north-western Romania. Tourists are attracted to Botiza because of its perceived traditional ways
            of life. Maramureş is presented as a region where time appears to stand still, and where tourists
            can experience a world that elsewhere has been displaced by modernity: a trip back through time
     5      to a nostalgic, lost past that in Botiza still exists. Tourists and locals together create a landscape
            in which each meets the expectations of the other.

            For some tourists, visiting Botiza is like stepping into a time machine to travel to a past
            which is experienced with nostalgia and now exists side by side with the modern world.
            From this perspective, the countryside embodies all positive values such as purity and health and
   10       the city all the negative ones, impurity and disease, connected to modernity. In the words of an
            American tourist: “I came here with my wife to see how our European ancestors used to live.
            We lived with a rural farming family, hoping to understand where we ourselves have come from…
            While the world keeps racing towards the future, these rural farmers invited us into their house and
            into the past.” The locals play on the backwardness of their living conditions: a backwardness that
   15       is deemed to be an asset and is therefore constantly emphasized.

            Tourists seek rural life in Botiza, with the pace, gestures, flavours and colours that they imagine
            and require it to have […]; in turn, local inhabitants and institutions construct and present their
            location as a favoured place which is “naturally” able to meet the expectations of tourists.

            Visits to craft workshops represent the past, an abstract concept recounted in all tales narrated
   20       by locals, tourists and advertising becomes an actual practical experience, made tangible through
            the purchase of handicrafts. […] The workshops are clear evidence of this representation and
            performance of the past. They generally display rugs, clothes and artifacts that are now no
            longer used.

            The local women present rugs for sale as “their own work”, that is work done by a woman
   25       who has learned the art of weaving from her own mother, who in turn learned it from the
            previous generation; thus the dyeing and weaving are presented as crafts dating back centuries.
            On the one hand, the object in question acquires the label of “traditional” and, on the other hand,
            the collective work done by a group of women is attributed to a single weaver. In this way the
            buyer can identify the product with the seller and thus confirm its authenticity.




2212-5801
                                                       –3–                 M12/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

     30     One French tourist expressed her interest in the local crafts thus: “All this positive knowledge
            has been transmitted from generation to generation. I would have bought everything, I would
            even have bought socks to take back to France, because none of it is expensive and in any case it
            is heritage, it has a real value.”

            Sometimes the visits to the workshops become essentially a stage where the ritual of traditional
     35     dress is played out. The tourists are interested in taking pictures of the loom, and they take turns
            sitting on the little bench in front of it, pretending to weave. They dress up in the clothes on
            display and become the protagonists of their own photographs and experience, a situation where
            they become “the representation of authenticity”. The value of the authenticity of the experience
            lived by the tourist can thus be added to the aesthetic value of the object purchased.

     40     The village’s value is “revealed” as a result of its contact with the outside world; over time,
            it is shaped and reinterpreted in order to adjust it to the requirements of the tourist. Tourists buy
            local items and use them quite differently from how they were meant to be used. For example,
            cloth used in Romanian homes as a decoration for plates or table lamps and in churches around
            icons can be worn as scarves or shawls. Outside views reinterpret local items and give them new
     45     meaning in different and distant contexts.



1.    Describe how tourists and locals jointly create an image of the past.                           [6 marks]


2.        Using theoretical perspectives, explain the relationship between modernity and
          tradition, with reference to the tourist experience in Botiza.                              [6 marks]


3.        Compare and contrast the way in which Botiza villagers present the past with the ways
          in which people relate to the past in one society that you have studied in detail.          [8 marks]




2212-5801
