M12/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                           May 2012



              SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
                ANTHROPOLOGY



                        Higher Level



                               Paper 1




7 pages
                              –2–            M12/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                                   –3–              M12/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.   Describe how tourists and locals jointly create an image of the past.                        [6 marks]

     This question requires a primarily descriptive answer and much of the material can be found in the
     text itself. The question asks candidates to demonstrate how villagers and tourists collectively
     construct their understanding of the past through their interactions. The interests of tourists and
     locals converge to recreate an idealized past, functional to both parties.

     A key point to note is that tourists and locals, through different practices and performances shape,
     tailor, and reinterpret facts and objects in order to create a representation of Botiza as a desired
     idealized past. This is illustrated by the quotation of the American tourist where it is clear that
     travelling to Botiza is not just travelling through space, but also through time. Also tourists imagine
     this past as their own past, relating the lifestyle to that of their ancestors.

     In the example from the text, by taking photographs, a social identity is enacted in a story that is
     created by and for the tourist. In the visits to the craft workshops, tourists try on costumes,
     pretend to weave at the loom, and in this way, perform the narrative they have created.
     To facilitate this, villagers construct and decorate their workshops with costumes that are no longer
     used by villagers themselves.

     Another descriptive example to choose from the passage is from the presentation artisans make of
     their work. They claim their rugs embody knowledge from a distant past, thus acquiring their value
     as authentic manifestations of the past. In the words of the French tourist, it is heritage and
     authenticity that adds value to the objects. In the tourist experience, the aesthetic value of the goods
     is often subordinate to its symbolic meaning, and drawing a strong link between an artifact and its
     producer allows the tourist to associate it with a local person and thus to give it a distinct history
     shared by tourist and artisan.

     It is also possible to identify how meanings are recreated in the ways in which tourists assign new
     uses to the objects they purchase, altering their contexts and purposes, like the cloth traditionally
     used to decorate icons and used by the tourists as scarves.

     The past is fundamentally constructed in the interactions between tourists who have clear
     expectations and locals willing to fulfill these. This interaction finally assumes the form of an
     economic exchange, where the object purchased is the embodiment of the jointly created meanings.
     The commodity is the tangible manifestation of that past.

     Candidates do not need to cover all the points above, but the answer does have to be focused and in
     the candidate’s own words to obtain full marks.
                                   –4–             M12/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Marks                        Level descriptor
    0 The work does not reach a standard described by the
      descriptors below.
  1–2 There is an attempt to organize the response and identify
      relevant points or examples, but the response relies too
      heavily on quotations from the text and/or limited
      generalizations are offered.
  3–4 The response is organized, identifies and explains some
      relevant points or examples, and offers generalizations.
  5–6 The response is organized, identifies and explains detailed
      relevant points or examples, and links them to generalizations,
      demonstrating good anthropological understanding.
                                                  –5–              M12/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   Using theoretical perspectives, explain the relationship between modernity and
     tradition, with reference to the tourist experience in Botiza.                 [6 marks]

     The passage shows that tourists arriving at Botiza perceive tradition and modernity as
     clearly distinct. The past embodies all positive values such as purity, health and authenticity,
     in contrast to the negative values associated with modernity. In this sense, the tourist experience
     acquires a moral dimension as the tourist connects with the past, and is immersed in its
     positive values.

     It is clear from the passage that the concept of a traditional village is an ideological construction,
     because, as the very tourist site confirms, it is untenable to speak about traditional and modern
     societies in an empirical sense.

     Some candidates may refer to the construction of place in global times; how this becomes a project
     in this tourist encounter, a project of cultural identity. The over communication of cultural
     distinctiveness can be understood as a localizing strategy. The interesting point is not whether an
     authentic tradition exists, but how the presentation of Botiza, a rural village, and its traditional
     dress, activities and environment is a process of commodification. Having made of “the past”
     a commodity, the encounter takes place as a modern economic exchange. Tourists and villagers
     together succeed in communicating and promoting the experience of “traditional” and authentic
     identity, each fulfilling their interests and needs.

     A valid way of approaching this question may be focusing on agency, since the viewpoint of
     the author seems to imply that the past is not an empirical object, a given content, but a process
     of agency creation. Locals are not victims with no agency, but active constructors of the
     tourist experience.   Other approaches may also show awareness of the viewpoint of
     the anthropologist.

     Candidates may draw from different theories such as political economy, postmodernism, symbolic
     theories, globalization and modernity studies, in order to frame their analysis.

     The relationship between tradition and modernity is a key point in discerning between [3 marks]
     and [4 marks] or higher. Those responses which clearly identify that the two (re)create each other
     (and are not mutually exclusive) should be awarded [4 marks] or more, providing of course that this
     is in accordance with other level descriptors in the assessment criteria below.

     This knowledge should clearly refer to relevant theoretical works or perspectives.
                                    –6–             M12/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Marks                        Level descriptor
    0 The work does not reach a standard described by the
      descriptors below.
  1–2 The response is mainly descriptive and relies on quotations,
      but may demonstrate limited understanding of relevant
      anthropological issues and concepts.
  3–4 The response demonstrates some understanding of relevant
      anthropological issues and concepts or theory, or the response
      recognizes the viewpoint of the anthropologist, but not all
      of these.
  5–6 The response demonstrates a critical understanding of relevant
      anthropological issues, concepts and theory, and recognizes
      the viewpoint of the anthropologist.
                                                 –7–              M12/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   Compare and contrast the way in which Botiza villagers present the past with
     the ways in which people relate to the past in one society that you have studied
     in detail.                                                                       [8 marks]

     Candidates may choose any social group in order to develop a comparison. The question requires
     candidates to demonstrate an understanding of how relations with the past are conceptualized in or
     between societies, groups and institutions. Some comparisons can be made on the ideological uses
     of the past. These can potentially help agents make sense of the present, legitimate or contest the
     political order, provide group identity or justify particular views of the present.

     Candidates are required to use theory and concepts (ideally introduced in their question 2 response)
     to frame their comparison.

     Regarding identification of comparative ethnography (necessary to achieve more than [4 marks]);
     while the ethnographic present/ historical context is more desirable, the year of publication of the
     given ethnography is acceptable.


            Marks                           Level descriptor
                  0 The work does not reach a standard described by the
                    descriptors below.
               1–2 Comparative ethnography is presented in limited detail and its
                   relevance is only partly established. It is not identified in
                   terms of place, author or historical context. The response may
                   not be structured as a comparison.
               3–4 Comparative ethnography is presented in limited detail but its
                   relevance is established. The comparative ethnography is
                   identified in terms of place, author and historical context,
                   or the response is clearly structured as a comparison.
               5–6 Comparative ethnography is presented and its relevance is
                   successfully established. The comparative ethnography is
                   identified in terms of place, author and historical context,
                   and the response is clearly structured as a comparison.
                   Either similarities or differences are discussed in detail,
                   but not both.
               7–8 Comparative ethnography is presented and its relevance is
                   successfully established. The comparative ethnography is
                   identified in terms of place, author and historical context,
                   and the response is clearly structured as a comparison.
                   Similarities and differences are discussed in detail. The
                   response demonstrates good anthropological understanding.
