M12/3/WLDPO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/T




     22129019

WORLD POLITICS AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
STANDARD LEVEL
Paper 2                                   SCHOOL BASED SYLLABUS
Monday 30 April 2012 (morning)

1 hour 30 minutes


                    SOURCE BOOKLET
INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

 Do not open this Source Booklet until instructed to do so.
 This Source Booklet contains the sources required for Paper 2.
 There are two sources per syllabus area.




2212-9019                                                                                           6 pages
                                                            © International Baccalaureate Organization 2012
                                                     –2–              M12/3/WLDPO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

                                            Syllabus Area III

Human rights and international law

SOURCE A

                      Plan sets out details for human rights development and implementation

            Beijing China will draft a new national programme for human rights development for the period
            from 2012–2015 to improve people’s basic rights, said Wang Chen, minister of the State Council
            Information Office, on Thursday.

            The new national human rights action plan, the second of its type in China, will set up detailed
     5      goals and measures related to people’s rights in sectors including employment, social security,
            health and education, Wang said at a two-day seminar in Beijing.

            The first such action plan for 2009–2010, which paid particular attention to social groups like
            underprivileged women, ethnic minority groups, migrant workers, the disabled, homeless children,
            among others, has been fully implemented, with all tasks completed, he said.

   10       Wang highlighted its achievements, “Over the past two years, China has designated 2.779 billion
            Yuan (431 million US dollars) as a development fund for ethnic minority groups; 46 000 households
            of Tibetan farmers and herdsmen moved to new houses; micro-finance loans worth 16.6 billion
            Yuan (2.56 billion US dollars) were issued to help 410 000 women to start their own businesses”.

            The seminar at which the new national programme for human rights development for the period
   15       2012–2015 will be discussed, themed “development and creation of Chinese human rights theory
            and practices,” will end on Friday.

            Wang urged some 70 Chinese experts on human rights studies attending the seminar to be
            innovative, enrich Chinese human rights theories, and make China’s path to human rights
            development “able to be understood by more people from the international community”.

   20       Disregarding the monumental progress that China has made in human rights, some Western people
            still criticize the condition of human rights in China without supporting facts, experts said.

            Wang said that the country will “make active responses” to the international community’s concerns
            about China’s human rights.

            “The construction of Chinese human rights theories still cannot meet the requirements of
   25       modernization and Chinese human rights practices. It is important to communicate with the
            international human rights circle in a language that they can understand,” he said.

            Wang also required institutions and mass media to play a role in human rights education to raise
            the public’s ability and awareness to defend their basic rights.




2212-9019
                                                               –3–                   M12/3/WLDPO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

            Researchers at the seminar agreed that a social consensus on respecting and protecting human
   30       rights will not only maintain social stability, but also contribute to the cause of world human rights.

            Luo Haocai, chairman of the China Society for Human Rights Studies, which sponsored the seminar,
            said China still needs to improve legislation to balance rights and obligations and therefore better
            protect human rights. Still, he said to be confident that the Chinese government will make its
            people’s lives more secure, decent and blissful.

                 [Source: adapted from China Daily, http://english.people.com.cn/90882/7581192.html, 26 August 2011]




2212-9019                                                                                                              Turn over
                                                               –4–             M12/3/WLDPO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

SOURCE B

                               France accuses Syria of committing crimes against humanity

            French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe on Wednesday condemned the continued suppression of
            pro-democracy protests in Syria and noted that the ongoing brutal crackdown on protesters by the
            Syrian regime amounts to “crimes against humanity”.

            Juppe also urged Russia to back western efforts at the UN to get sanctions and other punitive
     5      measures imposed on the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad over its crackdown on
            pro-democracy demonstrators. Acknowledging that the French and Russian stands on the Syrian
            issue were different, Juppe said: “I hope Russia will back us in the Security Council even if our
            positions do not yet fully agree”.

            Lavrov*, on his part, defended Russia’s continued stand of not supporting Western efforts to impose
    10      UN sanctions on Syria and stressed that Moscow wants the Syrian opposition to engage in talks
            with Assad’s government to resolve the crisis. “Russia has submitted a draft UN Security Council
            resolution that calls on all sides to end all types of violence … and calls on the opposition not to
            resort to armed provocation, which we have seen before, and not to reject invitations to talks,”
            Lavrov said. The development came as reports from Syria citing opposition activists suggest that
    15      at least six people were killed in a new military assault on the Syrian city of Homs. Those claims
            cannot be independently verified as foreign journalists are banned from Syria.

            A popular uprising against President Bashar al-Assad’s rule is currently underway in Syria, with
            reports suggesting that Assad’s regime was still using tanks and hundreds of heavily armed troops
            in military operations aimed at cracking down on protesters in several Syrian cities and towns.
    20      Human rights groups estimate that more than 2200 civilians and 350 security personnel have been
            killed in Syria and over 25 000 detained in crackdowns since the pro-democracy protests broke
            out on 15 March. The Syrian President blames “armed terrorist gangs” backed by Islamists and
            foreign agitators for the ongoing unrest and warned against any foreign military intervention in
            his country.

    25      Last week, Amnesty International claimed in a report that at least 88 people have died while in
            detention in Syria during the bloody repression of pro-reform protests. The report also urged
            the UN Security Council to refer the Syrian situation to the International Criminal Court, and to
            impose an arms embargo as well as sanctions against President Assad’s regime.

            Although several international organizations, human rights groups and most nations have
    30      condemned the ongoing brutal suppression of pro-democracy protests in Syria, China and Russia
            have resisted western efforts to get UN sanctions imposed on Assad’s regime. However, the EU
            and the US have already imposed several rounds of separate sanctions on the Syrian regime in
            response to the brutal repression.

      [Source: adapted from RTTNews, http://www.rttnews.com/Content/GeneralNews.aspx?Id=1708854&SM=1, 7 September 2011]



* Lavrov: Sergey Viktorovich Lavrov is the Foreign Minister of Russia



2212-9019
                                                                       –5–                     M12/3/WLDPO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

                                                         Syllabus Area IV

Conflict, peace and reconstruction

SOURCE C

                                              Taliban: A terrorist group, not a political party

            How ironic, of all people in the world, Vladimir Lenin, the Russian revolutionary defined the goal
            of terrorism succinctly. Lenin once said: “the purpose of terrorism is to terrorize”. A century has
            unfolded since Lenin’s practical conclusion.

            When September 11 occurred, Osama Bin Laden became overnight the heroic figurehead of terrorism.
      5     With Bin Laden now dead, his co-conspirators, the Taliban, continuously terrorize freedom. The
            Taliban are the perfect face of modern terrorism in all of its glorious pathology. And yet for some,
            including Afghanistan’s president, their bogus moral preening1 continues to resonate.
            While Afghanistan’s president, Mr Hamid Karzai, is openly advocating for the Taliban to be
            recognized as a legitimate political movement, the Taliban’s actions clearly classify them as a
    10      terrorist organization, which desperately preys on vulnerable minds. Boys as young as 12 years old
            are recruited to become suicide bombers under the pretence of false promises, which will never be
            delivered.

            When the Pakistan-backed Taliban regime collapsed in 2001, Afghanistan’s doors were open to all
            Afghans, regardless of their ethnicity or political affiliation. Even those who served during the dark
    15      days of the Afghan Communist era returned (the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, with close
            links to the USSR, was the government of Afghanistan from 1978–1992). The Taliban, however,
            resorted to terrorism to appease their Pakistani ISI masters2, and incessantly inflict terror on Afghans.
            Their objective is for the United States to leave Afghanistan, so Pakistan can conveniently move back
            in, as in the late-nineties. While most terrorist groups are political by nature, their aim is to target
    20      civilians as the Taliban demonstrate on a daily basis.

            But the senseless Afghan war must end. If the President of Afghanistan is truly genuine about bringing
            a well-deserved peace to his country, he must be genuine about the peace process. First, he must tell
            the difference between Afghanistan’s foes3 and friends; and he must use the tools of democracy to
            delegitimize terrorist actions. Second, the Afghan government must work hard to reform mosques
    25      that have historically been used to promote political upheavals. Third, the Afghan opposition leaders
            also have a stake in shaping the course of Afghanistan’s future. They must demonstrate to Afghans
            that individuals with Afghan blood on their hands will no longer be part of a new chapter.

            Allowing the Taliban to participate in political dialogue will afford them an opening to legitimize
            their cause, which can only be achieved through violence.

    30      Wahid Monawar is former Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the United Nations in Vienna,
            Austria.

     [Source: adapted from Wahid Monawar, Afghan Online Press, http://www.aopnews.com/opinion/monawar_taliban_terroists.shtml,
                                                          11 June 2011]


1
    bogus moral preening: false or hypocritical moral stance
2
    Pakistani ISI masters: The Inter-Services Intelligence or ISI, is Pakistan’s premier intelligence agency.
    The source suggests that the Taliban respond to Pakistani interests.
3
    foes: enemies


2212-9019                                                                                                            Turn over
                                                                   –6–               M12/3/WLDPO/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

SOURCE D

                              Russia and US have “productive” talks on nuclear arms reduction

            Russia and the United States had “productive” talks on cutting their nuclear arsenals, the senior US
            negotiator said on Thursday as the two sides arranged to meet again this month.

            US Under Secretary of State for Arms Control, Rose Gottemoeller, told the International Conference
            on Disarmament that the two nuclear powers were seeking to reduce weapons’ numbers below
      5     levels set in the 1991 Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START). “President Obama and Russian
            President Medvedev have instructed that the new agreement must achieve reductions lower than those
            in existing arms control agreements, and that the agreement should include effective verification
            measures drawn up from our experience in implementing START,” she said.

            The 1991 START, signed just before the break-up of the Soviet Union, bounds both sides to deep
    10      cuts in their nuclear arsenals.

            The United States and Russia also have the more recent Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty
            (SORT) signed in 2002, which technically went further than START with stricter limits on the total
            deployment of warheads. However, disarmament experts regard it as a weaker agreement, because
            it focuses on deployment and does not physically reduce weapons stockpiles, and is not verifiable,
    15      unlike START.

            Gottemoeller, who led the US delegation, made it clear that the replacement deal would be one of several
            building blocks in broader global moves towards nuclear disarmament and curbs on proliferation.
            She highlighted the breakthrough at the 65-nation Conference on Disarmament last Friday,
            which agreed to restart global arms control talks after more than a decade of deadlock. It includes
    20      full “negotiations” for an international ban on production of new nuclear bomb-making material,
            a Fissile Material1 Cut-off Treaty (FMCT).

            “If we succeed on FMCT, we’ll have taken a necessary but admittedly not sufficient step towards
            nuclear disarmament,” Gottemoeller said.

            “It must be complemented by deeper respect for non-proliferation rules, consequences for those who
    25      violate them, improved verification on compliance and further progress on arms control.”

            The permanent conference in Geneva includes the historic nuclear weapons powers, as well as India,
            Israel, North Korea, Pakistan, and Iran whose controversial nuclear energy programme is under the
            international spotlight.

            Obama last week called FMCT “an essential part of my vision”.

    30      However, Pakistan warned the Conference on Thursday that it wanted to see progress “in tandem2
            on all core issues,” including “negative security assurances” sought by non-nuclear weapon states to
            guarantee that they would not be targeted by a nuclear attack.

            “This will serve as a first building block,” said ambassador Zamir Akram, who also highlighted
            Pakistan’s overriding concern about the regional nuclear balance in South Asia with arch-rival India.

                     [Source: adapted from MosNews.com, http://mosnews.com/politics/2009/06/05/2157/, 5 June 2009]

1
    Fissile material: material capable of being used to create nuclear weapons
2
    tandem: at the same time


2212-9019
