M11/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                           May 2011



                               MUSIC



          Higher Level and Standard Level



                      Listening Paper




9 pages
                              –2–            M11/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                                –3–              M11/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


General Comment to Examiners
Please note that the markscheme is provided as a guideline for marking. There are many potential and
valid ways in which to approach these questions and examiners need, therefore, to use their judgment
carefully.

Each question is worth [20 marks].

                                            SECTION A

Examiners should refer to page 32 (Listening paper – Section A (SL and HL)) of the IB Music Guide
(published February 2009, first examinations 2011) when marking questions 1 to 3.

1.   Symphony No. 41 in C Major, K. 551 “Jupiter” by W A Mozart
2.   El Salón México by A Copland
3.   Symphony No. 41 in C Major, K. 551 “Jupiter” by W A Mozart and El Salón México by
     A Copland

     Question 1 or question 2
     The arguments should refer to the appropriate prescribed work.

     Arguments should address the question and be consistent and convincing in their display of musical
     understanding, and should be backed up by clearly located evidence. Musical terminology should
     be effective in its use.

     Question 3
     The arguments should refer to both prescribed works. The comparing and contrasting of significant
     musical links must focus on thematic development.

     Arguments should be consistent and convincing in their display of musical understanding, and
     should be backed up by clearly located evidence. Musical terminology should be effective in
     its use.
                                                 –4–              M11/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                             SECTION B

Examiners should refer to pages 33 and 34 (Listening paper – Section B (SL and HL)) of the IB Music
Guide (published February 2009, first examinations 2011) when marking questions 4 to 7.

4.   Short Ride in a Fast Machine by J Adams (Identified piece)
     (no score provided)

     Musical elements
     The track consists of a number of passages with thick, chordal textures, set against the consistent
     tapping of a wood block and other instruments playing various subdivisions, which overlap and
     create shifts of patterns against the beat, giving rise to irregular and fast-changing rhythms.

     Musical structure
     There are many possible interpretations of the structure of this excerpt. Here is one of them.
     However, candidates are not expected to give such detail.

     0:00    The wood block starts alone, playing fast crotchet beats, quickly joined by ostinato on the
             clarinets and then four trumpets playing a major triad with added 6th on the strong beat.
             Introduction of other instruments – woodwind, lower brass.

     0:14    New chord (one tone lower) intermeshed with the opening chord, followed by flute and
             piccolo flourishes and addition of snare drum.

     0:34    Rhythm briefly becomes more regular before developing into polyrhythms.

     0:39    The flute and piccolo flourish is extended.

     1:02    New section, with new major chord, bass drum and strings, with a gradual addition of
             instruments, notes and increasingly complex harmonic material building to a climax –
             French horns have hunting calls/rips.

     1:40    New section, lower pitched wood block with tambourine, and the bass section seemingly in
             a different time signature, with trumpet stab chords slowly increasing in frequency.
             Chords with added notes, and a building of dissonant texture.

     2:31    New bass theme repeated in lower instruments of the orchestra.

     Musical terminology
     Some of the words that could be relevant to criterion C include (but are not limited to):
     rhythmic ostinato, cross rhythms, regular pulse, metric displacement, motivic, homophonic chords,
     layering, polyrhythm, polymeters, dissonance.

     Musical context
     • American.
     • John Adams – born in 1947.
     • Minimalist.
     • This piece dates from 1986.
     • Commissioned for the Great Woods Festival and premiered by the Pittsburg Symphony
       Orchestra. Hence the original title “Fanfare for Great Woods”.
     • Some candidates may relate this excerpt to film music.
                                                  –5–              M11/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


5.   First movement from Symphony No. 1, Op. 25 “Classical” by S Prokofiev (Identified piece)
     (score provided)

     Musical elements
     • mostly in 2/2 time
     • in D major
     • non-traditional key changes
     • simple diatonic harmony (for the most part)
     • medium sized symphony orchestra
     • clear textures
     • sonata form exposition
     • varied use of string techniques
     • profuse use of contrasting dynamics.

     Musical structure
     There are many possible interpretations of the structure of this excerpt. Here is one of them.

     Bar 1   Opening flourish on the D major arpeggio, ff.

     Bar 3   First theme (first subject) in violin I, supported by other strings, p, which then modulates
             into the relative (b) minor. In bar/measure 11 this material is then repeated a tone lower
             (C major).

     Bar 19 New section of first theme back in D major in the flutes, imitated through the woodwind
            instruments, accompanied by strings with a sparse texture, repeated in b minor, and
            E major (different orchestration each time), with bridge passage.

     Bar 46 New theme (second subject) in A major (dominant) in violins 1 accompanied by a single
            bassoon, with use of acciaccaturas. Sparse texture and widely spaced tessituras.

     Bar 74 Full orchestral passage (exposition coda) based on ascending A major triad, and ending in
            the dominant key (A major).

     N.B. Some candidates may present a valid argument that this is the beginning of the bridge
          passage.

     Musical terminology
     Some of the words that could be relevant to criterion C include (but are not limited to):
     terraced dynamics, imitation, sonata form, exposition, modulation, appoggiaturas, acciaccaturas,
     articulations.

     Musical context
     • Early 20th century (1917).
     • Precursor of Neoclassicism.
     • Russian.
                                                  –6–              M11/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


6.   No Strings (I’m Fancy Free) by I Berlin, performed by F Astaire (Unidentified piece)
     (no score provided)

     Musical elements
     • in 4/4 time
     • big band with saxophone, woodwinds, strings, double bass, drums and vocal soloist
     • modified structure form based on the “Tin Pan Alley structure” (aaba) also known as the
       “32-bar/measure form”.

     Musical structure
     There are many possible interpretations of the structure of this excerpt. Here is one of them.

     Introduction.
     0:00   Short 4-bar introduction on E♭ with chromatic bass motif and solos in clarinet and
            saxophone.

     Strophe A. Instrumental (aaba) in E♭ major.
     0:05    (a) Antecedent: muted trumpets with flute flourishes (8 bars).

     0:14    (a) Consequent: muted trumpets with strings countermelody (8 bars).

     0:24    (b) Beginning in g minor and moving to the dominant of E♭. Saxophones accompanied by
             violin countermelody (8 bars).

     0:33    (a) Brass section with countermelody on the violins (8 bars with 2 extra modulatory bars).

     Strophe B. (aa1) in C major.
     0:44    (a) Antecedent: voice with accompaniment almost only by strings (8 bars).

     0:54    (a1) Consequent: (8 bars).

     Strophe A1. Vocal (aaba) in C major.
     1:03    (a) Antecedent: voice takes the melody. Al the vocal phrases are complemented by muted
             instruments.

     1:12    (a) Consequent.

     1:22    (b) Beginning in e minor and moving to the dominant of C.

     1:31    (a) Consequent.

     Strophe A2. Instrumental and tap dancing (aaba) in E♭ major.
     1:40    (a) Antecedent: muted trumpet improvisation solo based on same melody and chord
             progression of previous strophes but in a different key. Tap dancing is central to this
             section.

     1:49    (a) Consequent: beginning in g minor and moving to the dominant of E♭.

     1:58    (b) The accompaniment is limited to strings pizzicati on the beats to allow the complicated
             rhythms of the dancer to become more prominent.

     2:07    (a) Return of muted trumpet.
                                            –7–              M11/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Coda. In F major.
2:17   Reintroduction of the full band. Melody on the winds with countermelody on the strings
       (8 bars). Final tap dancing flourish (4 bars).

Musical terminology
Some of the words that could be relevant to criterion C include (but are not limited to):
triplets, dotted rhythms, syncopation, modulation, mute, counter melody, improvisation, tap.

Musical context
• Irving Berlin.
• American.
• From 1935 film “Top Hat” with co-star Ginger Rogers.
                                                  –8–               M11/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


7.   Ya Teira Tiri (“Fly, o Bird”) by S Al-Qabbani, performed by Z Al-Jundi (Unidentified piece)
     (no score provided)

     Musical elements
     • different rhythms from a variety of drums and tambourines
     • solos from the ney (flute) and kanun (zither)
     • accompanying western string instruments
     • highly ornamented vocal and instrumental lines
     • a female soloist and a group of singers
     • the maqam (mode) used is similar to the western melodic minor, though with quarter tones
     • melody throughout has narrow tessitura and is generally conjunct
     • typical underlying ♫ ♪ ♩♩ rhythm for the region
     • in 4/4 time
     • four bar/measure phrases.

     Musical structure
     There are many possible interpretations of the structure of this excerpt. Here is one of them.

     0:00     Instrumental introduction – use of tabla, tambourine and larger drum – rhythm is
              syncopated at times.

     0:08     Introduction of the ney (flute) on the melody, with motivic answers from western string
              instruments in octaves. Some of the melodic material is presented with use of sequence,
              ending the section together in octaves.

     0:30     Female voice enters with the first verse, using similar material to the introduction,
              with the ney heterophonically following the vocal line, which is embellished with
              ornamentation.

     1:06     Chorus of male and female voices singing an octave apart enters, repeating the material
              found in the verse. Rhythmic patterns are varied in the accompaniment.

     1:42     The kanun enters, again with the same material, but highly ornamented. Toward the end of
              the extract the strings and ney join the melody at the unison and the octave.

     Musical terminology
     Some of the words that could be relevant to criterion C include (but are not limited to):
     heterophonic, mode, sequence, motivic, ornamentation, unison, octave.

     Musical context
     • Modern rendition of well-known Qadd.
     • A Qadd is an old popular Syrian song genre.
     • Composed by S Al-Qabbani (1835–1902).
                                               –9–              M11/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                           SECTION C

Examiners should refer to page 35 (Listening paper – Section C (HL only)) of the IB Music Guide
(published February 2009, first examinations 2011) when marking question 8.

8.   A choice of any two of the extracts from Section B

     Question 8
     The arguments should refer in a balanced way to both of the candidate’s chosen extracts
     (taken from Section B). Arguments establishing musical links should be consistent and convincing
     in their display of musical understanding, and should be backed up by clearly located evidence.
     Musical terminology should be effective in its use.
