© International Baccalaureate Organization 2021

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2021

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2021

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
English A: literature – Higher level – Paper 1
Anglais A : littérature – Niveau supérieur – Épreuve 1
Inglés A: Literatura – Nivel Superior – Prueba 1
Monday 10 May 2021 (afternoon)
Lundi 10 mai 2021 (après-midi)
Lunes 10 de mayo de 2021 (tarde)

2 h 15 m


Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y Write a guided analysis of text 1.
y Write a guided analysis of text 2.
y Use the guiding question or propose an alternative technical or formal aspect of the text to focus
  your analysis.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [40 marks].

Instructions destinées aux candidats
y N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
y Rédigez une analyse dirigée du texte 1.
y Rédigez une analyse dirigée du texte 2.
y Utilisez la question d’orientation ou proposez une autre manière d’aborder le texte en
  choisissant un aspect technique ou formel sur lequel concentrer votre analyse.
y Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est de [40 points].

Instrucciones para los alumnos
y No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
y Escriba un análisis guiado del texto 1.
y Escriba un análisis guiado del texto 2.
y Utilice la pregunta de orientación o proponga otro aspecto técnico o formal del texto en el que
  centrar su análisis.
y La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [40 puntos].




                                                                                               2221 – 0049
     3 pages/páginas                                       © International Baccalaureate Organization 2021
                                                  –2–                 2221 – 0049


Write a guided analysis of the following text.

1.




                                      Removed for copyright reasons
                                                      –3–                                            2221 – 0049


Write a guided analysis of the following text.

2.

The following extract is the opening of a one-act play Campbell of Kilmohr by J.A. Ferguson. It is set in a
poor cottage in eighteenth century Scotland, where the women are waiting for the older one’s son who is
a rebel on the run.



           MORAG is restlessly moving backwards and forwards. The old woman is seated on a low stool
           beside the peat1 fire in the centre of the floor.
           The room is scantily furnished and the women are poorly clad. MORAG is barefooted. At the
           back is the door that leads to the outside. On the left of the door is a small window. On the right
      5    side of the room there is a door that opens into a barn. MORAG stands for a moment at the
           window, looking out.

           MORAG: It is the wild night outside.
           MARY STEWART: Is the snow still coming down?
           MORAG: It is that then – dancing and swirling with the wind too, and never stopping at all. Aye,
     10    and so black I cannot see the other side of the road.
           MARY STEWART: That is good.
           MORAG moves across the floor and stops irresolutely. She is restless, expectant.
           MORAG: Will I be putting the light in the window?
           MARY STEWART: Why should you be doing that! You have not heard his call (turns eagerly),
     15    have you?
           MORAG (with sign of head): No, but the light in the window would show him all is well.
           MARY STEWART: It would not then! The light was to be put there after we had heard the signal.
           MORAG: But on a night like this he may have been calling for long, and we never heard him.
           MARY STEWART: Do not be so anxious, Morag. Keep to what he says. Put more peat on the
     20    fire now and sit down.
           MORAG (with increasing excitement): I canna2, I canna! There is that in me that tells me
           something is going to befall us this night. Oh, that wind, hear to it, sobbing round the house as if
           it brought some poor lost soul up to the door, and we refusing it shelter.
           MARY STEWART: Do not be fretting yourself like that. Do as I bid you. Put more peats on
     25    the fire.
           MORAG (at the wicker peat-basket): Never since I… What was that? (Both listen for a moment.)
           MARY STEWART: It was just the wind; it is rising more. A sore night for them that are out in
           the heather.

           MORAG puts peat on the fire



1
     peat: turf used as fuel
2
     canna: cannot (Scottish dialect)


       –      In what ways does the relationship between the two women help to create the mood of this
              opening to the play?
Disclaimer:

Texts used in IB language assessments are taken from authentic, third-party sources. The views expressed within
them belong to their individual authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the IB.



References:

2.       Ferguson, J.A., 1915. Campbell of Kilmohr. In: Charlton, J.M., ed. 1965. The Pan Book of One-Act Plays. London:
         Samuel French. Pp.37–38.
