© International Baccalaureate Organization 2021

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2021

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2021

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
English A: literature – Higher level – Paper 1
Anglais A : littérature – Niveau supérieur – Épreuve 1
Inglés A: Literatura – Nivel Superior – Prueba 1
Monday 10 May 2021 (afternoon)
Lundi 10 mai 2021 (après-midi)
Lunes 10 de mayo de 2021 (tarde)

2 h 15 m


Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y Write a guided analysis of text 1.
y Write a guided analysis of text 2.
y Use the guiding question or propose an alternative technical or formal aspect of the text to focus
  your analysis.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [40 marks].

Instructions destinées aux candidats
y N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
y Rédigez une analyse dirigée du texte 1.
y Rédigez une analyse dirigée du texte 2.
y Utilisez la question d’orientation ou proposez une autre manière d’aborder le texte en
  choisissant un aspect technique ou formel sur lequel concentrer votre analyse.
y Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est de [40 points].

Instrucciones para los alumnos
y No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
y Escriba un análisis guiado del texto 1.
y Escriba un análisis guiado del texto 2.
y Utilice la pregunta de orientación o proponga otro aspecto técnico o formal del texto en el que
  centrar su análisis.
y La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [40 puntos].




                                                                                               2221 – 0046
     4 pages/páginas                                       © International Baccalaureate Organization 2021
                                                      –2–                                             2221 – 0046


Write a guided analysis of the following text.

1.

This is an extract from Prospero’s Cell, a non-fiction work by Lawrence Durrell.



                                    DIVISIONS UPON GREEK GROUND

                                                    29.4.37

          It is April and we have taken an old fisherman’s house in the extreme north of the island –
          Kalamai1. Ten sea-miles from the town, and some thirty kilometres by road, it offers all the
          charms of seclusion. A white house set like a dice on a rock already venerable with the scars
     5    of wind and water. The hill runs clear up into the sky behind it, so that the cypresses and
          olives overhang this room in which I sit and write. We are upon a bare promontory2 with its
          beautiful clean surface of metamorphic stone covered in olive and ilex3. […] This is become our
          unregretted home. A world. Corcyra4.


                                                     5.5.37

     10   The books have arrived by water. Confusion, adjectives, smoke, and the deafening pumping of
          the wheezy Diesel engine. Then the caique5 staggered off in the direction of St. Stephano and
          the Forty Saints where the crew will gorge themselves on melons and fall asleep in their coarse
          woollen vests, one on top of the other, like a litter of cats, under the ikon of St. Spiridion of Holy
          Memory. We are depending upon this daily caique for our provisions.


     15                                              6.5.37

          Climb to Vigla6 in the time of cherries and look down. You will see that the island lies against
          the mainland roughly in the form of a sickle. On the landward side you have a great bay, noble
          and serene, and almost completely landlocked. Northward the tip of the sickle almost touches
          Albania and here the troubled blue of the Ionian is sucked harshly between the ribs of limestone
     20   and spits of sand. Kalamai fronts the Albanian foothills, and into it the water races as into a
          swimming-pool: a milky ferocious green when the north wind curdles it.


                                                     7.5.37

          The cape opposite is bald; a wilderness of rock-thistle and melancholy asphodel7 – the drear
          sea-quill. It was on a ringing spring day that we discovered the house. The sky lay in a heroic
     25   blue arc as we came down the stone ladder. I remember N. saying distinctly to Theodore: ‘But
          the quietness alone makes it another country.’ We looked through the hanging screen of olive-
          branches on to the white sea wall with fishing-tackle drying on it. A neglected balcony. The floors
          were cold. Fowls clucked softly in the gloom where the great olive-press lay, waiting its season.
          A cypress stood motionless – as if at the gates of the underworld. We shivered and sat on the
     30   white rock to eat, looking down at our own faces in the motionless sea. You will think it strange
          to have come all the way from England to this fine Grecian promontory where our only company
          can be rock, air, sky – and all the elementals. In letters home N. says we have been cultivating
                                                    –3–                                            2221 – 0046


          the tragic sense. There is no explanation. It is enough to record that everything is exactly as the
          fortune-teller said it would be. White house, white rock, friends and a narrow style of loving: and
    35    perhaps a book which will grow out of these scraps, as from the rubbish of these old Venetian
          tombs the cypress cracks the slabs at last and rises up fresh and green.

                         Reproduced with permission of Curtis Brown Group Ltd, London on behalf of the
                      Beneficiaries of The Estate of Lawrence Durrell. Copyright © Lawrence Durrell 1945.



1
    Kalamai: village on Corfu, Greece
2
    promontory: a rocky ridge
3
    ilex: holly
4
    Corcyra: an alternative name for Corfu
5
    caique: a fishing boat
6
    Vigla: village on Corfu, Greece
7
    asphodel: a plant common in Greece


      –      How does the author use descriptive language to create atmosphere?




                                                                 Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                           –4–                                                    2221 – 0046


Write a guided analysis of the following text.

2.

Eleanor Farjeon wrote this poem in memory of a close friend (E.T. – Edward Thomas) who died in battle.



                                        Easter Monday (In Memoriam E.T.)

                                      In the last letter that I had from France
                                      You thanked me for the silver Easter egg
                                      Which I had hidden in the box of apples
                                      You liked to munch beyond all other fruit.
                                 5    You found the egg the Monday before Easter,
                                      And said, ‘I will praise Easter Monday now –
                                      It was such a lovely morning’. Then you spoke
                                      Of the coming battle and said, ‘This is the eve.
                                      Good-bye. And may I have a letter soon.’

                                10    That Easter Monday was a day for praise,
                                      It was such a lovely morning. In our garden
                                      We sowed our earliest seeds, and in the orchard
                                      The apple-bud was ripe. It was the eve.
                                      There are three letters that you will not get.


      –       How is imagery used to convey the poet’s feelings?




Disclaimer:

Texts used in IB language assessments are taken from authentic, third-party sources. The views expressed within
them belong to their individual authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the IB.



References:

1.        Reproduced with permission of Curtis Brown Group Ltd, London on behalf of the Beneficiaries of The Estate of
          Lawrence Durrell. Copyright © Lawrence Durrell 1945.

2.        Farjeon, E., 1959. “Easter Monday (In Memoriam E.T.)”. Book of Days. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
