M21/1/TEXTP/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Marking notes


                                 May 2021


                  Literature and performance


                               Standard level


                                  Paper 2




6 pages/páginas
                                            –2–               M21/1/TEXTP/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2021

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2021

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2021

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                 –3–              M21/1/TEXTP/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                        Assessment criteria

These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking and as a supplement
to the published external assessment criteria for written paper 2. They are not offered as an
exhaustive and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must rigidly adhere.
Good ideas or angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate.
Similarly, answers which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here should not be
so heavily penalized as to distort appreciation of individuality.

With reference to criterion C, the better answers will contain examples that show an adequate
sense of stylistic features with some awareness of their effects, using critical analysis and pertinent
detail.

The best answers will show a strong sense of the stylistic and comparable features of the works,
as well as the effects of these features.

Of course, some of the points listed below will appear in weaker papers but are unlikely to
be developed.

These apply to all answers below.

A maximum of [5 marks] may be awarded for each of the five criteria.

Criteria A and B

The danger of rewarding or penalizing the use of illustration/references/quotations twice in both
these categories should be avoided.

Criterion B

“Personal response” and “independence of thought” appear as the levels of the descriptors
increase. What is sought is an engaged and individual treatment of the chosen topic. Engaged and
individual essays will usually make themselves clear by showing insight into the implications of the
question and the quality and interest of the details cited in support.

The first-person singular does not automatically constitute a personal response and conversely an
impersonal academic style does not necessarily indicate a lack of personal response.

Criterion C

It is expected that every question set will provide candidates with ample opportunities to
demonstrate their awareness of the demands of this criterion. However, where a question does not
explicitly offer such opportunities, examiners should interpret criterion C broadly, to ensure that
candidates are not unfairly disadvantaged. In such cases it would be sufficient for candidates
to show, as appropriate to the question, an awareness of how elements such as plot, character,
setting, structure, voice, etc, are used by writers to meet their purposes. No matter how the
question is phrased, candidates must also address related matters of style and technique.

“Awareness” and “appreciation” of literary features are the key elements under this criterion.
The mere labelling, without appreciation, of literary features will not score the highest marks.
On the other hand, the candidate who is attentive to literary features and deals with them in a
meaningful way, but who does not consistently use the vocabulary of literary criticism, can still be
awarded the higher achievement levels.

Reminder: the term “literary features” is broad and includes elements as basic as plot, character
etc, attention to which is valid and must be rewarded as appropriate.
                                                  –4–              M21/1/TEXTP/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion D

Any form of structuring to the essay will be rewarded if it is effective and appropriate.
Different conventions are in operation and therefore all approaches are acceptable and will be
judged on the basis of their effectiveness. Examiners should remember that structure does not
exist by itself, but any structure must be measured by appropriate reference to the terms of the
question and by its capacity to integrate these towards the development of an organized and
coherent essay.

Reminder: in this criterion, supporting examples must be evaluated in terms of how fluently they
are incorporated/integrated to shape/advance the argument, not in terms of their appropriateness
or accuracy.

Criterion E

If you have reservations about awarding a 4, you should ensure that these are well founded before
awarding a 3. The broadness of achievement in level three sometimes makes examiners reluctant
to award 4.

Judgment needs to be used when dealing with lapses in grammar, spelling and punctuation;
therefore, do not unduly penalize.

Mechanical accuracy is only part of this criterion. Ensure that all the other elements are
considered.

Examiners should be careful to avoid being prejudiced in their application of this criterion by
achievement levels in other criteria. It is possible to score highly on this criterion even if candidates
have scored in the lower levels on other criteria, and vice versa.
                                                –5–              M21/1/TEXTP/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1. An adequate to good answer will:
    • identify and define the nature of morality presented in the work of at least two poets
    • address concepts of morality by demonstrating “how” these ideas are constructed and their
      effects
    • select stylistic and literary features (imagery, point of view, and the like) according to their
      relevance to the question.


    A very good to excellent answer may also:
    • skilfully create a focussed response to this broad question by engaging with the
       presentation of morality through the stylistic features of the poetry beyond the mechanics,
       such as the role of the persona or speaker
    • engage with the context (time, place) in which the poems were written and link the poets’
       choices to concepts of morality
    • adeptly engage with the comparative aspects of morality presented in the poems.



2. An adequate to good answer will:
    • outline the imagery used in the poems of at least two poets that evoke a response of
      existence and/or nothingness. This could be communicated by the poet in the ideas,
      actions, objects, emotions, and/or concepts presented in the poems
    • define their understanding of existence and nothingness, most likely but not exclusively by
      dealing with thematic concepts of vastness, death, afterlife, vocation, loss, or existential
      notions
    • have a clear understanding of the literary features (motif, symbolism, personification) that
      have been employed by the poet to arouse the imagery discussed.
    A very good to excellent answer may also:
    • articulate the collective effect of the imagery presented leading them to discuss other
       relevant stylistic effects, such as tone, motif, and point of view
    • engage in comparative notions of existence and/or nothingness across the poems
       discussed.



3. An adequate to good answer will:
    • provide a mostly focussed response by communicating the ways in which at least two poets
      have represented notions of illusion, including defining their own understanding of the
      concept of illusion
    • compare “point of view” and engage with the different perspectives of the reader from the
      speaker and/or persona
    • analyse and articulate the elements (tone, symbolism, metaphor, simile) the poets have
      used to create a world of varying perceptions and/or deception.


    A very good to excellent answer may also:
    • compare the effect of illusion across the breadth of poems studied
    • compare literary features in their answer
    • provide the most pertinent examples from the texts to progress their argument.
                                                –6–              M21/1/TEXTP/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4. An adequate to good answer will:
    • define the subject of betrayal explored by at least two poets for the reader
    • provide a clear sense of the way in which the poets have used symbolism and metaphor to
      evoke responses of betrayal
    • mention the comparative effects of the literary features between poems, for example the
      contrasting relationship between the persona and speaker
    • select more relevant textual examples and may consider the development of the concept of
      betrayal throughout the poem.
    A very good to excellent answer may also:
    • explain the cumulative result of symbolism and metaphor employed by the poet to create
       other stylistic effects, such as tone, motif, and concepts
    • make reference to the similar and different ways poets have used symbolism and metaphor
       and their comparative effects on the reader.



5. An adequate to good answer will:
    •   clearly communicate the form and structure of at least two poets
    •   engage with the context of the poem to add understanding to the meaning created
    •   describe the effects of form and structure to create meaning by articulating how structure
        develops the poets’ intended ideas.
    A very good to excellent answer may also:
    • demonstrate a clear grasp of the mechanics of the poems studied
    • articulate how this has intentionally been constructed to create meaning
    • compare the form and structure employed by the two poets.



6. An adequate to good answer will:
    •   understand how at least two poets have intentionally constructed their works to create
        suspense and intrigue for the reader
    •   address the literary devices needed to create suspense and intrigue and also define their
        own understanding of these concepts
    •   focus on language, structure, rhythm, and tone
    •   show knowledge and understanding of the deliberate language choices made
    •   demonstrate knowledge of the mechanics of the poems studied and their effects to evoke
        a tone of suspense and intrigue.
    A very good to excellent answer may also:
    • articulate other stylistic effects that result from language, structure, rhythm, and tone, such
       as, satire, imagery, foreshadowing, or personification
    • make mention of the similar and/or different ways the poets use language conventions to
       actively engage the reader.
