N18/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

November / Novembre / Noviembre de 2018


         English / Anglais / Inglés ab initio


                         Standard level
                         Niveau moyen
                          Nivel medio


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2




9 pages/páginas
                              –2–          N18/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are the property of the International
Baccalaureate and must not be reproduced or distributed to
any other person without the authorization of the IB Global
Centre, Cardiff.

Ces remarques pour la notation sont la propriété du
Baccalauréat International. Toute reproduction ou distribution à
de tierces personnes sans l’autorisation préalable du centre
mondial de l’IB à Cardiff est interdite.

Estas notas para la corrección son propiedad del Bachillerato
Internacional y no deben reproducirse ni distribuirse a ninguna
otra persona sin la autorización del centro global del IB en
Cardiff.
                                                 –3–              N18/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                              Section A
Criterion A: Language
• Does the student demonstrate an ability to use the language effectively and accurately?
• Does the student use spelling, calligraphy (see “Glossary of terms”), vocabulary and
  grammatical structures correctly and accurately?

 Marks    Level descriptor
   0      Language inaccuracies completely obscure communication.
   1      Language inaccuracies often obscure communication.
   2      Language is generally accurate and does not obscure communication.
   3      Language is mostly accurate and communication is clear.

Clarification
Word count
At ab initio level, students are required to write a minimum of 50 words in section A (with equivalents
in non-Roman script languages). There is no penalty for not writing the minimal word target in
section A.
Language
Not all errors have the same importance, and examiners should bear this in mind. Some errors
affect the communication of meaning significantly, and others do not. Also, some errors indicate a
fundamental lack of command of the language, while others may simply indicate a moment of
forgetfulness.
SLIPS – mistakes at all levels of difficulty, but erratic and occasional – eg the candidate normally
forms past tenses well, but occasionally forgets “-ed”.
FLAWS – errors occur more regularly, particularly in certain structures – eg past tenses are formed
correctly quite often, but are not really reliable, and there may be basic confusions (eg past simple
versus present perfect).
GAPS – some structures are rarely correct, or simply don’t appear – eg the past tenses are needed,
but do not appear.


Criterion B: Message
• Is all the relevant information conveyed?
 Marks    Level descriptor
   0      No relevant information has been conveyed.
   1      Some relevant information has been conveyed.
   2      More than half (at least three pieces of information) has been conveyed.
   3      All relevant information has been conveyed effectively.


Criterion C: Format
• Does the format correspond to the task?
 Marks    Level descriptor
   0      The format is not appropriate.
   1      The format is appropriate.
                                                   –4–           N18/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Question 1:
Your school is collecting money to help the victims of a natural disaster. Write a poster to
encourage all students to participate. You explain:
• the type of natural disaster
• where the natural disaster happened
• what the victims urgently need
• two activities that students can do to collect money to help the victims.

 Criterion B: Message
 Information to be given:
    • type of disaster: storm; wind; tsunami; flood… Do not accept non-natural disasters such as
       train accidents; war…
    • where: name of country or town or region; geographical reference (near the coast) …
    • what the victims need: (any one necessity) food; water; blankets…
    • 2 activities: make / sell (X) in school; charity activity to raise money (a run; a show …);
       awareness campaign…


 Criterion C: Format – Poster
 The format is not appropriate          No title                                             0
 The format is appropriate              A relevant title                                     1


Question 2:
You have just found out that you have passed your International Baccalaureate English ab initio
final examination. You are very happy with the result. Post a message on your Facebook page.
Explain:
• what part of the exam was easy for you
• what part of the exam was difficult for you
• the reason for this difficulty
• why you are pleased with the result
• how you will celebrate.

 Criterion B: Message
 Information to be given:
 • what is easy: speaking; writing; vocabulary…
 • what is difficult: speaking; writing; homework…
 • the reason it is difficult: complicated grammar; large range of vocabulary to learn; did not
    study; no confidence; little practice; challenging course…
 • why you are pleased: passed exam; can go to university; better result that you thought…
 • celebration: party; evening with friends; restaurant… Accept this information even if the
    celebration is described in the past tense.



 Criterion C: Format – Message on face book
 The format is not appropriate          No title or greeting or introduction                 0
 The format is appropriate              • a direct comment (title), eg “Hi, I just got my    1
                                          results”; “Time to chill out!”; “University here
                                          I come!”; “Nailed it! 7/7!! Cheers!”
                                        • a greeting or introduction
                                                –5–              N18/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                            Section B
Criterion A: Language
• To what extent does the student demonstrate an ability to use the language effectively and
  accurately?
• Does the student use a range of vocabulary and grammatical structures?
• Does the student show an awareness of the appropriate register for the task?

 Marks    Level descriptor
   0      The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
          The response and communication are of limited effectiveness.
          The range of vocabulary used is limited.
  1–2     Some basic grammatical structures are used accurately. These are isolated and limited
          in range.
          Register is inappropriate.
          The response and communication are partially effective.
          The range of vocabulary used is sometimes varied.
  3–4
          Most basic grammatical structures are used accurately.
          Register is partially appropriate.
          The response is generally accurate and communication is generally effective.
          The range of vocabulary used is varied.
  5–6     Basic grammatical structures and a limited range of more complex grammatical
          structures are used accurately.
          Register is generally appropriate.
          The response is accurate and communication is effective.
          The range of vocabulary used is varied and effective.
  7–8
          Basic and some more complex grammatical structures are used accurately.
          Register is appropriate.


Clarification

Word count
At ab initio level, students are required to write a minimum of 100 words in section B (with
equivalents in non-Roman script languages). There is no penalty for not writing the minimal word
target in section B.

Language
Not all errors have the same importance, and examiners should bear this in mind. Some errors
affect the communication of meaning significantly, and others do not. Also, some errors indicate a
fundamental lack of command of the language, while others may simply indicate a moment of
forgetfulness.
SLIPS – mistakes at all levels of difficulty, but erratic and occasional – eg the candidate normally
forms past tenses well, but occasionally forgets “-ed”.
FLAWS – errors occur more regularly, particularly in certain structures – eg past tenses are formed
correctly quite often, but are not really reliable, and there may be basic confusions (eg past simple
versus present perfect).
GAPS – some structures are rarely correct, or simply don’t appear – eg the past tenses are needed,
but do not appear.

COMPLEX GRAMMAR STRUCTURES – these include modals, conditionals, perfect tenses,
passives…
                                                –6–              N18/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B: Message

•    To what extent does the student fulfil the task?
•    Are the ideas well-developed?
•    Is there evidence of a logical structure (paragraphing and sequencing)?
•    Are cohesive devices used effectively?

    Marks   Level descriptor
      0     The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
            The task has been partially fulfilled.
            One or more ideas have been identified and have been partially developed.
     1–2
            There is limited evidence of a logical structure.
            There is a partially successful use of a limited range of simple cohesive devices.
            The task has been generally fulfilled.
            One or more ideas have been identified and have been developed.
     3–4
            There is evidence of a logical structure.
            There is a generally successful use of a range of simple cohesive devices.
            The task has been fulfilled.
            All ideas have been identified and some have been developed well.
     5–6
            There is a logical structure.
            There is successful use of a range of simple cohesive devices.
            The task has been fulfilled effectively.
            All ideas have been developed well.
     7–8
            There is an effective, logical structure.
            There is successful use of a range of simple and some complex cohesive devices.

General information
• Each question is composed of 3 parts.
• Each part is worth 2 marks. (1 detail / example / information = 1 mark).

     1. FIRST assess the task based on the message and the number of relevant details.
        (Total marks: 6 [3X2]).
     2. THEN assess the structure and use of cohesive devices.
           - 1 mark for a logical structure
           - 1 mark for the successful use of cohesive devices: first, second; then, next,
               because, also, but, if, or, however; and, for example, furthermore, likewise, besides,
               nevertheless, in addition, for instance, consequently, despite, in spite of, in
               conclusion, to sum up…
        (Total marks: 2)
   3. THEN add together the mark for the message and the marks for logical structure and use of
      cohesive devices.
      (Total marks: 6 + 2 = 8)
Note:
   • It is possible to have 2 marks for logical structure and use of cohesive devices even if the
      message is only partially fulfilled.
   • Do not penalize if there are fewer than 100 words.
   • The message must be clear to be awarded a mark. The message is clear when understood
      by an English speaker.
                                                      –7–             N18/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion C: Format

•     To what extent does the student succeed in using the correct text type?
•     Does the student use the appropriate format?

    Marks    Level descriptor
      0      The format is not appropriate.
      1      The format is partially appropriate.
      2      The format is appropriate.




Question 3:
A politician recently visited your school and you interviewed him/her for the school magazine. You
asked him/her to give three examples of actions that young people can take in the school or in the
community to protect the environment. Write the interview.

    Criterion B: Message
       •    Three actions to protect the environment: recycling; re-using; choice of transport; use of
            water / electricity, launching an awareness campaign…
       •    Two pieces of information about each of three actions
            (Total 6 marks)
       •    Add 1 mark for logical structure and 1 mark for use of cohesive devices.
            (Total 2 marks)



    Criterion C: Format – Interview

    The format is not appropriate         No characteristic of an interview                        0


    The format is partially appropriate   The following characteristic:                            1
                                             •      question and answer format or reported
                                                    speech
    The format is appropriate             Two of the following characteristics:                    2
                                             •      question and answer format or reported
                                                    speech
                                             •      title
                                             •      introductory and concluding remarks
                                                    (These may be quite detailed or limited to:
                                                    Good morning… Thank you for the
                                                    interview)
                                                –8–               N18/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Question 4:
You have been asked to make a speech to a group of students visiting from another country to
welcome them to your school. In the speech, you give information about the school day, the
uniform and the school facilities. Write the text of your speech.


 Criterion B: Message
    •   the school day: length of day, of classes, lunch time…
    •   the uniform: Accept the answer if the candidate says there is no uniform but students
        generally wear …
    •   the school facilities: School facilities refer to areas or types of rooms within and around
        the school; classrooms, playgrounds… or tangible aspects like technology, furniture…
        Activities and sports are not facilities. “There are sports” does not refer to a facility.” We
        have a sports hall” is a school facility.
    •   Two pieces of information about each of the three topics.
        (Total 6 marks)
    •   Add 1 mark for logical structure and 1 mark for the use of cohesive devices.
        (Total 2 marks)



 Criterion C: Format – Speech

 The format is not appropriate         No characteristic of a speech                               0


 The format is partially appropriate   The following characteristic:                               1
                                           •   opening address
                                           •   reference to audience in the speech
                                           •   concluding remarks to audience
 The format is appropriate             Two of the following characteristics:                       2
                                           •   opening address
                                           •   reference to audience in the speech
                                           •   concluding remarks to audience
                                                 –9–               N18/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Question 5:
Your English teacher has asked your class to work in small groups to prepare a brochure on an
English-speaking country. You are responsible for writing the part about taking a holiday in that
country. You write about leisure activities, popular tourist destinations and typical food. Write this
part of the brochure.


 Criterion B: Message
     •   If the information is not about an English-speaking country, the maximum mark for
         Message is 4.
     •   Information about: leisure activities, popular destinations, typical food.
         Examples of typical food must be given in English.
         It is possible that the candidates link the topics of activities and destinations (If you go to
         Miami you can go to the beach and surf). This is acceptable.
     •   Two pieces of information about each of three topics.
         (Total 6 marks)
     •   Add 1 mark for logical structure and 1 mark for the use of cohesive devices.
         (Total 2 marks)



 Criterion C: Format – Brochure

 The format is not appropriate          No characteristic of a brochure                             0


 The format is partially appropriate    The following characteristic:                               1
                                            •   title
                                            •   sub-titles
                                            •   lists or columns
 The format is appropriate              Two of the following characteristics:                       2
                                            •   title
                                            •   sub-titles
                                            •   lists or columns
