M10/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T




       22102238


ENGLISH B – HIGHER LEVEL – PAPER 1
ANGLAIS B – NIVEAU SUPÉRIEUR – ÉPREUVE 1
INGLÉS B – NIVEL SUPERIOR – PRUEBA 1

Monday 10 May 2010 (morning)
Lundi 10 mai 2010 (matin)
Lunes 10 de mayo de 2010 (mañana)

1 h 30 m


TEXT BOOKLET – INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES
• Do not open this booklet until instructed to do so.
• This booklet contains all of the texts required for Paper 1.
• Answer the questions in the Question and Answer Booklet provided.

LIVRET DE TEXTES – INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS
• N’ouvrez pas ce livret avant d’y être autorisé(e).
• Ce livret contient tous les textes nécessaires à l’Épreuve 1.
• Répondez à toutes les questions dans le livret de questions et réponses fourni.

CUADERNO DE TEXTOS – INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS
• No abra este cuaderno hasta que se lo autoricen.
• Este cuaderno contiene todos los textos para la Prueba 1.
• Conteste todas las preguntas en el cuaderno de preguntas y respuestas.




2210-2238                                                                                       7 pages/páginas
                                                                 © International Baccalaureate Organization 2010
                                                      –2–               M10/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

TEXT A


            ANTARCTICA: THE ULTIMATE JOURNEY
            A visit to Antarctica is much more than a holiday. Remote and unspoilt, any journey
            there is a unique adventure you’ll find nowhere else on earth.

            As you cruise in style aboard Discovery, you will gaze upon majestic, icy peaks, giant icebergs
            and diverse wildlife that includes whales, seals, penguins and birds. You will sail through
 5          glassy bays and have the opportunity, weather permitting, to set foot on Antarctica’s shores
            and volcanic beaches. On all cruises, you will get as close to nature as you would on smaller
            ships, whilst enjoying a higher class of Discovery’s 4-star comforts.

            Make the most of your experience
            Our extensive programme offers the opportunity to witness some
            of the earth’s least accessible islands and most dramatic landscapes
10          including Elephant Island, where Shackleton’s Endurance crew
            were dramatically rescued in 1916 after spending almost two
            years lost on the ice; Gyrtviken, visited by Captain Cook in
            1775; and Half Moon Island, home to thousands of penguins.
            In Lemaire Channel, Discovery sails between spectacular cliffs
15          and glaciers making its way through “Iceberg Alley”. You can
            combine your visit to Antarctica with the warm hospitality of the
            Falkland Islands, exciting South American cities and the
            spectacular Chilean Fjords*.

            Summer spectacular
            Temperatures, like the landscape, will surprise many, ranging from –5 ºC up to +5 ºC. Daylight
20          at this time of year lasts as long as 20 hours per day. It’s a season that draws all kinds of
            wildlife, one that will host a display of sensational lights in the night sky. As the summer
            arrives, penguin chicks hatch and seal pups can also be spotted. Antarctica’s warmest months
            also see migrating whales, getting closer to shore as the ice retreats.

            An eye to the future
            A priority on the cruise is to learn about Antarctica’s fragile
25          ecosystem. You’ll be moved by the heroic tales of explorers
            like de Gerlache, Amundsen, Scott and Shackleton. Led by
            Dr Peter Carey and his team, comprising some of the world’s
            most respected authorities on Antarctica, their lectures will bring
            Antarctica to life. They will accompany you on your landings
30          ashore and on small boat excursions (subject to ice and weather
            conditions).




2210-2238
                                                        –3–             M10/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T




            Exciting cruises aboard Discovery
            No single supplement on cabins

            Voyage to Antarctica
            36 Days, departing 16 November 2010
35          From Lisbon across the Atlantic Ocean to Buenos Aires with stops in exotic locales like Funchal,
            Rio de Janeiro and Ushuaia
            Now from £ 3575

            Antarctica, Chile & Patagonia
            18 Days, departing 16 December 2010
40          From Buenos Aires sail to Antarctica and depart the ship in Santiago
            Now from £ 3145
            N.B. some sailings might be in reverse, from Santiago to Buenos Aires

            Cape to Cape
            23 Days, departing 7 February 2011
45          Leave from Buenos Aires and sail around Cape Horn, visit Antarctica and make your way to
            Cape Town, South Africa
            Now from £ 2995

            What’s included:
            All meals, entertainment and gratuities on board. Return flights to/from UK.
50          Overseas transfers between airports, hotels and ship. Hotel stays in Buenos Aires and Santiago.
            Informative lecture programme. Landings ashore and small boat sightseeing.

            PLUS – Save an extra £ 500 per couple on early bookings before September 2010

            For a brochure or reservation call 01444 462 150
            www.voyagesofdiscovery.com/antarctica


                                                                  Adapted from Telegraph Travel (July 2008)
                                            © Telegraph Media Group Limited 2008. Reprinted with permission.



* fjord: a very narrow bay between cliffs




2210-2238                                                       Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                   –4–             M10/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T


TEXT B



                           The World at His Feet
              [–X–]

            “Hi, I’m Matt and I dance badly”, sounds like a confession in a therapy group.
            In fact, it’s an introduction to a man who spent 14 months travelling and dancing his way
            around the world.

            There are no box-ofﬁce charts for online videos. But if there were, near the top
  5         of the charts would be a four minute one called “Dancing”, which more than
            four million people have viewed on YouTube. It’s the online version of a platinum hit.

              [ – 10 – ]

            Set to feel-good music, Matt Harding appears
            smiling and dancing, in 69 different locations
            including India, Kuwait, Bhutan, Tonga, Timbuktu
  10        and Nellis Airspace in Nevada, where he
            dances in zero gravity.        The 31-year-old said:
            “It makes people want to travel but also shows them
            how big the world is”. Now he’s on the streets of
            Mumbai one minute, balanced on the Giant’s
  15        Causeway rock formation in Northern Ireland
            the next, and in a ﬂower ﬁeld in the Netherlands or in
            front of hot springs in Iceland. On Christmas Island
            he has an audience of crabs, and on Madagascar
            he performs for lemurs*.

              [ – 11 – ]

  20        But more often – and this accounts for the video’s appeal – he’s in the company of
            people: South African street children in Soweto, Bollywood-style dancers in India and
            crowds of free spirits in Madrid and Paris, all trying to copy his ﬂailing dance step.
            Mr Harding even dances for a policeman in the Korean demilitarized zone.

              [ – 12 – ]

            Harding’s work at Pandemic Studios on the game Destroy All Humans! led to
  25        his ﬁrst trip. Because he “didn’t want to spend two years writing a game about
            killing everyone”, he resigned from his job in Brisbane, Australia, in 2003 and
            began travelling, leading to the production of his ﬁrst video.



2210-2238
                                                      –5–          M10/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T




              [ – 13 – ]

            In Vietnam, another traveller ﬁrst ﬁlmed him dancing.           They were taking
            pictures in Hanoi and his friend said, “Hey, why don’t you stand over there and do
  30        that dance?” The video was e-mailed around and eventually became viral, getting
            20 000 or more hits a day. Matt, originally from the USA, made some more video
            postcards and posted them online on his now famous website
            www.wherethehellismatt.com. He created it so his friends and family could keep
            updated with where he was.

              [ – 14 – ]

  35        He caught the attention of Stride Chewing Gum company, who wanted to
            sponsor him to dance his way around the world. So, in 2006, Matt took a six-month
            trip through 39 countries on all seven continents. Subsequent videos made him more
            famous. In 2007, Matt took an idea to his sponsor. He knew he danced badly, so he
            wanted to get others to dance with him. He shared all the e-mails that he had received
  40        from people worldwide. On his next trip he invited the people who had written to him
            to come out and dance.

                 Worldwide impact of his videos

            On 22 July 2008, NASA featured Harding’s third video on their APOD
            (Astronomy Picture of the Day) website, titled “Happy People Dancing on Planet Earth”.
            The website states that “few people are able to watch the above video without
  45        smiling”. At present, Harding’s YouTube channel is ranked No. 80 on the
            “Most Subscribed of All Time” list.


                                                                           Adapted from various sources
                                                                             Reprinted with permission.


* lemur: tree-dwelling animal speciﬁc to Madagascar




2210-2238                                                   Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                          –6–               M10/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

TEXT C

                                          The Village by the Sea
                   Lila would go to the market at Thul today. She had to buy rice and perhaps some sugar
            and tea. Hari had brought down six bunches of coconuts and sold them to the Malabaris who
            came from Bombay in a lorry, so she had some money to spend. After Bela and Kamal had left
            for school, she took out her best sari from the green tin trunk in the corner of the room she
   5        shared with her sisters, and wore that. It was pink and had a pattern of brown flowers on it, and a
            border of violet. It was quite a cheap cotton sari but she wore it so seldom that it still looked
            new and fresh. It made her feel much happier than when she was dressed in her everyday
            sari which was always either dark green or purple, a single unpatterned colour made of thick
            material. She felt younger and happier, and she took the market bag off its nail on the kitchen door
  10        and called goodbye to her mother and set off down the beach that was brilliant with morning light and
            already hot.
                   A few other women were walking along to the market with big black umbrellas to shield them
            from the white, blinding sun. The whole sea glittered with reflected light – it was like a mirror broken
            into bits and shining. Only the two small rocky islands of Undheri and Kundheri made two blobs in
  15        all that brightness. One of them had a small fort built long ago and both were empty now except
            for lizards. There was a breeze and the big boats and catamarans swooped along as swiftly as birds
            carrying their cargo up the coast to Gujarat and Saurashta.
                   There was some commotion on the beach where a lorry had come and unloaded some
             timber. Now it was stuck in the sand. The driver was cursing loudly. Some of the village boys,
  20         the ones who did not go to school, came to help him. They were spreading palm leaves on the sand
             under the wheels and trying to push the lorry out of the ruts onto them.
                   As Lila walked past, the wheels churned and threw up sand, then the lorry heaved and roared
            and was on its way. “Next time send your timber in an ox cart,” one of the boys shouted after the
            driver and they all hooted and laughed.
  25               “You think I would drive an ox cart?” the driver shouted at them from the window.
            “Ox carts don’t stick in the sand like your fancy motor,” they screamed, but he was gone.
                   Lila did not stop to listen and hurried on, the soles of her feet burning on the hot sand.
            The village road leading to the market was lined with houses, some of them of solid brick and
            white washed, with bright floral patterns painted on their veranda walls and others made of mud,
  30        with tattered palm leaves for roofs. But large or small, rich or poor, each had a sacred basil plant
            growing in a pot by the front door.
                  A young girl from across the lane [ – X – ] to her. Lila smiled and went up to her
            friend Mina. “I have to go buy some rice and sugar. Will you [ – 33 – ]?” She had nothing to
            do it seemed – her parents were trying [ – 34 – ] her a husband. They strolled down the lane
  35        together past the women with handfuls of flowers [ – 35 – ] from the hedges and bushes.
            Mina bought some to make a garland for her hair.
                  Lila could not [ – 36 – ] money on such things.
                                            Adapted from the novel The Village by the Sea by Anita Desai (1982)
                                 Copyright © Anita Desai. Reproduced by permission of the author c/o Rogers,
                                                  Coleridge & White Ltd., 20 Powis Mews, London W11 1JN


2210-2238
                                                     –7–                M10/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

TEXT D


THE FACEBOOK REVOLUTION
While nowadays adults are pretty hip and computer savvy, the idea
of a thriving online social life escapes them. Today’s college student
generation has grown up instant-messaging and surﬁng websites where
they can interact with people from all over the world.

Launched in 2004, Facebook is an online directory of college students, faculty, staﬀ and alumni. What is all
the fuss about? The site sounds about as interesting as the phone book. But the phone book is not nearly
as interactive and as fun. When people look you up, they will see your proﬁle. Proﬁles typically include
a photo, your likes and dislikes, your relationship status, political views and interests. You also have the
opportunity to join user groups with similar interests. You can create photo albums that users can look
through, and choose whether or not to accept others as friends.

How much control do you have over your Facebook proﬁle? All the content is controlled by you, including
the information you want to share. You can even delete comments left by others if you don’t like them.
Many students have pretty innocent proﬁles; there are some, however, that would probably leave some
parents more than a little shocked.

Is there a downside to sharing too much information on Facebook? In the news recently was an incident
at Penn State where students rushed the football ﬁeld after a game. Those behind the incident were
discovered and later disciplined because of their Facebook proﬁles, which bragged about and displayed
photos of the event. Outraged students cried invasion of privacy. But can anything posted on the Internet
be considered private?

There have been other alarming stories about the misuse of Facebook. Several cases of student expulsion
have been directly related to remarks made. Some students have even lost scholarships. There is also the
growing trend of employers using Facebook when performing background checks on future employees.

What can a concerned Facebook user do? According to spokesperson Chris Hughes, you must protect
your privacy. If you only want friends to see your proﬁle, and not a school administrator or employer,
change your privacy settings.

Another piece of advice is to keep the amount of private information you post to a minimum. Never, ever
post your address, birthday, telephone number, class schedule or anything else that you would not want a
stranger to know.

You’ve also got to ask yourself, is it crucial to my social life that I post a picture of myself at a wild party?
Remember, pictures can be printed out and saved – for years even.

If you are addicted to Facebook and can’t give it up, then use it – but use it wisely. You are college students.
Nobody expects you to be angels. But to show oﬀ bad behavior – especially illegal behavior – without any
concern for the consequences is dangerous.

   Reprinted with the permission of Northampton Community College. Adapted from the college website
                                                 www.northampton.edu/news/topstories/Facebook.htm



2210-2238
