M10/2/A2ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




       22102013


ENGLISH A2 – HIGHER LEVEL – PAPER 1
anglais A2 – NIVEAU SUPÉRIEUR – ÉPREUVE 1
inglés A2 – NIVEL SUPERIOR – PRUEBA 1

Tuesday 4 May 2010 (morning)
Mardi 4 mai 2010 (matin)
Martes 4 de mayo de 2010 (mañana)

2 hours / 2 heures / 2 horas


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

   Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
   Section A consists of two passages for comparative commentary.
   Section B consists of two passages for comparative commentary.
   Choose either Section A or Section B. Write one comparative commentary.

INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS

   N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
   La section A comporte deux passages à commenter.
   La section B comporte deux passages à commenter.
   Choisissez soit la section A, soit la section B. Écrivez un commentaire comparatif.

INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS

   No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
   En la Sección A hay dos fragmentos para comentar.
   En la Sección B hay dos fragmentos para comentar.
   Elija la Sección A o la Sección B. Escriba un comentario comparativo.




2210-2013                                                                                     5 pages/páginas
                                                               © International Baccalaureate Organization 2010
                                                                    –2–           M10/2/A2ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Choose either Section A or Section B.

                                                               SECTION A

Analyse and compare the following two texts.

Discuss the similarities and differences between the texts and their theme(s). Include comments on the
ways the authors use elements such as structure, tone, images and other stylistic devices to communicate
their purposes.

Text 1

                  They are a strange breed1, clockmakers, some surly2 and insensitive to all save3 the machine
            about to whir into life, some uncertain as poets about their gift. Because my stepfather was one,
            I have studied their natures. He, my first clockmaker, never felt his talent as anything special.
            There were just a few procedures to learn. He did not feel himself to be in any way different from
      5     the market gardener in the way he spoke about his work. And I learned the cautious and also
            incautious habit of my own work from him. You are given a trade4, not a gift. There need not be
            intensity or darkness in the service of it. Still, I met no other clockmaker like him. By watching
            him, I learned enough to correct the pace on my own watch, but I would still take any failing
            timepiece to clockmakers in Toulouse so I could study the grandeur they brought to their skill.
    10            I love the performance of a craft, whether it is modest or mean-spirited, yet I walk away
            when discussions of it begin—as if one should ask a gravedigger what brand of shovel he uses or
            whether he prefers to work at noon or in moonlight. I am interested only in the care taken, and
            those secret rehearsals behind it. Even if I do not understand fully what is taking place.
                  I believe in the humbleness my stepfather had, who would stop in mid-operation—on hearing
    15      a song thrush5—and walk to a window to search it out. Or he would pass me one of his essential
            knives to sharpen my blunt pencils. He constructed objects for us out of those wheels and dials
            that were no longer being used, so they’d move like half-formed animals across the dining
            room table. He was not my father, but he raised me. I learned, I suppose, a manner from him.
            Also that any trade or talent could be shaped discreetly without the sparks of exaggerated drama.

                                                      Michael Ondaatje (2007) Divisadero, Alfred A. Knopf, New York.
                                                                                    Random House Publishing Group



1
    breed: species or kind
2
    surly: bad-tempered or unfriendly
3
    all save: everything but
4
    trade: an occupation, especially one requiring skilled labour
5
    song thrush: a kind of bird




2210-2013
                                                                    –3–                   M10/2/A2ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Text 2

                   Ray Bates sits in a room surrounded by clocks. They rest on the floor, line the shelves,
            and hang on the walls of his shop in Newfane, Vermont1. They are museum-quality works of art.
            Rich in decorative hand work – engraved and cast and exquisitely painted – these silent pieces
            of clocks, surrounded by their functional brethren2 whom Bates has brought back to life, serve to
      5     remind the clockmaker that his job is not to “fix” antique and high quality timepieces, but rather to
            re-animate them.
                   “I actually do make clocks,” he admits, “as I did to earn my Master Clockmaker status
            in Scotland, but that now is irrelevant. The function of a mechanical clock nowadays – in a
            world of television, satellites, and digital and quartz timepieces – takes on new significance.
    10      Now, it serves more to remind us of the ingenuity3 and art that once routinely went into the
            making of practical objects, and the timelessness of real quality.”
                   “My mission, as I see it, is to save as many of these antique clocks as I can, to bring them
            back to their original mechanical integrity – using all of the same techniques and materials from
            their period – and hope that someone will maintain that tradition long after I am gone.”
    15             Bates grows animated as he shows the inner workings of a particularly complex clock.
            “One of the things that impressed me most as an apprentice4 was being taught that every time we
            replaced something in a clock, our work should be indistinguishable from that of the original maker.
            Now, as I work on a piece, I feel I’m side by side with the craftsman who made it.”
                   Learning to “do a good job” has taken the British Clockmaker some considerable time
    20      and effort. Upon graduation from high school he entered a five-year apprenticeship with the
            R. L. Christie clockmaking company of Edinburgh, where he learned the craft in the centuries-old
            traditional manner, under the tutelage of European masters. He also concurrently studied
            mechanical engineering at the University of Edinburgh and graduated from both programmes as
            a Craft Member of the British Horological Institute, London. Completion of his “masterpiece”
    25      clock earned him his Master Clockmaker status in 1952.
                   “I really am in a kind of time warp,” he says, “because I am one of the few people still
            practicing today using the techniques that were current three hundred years ago, and rarely still
            being taught since the breakdown of the apprenticeship system more than 25 years ago.”

                                                      http://www.thebritishclockmaker.com. Reprinted with permission.




1
    Vermont: northeastern state in the USA
2
    brethren: brothers (an archaic word)
3
    ingenuity: cleverness, skill
4
    apprentice: a person who works for another in order to learn a trade or profession




2210-2013                                                                       Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                                   –4–       M10/2/A2ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                                                 SECTION B
Analyse and compare the following two texts.
Discuss the similarities and differences between the texts and their theme(s). Include comments on the
ways the authors use elements such as structure, tone, images and other stylistic devices to communicate
their purposes.
Text 3

                  Hunters will tell you that a moose is a wily1 and ferocious forest creature. In fact, a moose
            is a cow drawn by a three-year-old. That’s all there is to it. Without doubt, the moose is the
            most improbable, endearingly hopeless creature ever to live in the wilds. It is huge—as big as
            a horse—but magnificently ungainly2. A moose runs as if its legs have never been introduced to
      5     each other. Even its antlers3 are hopeless. Other creatures grow antlers with sharp points that look
            wonderful in profile and command the respect of adversaries. Moose grow antlers that look like
            oven gloves.
                  Above all what distinguishes the moose is its almost boundless lack of intelligence.
            If you are driving down a highway and a moose steps from the woods ahead of you, he will squint
    10      at you for a long minute, then abruptly hie4 off down the road away from you, legs flailing in
            eight directions at once. Never mind that there are perhaps 10,000 square miles of safe, dense
            forest on either side of the highway. Clueless as to where he is and what exactly is going on,
            the moose doggedly follows the highway before his peculiar gait5 inadvertently steers him back
            in to the woods, where he immediately stops and takes on a perplexed expression that says,
    15      “Hey – woods. Now how the heck did I get here?”
                  What is amazing, given the moose’s lack of cunning and curiously blunted survival instincts,
            is that it is one of the longest-surviving creatures in North America. When mastadons
            walked the earth, the moose were there with them. Woolly mammoths, saber-toothed tigers,
            mountain lions, wolves, caribou, wild horses and even camels all once thrived in the eastern
    20      United States but gradually stumbled into extinction, while the moose just plodded on,
            untroubled by ice ages, meteor impacts, volcanic eruptions and shifting continents.
                  Today New Hampshire has an estimated 5,000 moose, Vermont 1,000 more and Maine
            anything up to 30,000. It is because of these robust and growing numbers that hunting has been
            gradually re-introduced as a way of keeping the numbers from getting out of hand. However, there
    25      are two problems with this. First, the population numbers are really just guesses. Moose clearly
            don’t line up to be counted. At least one leading naturalist thinks the population numbers may have
            been overstated by as much as 20 per cent, which would mean that moose aren’t so much being
            selectively culled6 as carelessly slaughtered. Even more pertinent, to my mind, is the thought that
            there is just something wrong about hunting and killing an animal as dopey and unassuming as
    30      a moose. Shooting a moose is not an achievement.


                                          Bill Bryson (1998) Notes from a Big Country, Doubleday, Random House.

1
    wily: smart, cunning
2
    ungainly: awkward, clumsy
3
    antlers: branched horns on an animal’s head
4
    hie: go quickly
5
    gait: manner of walking
6
    culled: killing animals with the aim of population control



2210-2013
                                                                    –5–          M10/2/A2ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Text 4

                                                            The Bull Moose

                                Down from the purple mist of trees on the mountain,
                                lurching through forests of white spruce and cedar,
                                stumbling through swamps,
                                came the bull moose
                          5     to be stopped at last by a pole-fenced pasture.

                                Too tired to turn, or, perhaps, aware
                                there was no place left to go, he stood with the cattle.
                                They, scenting the musk of death,
                                moved to the other end of the field, and waited.

                        10      The neighbours heard of it, and by afternoon
                                cars lined the road. The children teased him
                                with alder switches1 and he gazed at them
                                like an old, tolerant collie2. The women asked
                                if he could have escaped from a Fair.

                        15      And the bull moose let them stroke his tick3-ravaged flanks,
                                let them pry open his jaws with beer bottles, let a giggling girl
                                plant a purple cap
                                of thistles4 on his head.

                                When the wardens came, everyone agreed it was a shame
                        20      to shoot anything so shaggy and cuddlesome.
                                He looked like the kind of pet
                                women put to bed with their sons.

                                So they held their fire. But just as the sun dropped in the river
                                the bull moose gathered his strength
                        25      like a scaffolded5 king, straightened and lifted his horns
                                so that even the wardens backed away as they raised their rifles.
                                When he roared, people ran to their cars. All the young men
                                leaned on their automobile horns as he toppled.

                               “The Bull Moose” from Alden Nowlan: Selected Poems by Alden Nowlan C 1967.
                                            Reprinted with permission of House of Anansi Press. www.anansi.ca
                              Alden Nowlan, Between Tears & Laughter: Selected Poems (Bloodaxe Books, 2004)

1
    alder switches: branches cut from an alder tree
2
    collie: a breed of dog
3
    tick: a bug that burrows under the skin
4
    thistle: a plant with purple, spiky flowers
5
    scaffolded: to be put on a platform, usually for the purpose of execution




2210-2013
