Theory of knowledge guide
First assessment 2022Theory of knowledge guide
First assessment 2022
Published February 2020 
Published on behalf of the International Baccalaureate Organization, a not-for-profit 
educational foundation of 15 Route des Morillons, 1218 Le Grand-Saconnex, Geneva, 
Switzerland by the
International Baccalaureate Organization (UK) Ltd 
Peterson House, Malthouse Avenue, Cardiff Gate 
Cardiff, Wales CF23 8GL 
United Kingdom  
Website: ibo.org
© International Baccalaureate Organization 2020
The International Baccalaureate Organization (known as the IB) offers four high-quality 
and challenging educational programmes for a worldwide community of schools, aiming 
to create a better, more peaceful world. This publication is one of a range of materials 
produced to support these programmes.
The IB may use a variety of sources in its work and checks information to verify accuracy 
and authenticity, particularly when using community-based knowledge sources such as 
Wikipedia. The IB respects the principles of intellectual property and makes strenuous 
efforts to identify and obtain permission before publication from rights holders of all 
copyright material used. The IB is grateful for permissions received for material used 
in this publication and will be pleased to correct any errors or omissions at the earliest 
opportunity.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the IB’s prior written 
permission, or as expressly permitted by the Rules for use of IB Intellectual Property .
IB merchandise and publications can be purchased through the IB Store  (email:  
sales@ibo.org ). Any commercial use of IB publications (whether fee-covered or 
commercial) by third parties acting in the IB’s ecosystem without a formal relationship 
with the IB (including but not limited to tutoring organizations, professional development 
providers, educational publishers and operators of curriculum mapping or teacher 
resource digital platforms etc) is prohibited and requires a subsequent written license 
from the IB. License requests should be sent to copyright@ibo.org . More information can 
be obtained on the IB public website .
Diploma Programme
Theory of knowledge guide
International Baccalaureate , Baccalauréat International , Bachillerato Internacional   
and IB logos are registered trademarks of the International Baccalaureate Organization.IB mission statement
The International Baccalaureate aims to develop inquiring, knowledgeable and caring young people who 
help to create a better and more peaceful world through intercultural understanding and respect.
To this end the organization works with schools, governments and international organizations to develop 
challenging programmes of international education and rigorous assessment.
These programmes encourage students across the world to become active, compassionate and lifelong 
learners who understand that other people, with their differences, can also be right.IB learner profile I
profile IB learner parner profile IB leaile IB learner profiIB learner profile Ier profile IB learne
© International Bac calaur eate Or ganiza tion 2017
International Bac calaur eate® | Bac calaur éat International® | Bachiller ato Internacional®
The IB learner pro/f_ile represents 10 attributes valued by IB World Schools. We believe these attributes, and others 
like them, can help individuals and groups become responsible members of local, national and global communities.We nurture our curiosity, developing skills for inquiry and 
research. We know how to learn independently and with others. 
We learn with enthusiasm and sustain our love of learning 
throughout life.
We develop and use conceptual understanding, exploring 
knowledge across a range of disciplines. We engage with issues 
and ideas that have local and global signi/f_icance. 
We use critical and creative thinking skills to analyse and take 
responsible action on complex problems. We exercise initiative in 
making reasoned, ethical decisions.
We express ourselves con/f_idently and creatively in more than one 
language and in many ways.  We collaborate eﬀectively, listening 
carefully to the perspectives of other individuals and groups.
We act with integrity and honesty, with a strong sense of 
fairness and justice, and with respect for the dignity and rights 
of people everywhere. We take responsibility for our actions 
and their consequences.We critically appreciate our own cultures and personal histories, 
as well as the values and traditions of others. We seek and evaluate 
a range of points of view, and we are willing to grow from the 
experience.
We show empathy, compassion and respect. We have a 
commitment to service, and we act to make a positive diﬀerence 
in the lives of others and in the world around us.
We understand the importance of balancing diﬀerent aspects of 
our lives /emdash.capintellectual, physical, and emotional/emdash.cap to achieve 
well-being for ourselves and others. We recognize our interde-
pendence with other people and with the world in which we live.
We thoughtfully consider the world and our own ideas and expe-
rience. We work to understand our strengths and weaknesses in order to support our learning and personal development.We approach uncertainty with forethought and determination; we work independently and cooperatively to explore new ideas and innovative strategies. We are resourceful and resilient in the face of challenges and change.IB learner profile
The aim of all IB programmes is to develop internationally minded people who, recognizing their common 
humanity and shared guardianship of the planet, help to create a better and more peaceful world.
As IB learners we strive to be:THE IB LEARNER PROFILEIntroduction 1
About this publication 1
About the IB 2
Theory of knowledge 5
The TOK course “at a glance” 5
Nature of the subject 6
Aims 8
Assessment objectives 9
Syllabus 10
Course outline 10
Knowledge questions 11
Optional themes 16
Areas of knowledge 27
Assessment 37
Assessment in the DP 37
TOK assessment outline 38
TOK assessment details 39
TOK assessment instruments 46
Appendices 49
Designing a TOK course 49
Bibliography 50
Acknowledgments 52
Contents
Theory of knowledge guide
First assessment 2022
This  resource  is intended  to guide  the planning,  teaching  and  assessment  of the International 
Baccalaureate  (IB) Diploma  Programme  (DP)  Theory  of knowledge  (TOK)  course.  TOK  teachers  are the 
primary audience, although it is expected that teachers will also use the information in this guide to inform 
students and parents about the subject.
This  guide  can be found  on the programme  resource  centre  at resources.ibo.org,  a password-protected 
website  designed  to support  IB teachers.  Additional  publications,  such  as teacher  support  material,  subject 
reports and grade descriptors, can also be found on the programme resource centre.
Teachers  are also  encouraged  to check  the programme  communities  for additional  resources  created  or 
used  by other  teachers.  Teachers  can provide  details  of useful  resources,  such  as websites,  books,  videos, 
journals or teaching ideas.
Introduction
About this publication
1 Theory of knowledge guide
The IB consists  of four  programmes:  the Primary  Years  Programme  (PYP)  (ages  3–11),  the Middle  Years 
Programme  (MYP)  (ages  11–16),  the Diploma  Programme  (DP)  (ages  16–19),  and  the Career-related 
Programme (CP) (ages 16–19).
The aim of all IB programmes  is to develop  internationally  minded  people  who,  recognizing  their  common 
humanity  and  shared  guardianship  of the planet,  help  to create  a better  and  more  peaceful  world.  The 
programmes aim to inspire a lifelong quest for learning hallmarked by enthusiasm and empathy.
Any school, or group of schools, wishing to offer the IB programmes must first be authorized to do so by the 
IB Organization.
For more information about the IB, see the following resources.
• The IB mission statement
• What is an IB education? 
• Programme standards and practices 
About inclusion
Inclusion is an ongoing process that aims to increase access and engagement in learning for all students by 
identifying and removing barriers. For more information about inclusion, see the following resources.
• Access and inclusion policy 
• Learning diversity and inclusion in IB programmes 
• Meeting student learning diversity in the classroom 
• The IB guide to inclusive education: a resource for whole school development 
• Using Universal Design for Learning (UDL) in the IB classroom 
The Diploma Programme
The Diploma Programme (DP) is a rigorous pre-university course of study designed for students in the 16 to 
19 age range.  It is a broad-based  two-year  course  that  aims  to encourage  students  to be knowledgeable 
and  inquiring,  but also  caring  and  compassionate.  There  is a strong  emphasis  on encouraging  students  to 
develop intercultural understanding, open-mindedness and the attitudes necessary for them to respect and 
evaluate a range of points of view.
Students  are required  to choose  one  subject  from  each  of the six academic  areas  (although  they  can, 
instead  of an arts subject,  choose  two  subjects  from  another  area).  Additionally,  every  DP student  must 
complete  the three  core  components  that  lie at the heart  of the programme:  theory  of knowledge  (TOK), 
creativity, activity, service (CAS), and the extended essay (EE).
DP pedagogy  is underpinned  by the “approaches  to teaching  and  learning”—deliberate  strategies,  skills 
and  attitudes  that  permeate  the teaching  and  learning  environment.  The five categories  of approaches  to 
learning  skills  (developing  thinking  skills,  social  skills,  communication  skills,  self-management  skills  and 
research  skills)  along  with  the six approaches  to teaching  (teaching  that  is based  on inquiry;  focused  on 
conceptual  understanding;  developed  in local  and  global  contexts;  focused  on effective  teamwork  and 
collaboration;  designed  to remove  barriers  to learning;  informed  by assessment)  help  to encourage 
students, empower teachers and enhance the coherence and relevance of students’ DP experience.
At the end  of their  DP courses,  students’  abilities  are measured  by means  of external  assessment.  Many 
subjects  contain  some  element  of coursework  assessed  by teachers.  All coursework—including  work 
Introduction
About the IB
2 Theory of knowledge guide
submitted for assessment—is to be authentic, based on the student’s individual and original ideas, with the 
ideas  and  work  of others  fully  acknowledged.  Assessment  tasks  that  require  teachers  to provide  guidance 
to students  or that  require  students  to work  collaboratively  must  be completed  in full compliance  with  the 
detailed guidelines provided by the IB for the relevant subjects.
Diploma Programme model
The programme  is presented  as six academic  areas  enclosing  a central  core  (see  figure  1). In each  of the 
academic  areas,  students  have  flexibility  in making  their  choices,  which  means  they  can choose  subjects 
that particularly interest them and that they may wish to study further at university.
Figure 1
Diploma Programme model
Essential DP publications
• Diploma Programme: From principles into practice 
• Diploma Programme Approaches to teaching and learning website 
• Diploma Programme  Assessment procedures  (updated annually)
The DP core
The DP core  lies at the heart  of the programme  and  reflects  the IB’s strong  commitment  to the principle  of 
developing the whole person.
The three  elements  of the core  individually  and  collectively  illuminate  what  it means  to experience  a DP 
education,  and  are driven  by the IB’s mission  “to develop  inquiring,  knowledgeable  and  caring  young 
people  who  help  to create  a better  and  more  peaceful  world  through  intercultural  understanding  and 
respect” (IB mission statement).About the IB
3 Theory of knowledge guide
The core strives to make a difference to the lives of students. It should provide opportunities for students to 
think  about  their  own  values  and  actions,  to deepen  their  understanding  of their  place  in the world  and  to 
sensitively consider the contexts and views of others.
Every DP student must complete the three core elements.
• Theory of knowledge (TOK)  explores questions about knowledge and the process of knowing. TOK 
emphasizes comparisons and connections between areas of knowledge and encourages students to 
become more aware of their own perspectives and the perspectives of others.
• Creativity, activity, service (CAS)  provides students with the chance to participate in a range of 
experiences alongside their academic studies. The three strands of CAS are creativity (arts, and other 
experiences that involve creative thinking), activity (physical exertion contributing to a healthy 
lifestyle) and service (an unpaid collaborative and reciprocal engagement with the community).
• The extended essay (EE)  presents students with an opportunity to explore a topic of special interest, 
either through one of their six DP subjects or through an interdisciplinary approach. The EE helps 
students to develop the self-regulated research and writing skills that they need to fulfill their 
aspirations at university.
There  should  be close  links  between  these  core  elements  and  the rest of the DP. It is important  that 
teachers  give  careful  consideration  to how  TOK,  CAS  and  the EE can feed  into  a deeper  understanding  of 
the academic subjects, as well as how these subjects can enrich the core.
Aims of the DP core
The three elements of the DP core are intended to complement each other and to work together to 
achieve three common aims. These are:
• to foster international-mindedness and encourage students to become responsible and actively 
involved global citizens
• to develop students’ self-awareness and sense of identity, and provide an opportunity for reflection 
on their development of the attributes of the IB learner profile
• to enrich and add value to students’ overall learning experiences through the core—supporting, and 
being supported by, their academic studies in the rest of the programme.About the IB
4 Theory of knowledge guide
The TOK  course  provides  students  with  an opportunity  to explore  and  reflect  on the nature  of 
knowledge  and  the process  of knowing . It is a core  element  of the DP to which  schools  are required  to 
devote at least 100 hours of class time.
In TOK,  students  reflect  on the knowledge,  beliefs  and  opinions  that  they  have  built  up from  their  years  of 
academic  studies  and  their  lives  outside  the classroom.  The course  is intended  to be challenging  and 
thought-provoking—as well as empowering—for students.
The course  centres  on the exploration  of knowledge  questions , which  are a key tool  for both  teachers 
and  students.  These  are contestable  questions  about  knowledge  itself,  such  as: “What  counts  as good 
evidence  for a claim?”,  “Are  some  types  of knowledge  less open  to interpretation  than  others?”,  or “What 
constraints should there be on the pursuit of knowledge?”. While these questions may initially seem slightly 
intimidating,  they  become  much  more  accessible  when  considered  with  reference  to specific  examples 
within the TOK course.
The TOK curriculum is made up of three deeply interconnected parts.
• The core theme—Knowledge and the knower:  This theme encourages students to reflect on 
themselves as knowers and thinkers, and to consider the different communities of knowers to which 
we belong.
• Optional themes:  This element provides an opportunity to take a more in-depth look at two themes 
of particular interest to teachers and students. The given themes all have a significant impact on the 
world today and play a key role in shaping people’s perspectives and identities. Teachers select two 
optional themes from a choice of five: knowledge and technology; knowledge and language; 
knowledge and politics; knowledge and religion; and knowledge and indigenous societies.
• Areas of knowledge:  The areas of knowledge (AOK) are specific branches of knowledge, each of 
which can be seen to have a distinct nature and sometimes use different methods of gaining 
knowledge. In TOK, students explore five compulsory areas of knowledge: history; the human sciences; 
the natural sciences; mathematics; and the arts.
To help  teachers  and  students  explore  these  three  parts  of the TOK  curriculum,  guidance  and  suggested 
knowledge questions are provided. These suggested knowledge questions are organized into a framework 
of four  elements:  scope , perspectives , methods  and  tools , and  ethics . This  "knowledge  framework" 
encourages  a deep  exploration  of each  theme  and  AOK.  Having  these  common  elements  run throughout 
the different  parts  of the curriculum  also  helps  to unify  the course  and  helps  students  to make  effective 
connections and comparisons across the different themes and areas of knowledge.
There are two assessment tasks  in the TOK course.
• The TOK exhibition  assesses the ability of the student to show how TOK manifests in the world 
around us. The exhibition is an internal assessment component; it is marked by the teacher and is 
externally moderated by the IB.
• The TOK essay  engages students in a more formal and sustained piece of writing in response to a title 
focused on the areas of knowledge. The essay is an external assessment component; it is marked by IB 
examiners. The essay must be a maximum of 1,600 words and must be on one of the six prescribed 
titles issued by the IB for each examination session.
The TOK  course  can  be structured  in a variety  of ways  and  can start  from  a variety  of different  entry 
points.  Teachers  are encouraged  to exercise  flexibility,  creativity  and  innovation  in the design  and  delivery 
of their  TOK  course,  and  to provide  a diverse  range  of examples  that  meet  the specific  needs  and  interests 
of their  own  students.  Further  guidance  and  examples  relating  to the teaching,  learning  and  assessment  of 
TOK can be found in the Theory of knowledge teacher support material .
Theory of knowledge
The TOK course “at a glance”
5 Theory of knowledge guide
The TOK  course  plays  a special  role  in the DP by providing  an opportunity  for students  to reflect  on the 
nature,  scope  and  limitations  of knowledge  and  the process  of knowing.  In this way,  the main  focus  of TOK 
is not on students  acquiring  new  knowledge  but on helping  students  to reflect  on, and  put into 
perspective, what they already know.
TOK  underpins  and  helps  to unite  the subjects  that  students  encounter  in the rest of their  DP studies.  It 
engages  students  in explicit  reflection  on how  knowledge  is arrived  at in different  disciplines  and  areas  of 
knowledge,  on what  these  areas  have  in common  and  the differences  between  them.  It is intended  that 
through  this holistic  approach,  discussions  in one  area  will help  to enrich  and  deepen  discussions  in other 
areas.
The course is an opportunity for teachers and students to engage in interesting conversations that cross the 
boundaries of individual disciplines and that help students to reflect on the knowledge they have acquired 
from  both  their  academic  studies  and  their  lives  outside  the classroom.  Students  are encouraged  to 
examine  the evidence  for claims  and  to consider,  for example,  how  we distinguish  fact from  opinion,  or 
how  we evaluate  the credibility  of claims  that  we are exposed  to in the media.  They  explore  different 
methods and tools of inquiry and try to establish what it is about them that makes them effective, as well as 
considering their limitations.
The following  12 concepts  have  particular  prominence  within,  and  thread  throughout,  the TOK  course: 
evidence , certainty , truth , interpretation , power , justification , explanation , objectivity , perspective , 
culture , values  and responsibility . Exploration of the relationship between knowledge and these concepts 
can help students to deepen their understanding, as well as facilitating the transfer of their learning to new 
and different contexts.
The TOK course embraces the exploration of tensions, limitations and challenges relating to knowledge and 
knowing.  However,  it is also  intended  that  TOK  discussions  will encourage  students  to appreciate  and  be 
inspired  by the richness  of human  knowledge—and  to consider  the positive  value  of different  kinds  of 
knowledge.  Consideration  should  be given  to the benefits  of this kind  of reflection  on knowledge  and 
knowing;  for example,  in terms  of its potential  to help  us think  more  subtly,  to be more  aware  of our 
assumptions, or to overcome prejudice and promote intercultural understanding.
Knowledge in TOK
Knowledge  is the raw material  of the TOK  course.  Throughout  the TOK  course,  there  should  be ongoing 
conversations about the nature, scope and limits of knowledge. However, a detailed technical philosophical 
investigation  into  the nature  of knowledge  is not appropriate  in a TOK  course.  For example,  there  is no 
expectation  that  TOK  students  will be familiar  with  specific  philosophers  or philosophical  texts.  However,  it 
is useful  for students  to have  a rough  working  idea  of what  is meant  by “knowledge”  at the outset  of the 
course—this can then become more refined throughout the discussions.
There  are various  ways  of thinking  about  knowledge,  but one  useful  way  to help  students  think  about 
knowledge  in TOK  can be through  the metaphor  of knowledge  as a map.  Since  a map  is a simplified 
representation of the world, items that are not relevant to the purpose of the map are left out. For example, 
we would not expect to find detailed street names on a map of a city metro system. This metaphor can help 
students  to see the importance  of considering  the context  in which  knowledge  has been  sought  and 
constructed.
A metaphor  such  as this can support  rich discussions  about  knowledge  and  accuracy,  about  how 
knowledge  grows  and  changes,  and  about  the difference  between  producing  and  using  knowledge.  It can 
also  prompt  interesting  wider  reflections  on the cultural  assumptions  behind  our understanding  of what 
Theory of knowledge
Nature of the subject
6 Theory of knowledge guide
maps  are or should  be, or the way  that  the cartographer’s  perspective  is reflected  in a map.  Maps  and 
knowledge are produced by, and in turn produce, a particular perspective.
TOK and international-mindedness
The term  “international-mindedness”  is used  by the IB to refer  to a way  of thinking,  being  and  acting 
characterized by an openness to the world and a recognition of our deep interconnectedness to others.
The TOK  course  places  a great  deal  of emphasis  on elements  that  are central  to the development  of 
international-  mindedness.  For example,  it encourages  students  to consider  the diversity  and  richness  of 
different perspectives, as well as exploring the interdependent influence of knowledge and culture.
The course  encourages  students  to be curious  about,  and  to think  deeply  and  carefully  about,  complicated 
issues.  It encourages  students  to avoid  shallow  and  polarized  thinking,  and  to avoid  making  quick 
judgments.  It highlights  that  sometimes  there  really  are no simple  answers,  and  “that  tensions  between 
conflicting points of view have to be lived with, argued about and frequently left unresolved” (Walker 2004: 
135).
Through  their  explorations  in TOK,  students  are encouraged  to discover  and  articulate  their  own  views  on 
knowledge.  They  are encouraged  to share  their  ideas  with  others,  and  to listen  to and  learn  from  what 
others  think.  Through  this process  of dialogue  and  discussion,  their  own  understanding  is enriched  and 
deepened  as they  become  more  engaged  with  different  beliefs,  values  and  experiences,  as well  as with 
alternative ways of answering questions.
TOK also challenges students to be intellectual risk-takers and to question what they hold to be true. In this 
way,  it encourages  intellectual  humility  and  encourages  students  to gain  and  apply  their  knowledge  with 
greater awareness and responsibility. Reflecting on how we may be wrong and how the world may seem to 
someone  else  helps  students  to become  more  aware  of the assumptions  and  values  that  influence  our 
thoughts  and  actions.  In this way,  the course  helps  students  to reflect  on their  growing  understanding  of 
themselves and of the world around them.Nature of the subject
7 Theory of knowledge guide
The aims of the TOK course are:
• to encourage students to reflect on the central question, “How do we know that?”, and to recognize 
the value of asking that question
• to expose students to ambiguity, uncertainty and questions with multiple plausible answers
• to equip students to effectively navigate and make sense of the world, and help prepare them to 
encounter novel and complex situations
• to encourage students to be more aware of their own perspectives and to reflect critically on their own 
beliefs and assumptions
• to engage students with multiple perspectives, foster open-mindedness and develop intercultural 
understanding
• to encourage students to make connections between academic disciplines by exploring underlying 
concepts and by identifying similarities and differences in the methods of inquiry used in different 
areas of knowledge
• to prompt students to consider the importance of values, responsibilities and ethical concerns relating 
to the production, acquisition, application and communication of knowledge.
Theory of knowledge
Aims
8 Theory of knowledge guide
Having completed the TOK course, students should be able to:
• demonstrate TOK thinking through the critical examination of knowledge questions
• identify and explore links between knowledge questions and the world around us
• identify and explore links between knowledge questions and areas of knowledge
• develop relevant, clear and coherent arguments
• use examples and evidence effectively to support a discussion
• demonstrate awareness and evaluation of different points of view
• consider the implications of arguments and conclusions.
Theory of knowledge
Assessment objectives
9 Theory of knowledge guide
Course elements Minimum teaching 
hours
Core theme: Knowledge and the knower
This theme provides an opportunity for students to reflect on themselves as 
knowers and thinkers, and on the different communities of knowers to which 
we belong.32
Optional themes
Students are required to study two  optional themes from the following five 
options.
• Knowledge and technology
• Knowledge and language
• Knowledge and politics
• Knowledge and religion
• Knowledge and indigenous societies
Areas of knowledge
Students are required to study the following five  areas of knowledge.
• History
• The human sciences
• The natural sciences
• The arts
• Mathematics50
Assessment
Students are required to complete two  assessment tasks.
• TOK exhibition (internally assessed)
• TOK essay on a prescribed title (externally assessed)18
Total minimum teaching hours 100
Syllabus
Course outline
10 Theory of knowledge guide
The TOK  curriculum  centres  around  the exploration  of knowledge  questions.  Knowledge  questions  are 
crucial to effective TOK discussions as they help to make sure that students are focusing on questions about 
knowledge  itself  and  about  how  we know  things.  Knowledge  questions  help  students  to move  beyond 
subject-specific questions or specific real-life situations into the realm of TOK.
Knowledge  questions  are questions  about  knowledge —about  how  knowledge  is produced,  acquired, 
shared and used; what it is and what it is not; who has it and who does not; and who decides the answers to 
these  questions.  Instead  of focusing  on subject-specific  content  or specific  examples,  students  focus  on 
how knowledge is constructed and evaluated. In this sense, knowledge questions are distinct from many of 
the questions that students encounter in their other subjects.
Knowledge  questions  are contestable  in that  there  are a number  of plausible  answers  to them.  Dealing 
with  these  open  contestable  questions  is a key feature  of TOK,  although  some  students  can find  the lack  of 
a single  “right”  answer  slightly  disorienting.  In TOK  discussions,  it is perfectly  conceivable  that  answers  to a 
question  may  differ—what  matters  is that  the analysis  is thorough,  accurate  and  effectively  supported  by 
examples and evidence.
Knowledge  questions  also  draw  on TOK  concepts  and  terminology,  rather  than  using  subject-specific 
terminology  or specific  examples.  Knowledge  questions  draw  on central  TOK  concepts  such  as evidence, 
certainty, values, and interpretation.
Figure 2
Knowledge questions
Knowledge  questions  underlie  much  of the knowledge  that  we take  for granted  and  are often  the 
motivation  for many  disagreements  and  controversies.  Exploration  of knowledge  questions  can therefore 
help  us to have  a deeper  understanding  of how  knowledge  is constructed  and  evaluated  in different  areas, 
as well as helping us to make sense of the world around us.
Knowledge  questions  are the key tool  for teaching  and  learning  in TOK.  The two  assessment  tasks—the 
TOK  exhibition  and  TOK  essay—centre  on the exploration  of knowledge  questions  as both  the Internal 
Assessment  (IA) prompts  and  the prescribed  essay  titles  take  the form  of knowledge  questions.  It is 
therefore  crucial  that  students  engage  with  the exploration  and  discussion  of knowledge  questions 
throughout the TOK course.
Syllabus
Knowledge questions
11 Theory of knowledge guide
Examples of knowledge questions
Knowledge  questions  play  a crucial  role  in helping  students  to move  beyond  subject  specific  questions  or 
specific real-life situations into TOK discussions that are focused explicitly on knowledge.
Specific situations/question → Knowledge question
Studying the views of two different historians 
in a DP history lesson→How can we decide between the judgments of 
experts if they disagree with each other?
A newspaper article on predicting future 
population growth in Africa→How can a model be useful even if it is 
obviously false?
A journal article detailing the outcomes of a 
medical trial of an experimental new drug→What ethical constraints should there be on 
the pursuit of knowledge?
A discussion of “Pascal’s triangle” in a 
mathematics lesson →How significant have notable individuals been 
in shaping the development of mathematics as 
an area of knowledge?
Watching a video of a talk on compassion, 
happiness and inner peace by the Dalai Lama→Does some knowledge belong only to 
particular communities of knowers?
Should driverless cars be programmed to 
protect the passenger in the car or a 
pedestrian in the case of an accident?→In what ways do ethical judgments differ from 
other kinds of judgments?
Throughout  this guide,  examples  of knowledge  questions  are suggested  for each  of the themes  and  areas 
of knowledge.  In order  to encourage  and  support  students  in making  comparisons  and  connections  across 
different  elements  of the course,  the knowledge  questions  suggested  for each  theme  and  area  of 
knowledge  are organized  into  a “knowledge  framework”  consisting  of four  common  elements:  scope , 
perspectives , methods and tools , and ethics .
These  four  elements  provide  a structure  to help  students  explore  and  analyse  the different  aspects  of the 
course,  as well  as providing  a common  vocabulary  to help  encourage  comparisons  and  connections.  They 
can also  provide  a useful  starting  point  to help  non-TOK  teachers  make  links  to TOK  in their  other  DP 
subjects.
The knowledge  questions  suggested  in this guide  for each  theme  and  area  of knowledge  are suggested 
examples  only;  they  are not prescriptive.  Teachers  are free  to explore  the themes  and  areas  of knowledge 
using  a variety  of different  examples  and  knowledge  questions  of their  choice.  However,  teachers  are 
required  to ensure  that,  within  their  discussions  of each  theme  and  area  of knowledge,  they  include 
discussion of examples and knowledge questions that relate to each of the four elements.
Scope
This element focuses on exploring the nature and scope of the different themes and areas of knowledge. It 
explores how each theme/area of knowledge fits within the totality of human knowledge, and also 
considers the nature of the problems that each theme/area of knowledge faces and tries to address.
Examples of knowledge questions relating to scope include the following.
• What motivates the pursuit of knowledge in these themes/areas of knowledge?
• What practical problems can be solved through the application of knowledge from these themes/
areas of knowledge?
• What are the key current open/unanswered questions in these themes/areas of knowledge?
• What makes this theme/area of knowledge important?Knowledge questions
12 Theory of knowledge guide
Perspectives
This element focuses on the importance and influence of perspectives and context. This includes reflection 
on the students’ own perspectives and what informs them, as well as how different people or groups view 
or approach knowledge in the different themes/areas of knowledge. It also includes reflection on historical 
perspectives and how knowledge changes over time.
Examples of knowledge questions relating to perspectives include the following.
• What is the significance of key historical developments within these themes/areas of knowledge?
• What do these themes/areas of knowledge identify about knowledge that is rooted in particular 
social and cultural groups?
• Are some types of knowledge less open to interpretation than others?
• Is an understanding of the perspective of other knowers essential in the pursuit of knowledge?
Methods and Tools
This element focuses on exploring the methods, tools and practices that we use to produce knowledge. 
This includes the building of conceptual frameworks, the establishing of traditions and practices, as well as 
the methodologies employed by formal disciplines. It also includes consideration of the cognitive and 
material tools that we have available to help us in the pursuit of knowledge, and of how these tools have 
changed as a result of technological developments.
Examples of knowledge questions relating to methods and tools include the following.
• What assumptions underlie the methods of inquiry used in these themes/areas of knowledge?
• Does what is seen to constitute “good evidence” vary from discipline to discipline and culture to 
culture? How is knowledge produced and communicated in these themes/areas of knowledge?
• How important are material tools in the production and acquisition of knowledge?
Ethics
This element focuses on exploring ethics and the ethical considerations that have an impact on inquiry in 
the different themes and areas of knowledge. This includes aspects such as the relationship between facts 
and values, and how ethical and epistemic values are built into the quest for knowledge. It also includes 
questions relating to knowledge and inequality and injustice. It is crucial that TOK discussions about ethics 
focus on the knowledge questions that are woven into, and implied, in the ethical issues being discussed, 
rather than the focus being on debating the ethical issues themselves.
Examples of knowledge questions relating to ethics include the following.
• Should the pursuit of knowledge in these themes/areas of knowledge be subject to ethical 
constraints?
• What responsibilities rest on the knower as a result of their knowledge in these themes/areas of 
knowledge?
• How can we know when we should act on what we know?
• Do established values change in the face of new knowledge?
Core theme: Knowledge and the knower
The core  theme—knowledge  and  the knower—provides  an opportunity  for students  to reflect  on what 
shapes  their  perspective  as a knower,  where  their  values  come  from,  and  how  they  make  sense  of, and 
navigate, the world around them.
Importantly,  this theme  does  not focus  exclusively  on the individual  knower.  It also  considers  aspects  such 
as the impact  of the different  communities  of knowers  to which  we belong,  and  how  knowledge  is Knowledge questions
13 Theory of knowledge guide
constructed,  critically  examined,  evaluated  and  renewed  by communities  and  individuals.  This  includes 
reflection on how our interactions with others and with the material world shape our knowledge.
This theme encourages careful and critical consideration of claims, provoking students to reflect on how we 
distinguish between claims that are contestable and claims that are not. It highlights the importance of not 
simply accepting claims at face value, and then explores how this can be reconciled with a recognition that 
many situations require us to make decisions without possessing absolute certainty.
The core  theme  has been  explicitly  designed  to provide  rich opportunities  for teachers  and  students  to 
make links to the IB learner profile. Students are encouraged to consider both the power and the limitations 
of the tools  that  they  have  at their  disposal  as knowers  and  thinkers,  and  to become  more  aware  of their 
own biases and assumptions. They could also consider what it really means to be open-minded or consider 
the importance of caring about how knowledge is used and controlled.
Figure 3
Me as a knower and a thinker
An interesting  focus  for discussions  in this theme  could  be misinformation  and  disinformation,  deliberate 
deception  and  manipulation,  and  how  we know  who/what  to trust.  This  could  include  reflection  on which 
sources  of knowledge  (books,  websites,  personal  experience,  authority  figures,  and  so on) students 
consider  most  trustworthy,  and  why.  It could  also  include  reflection  on how  advances  in technology  have 
brought these issues into sharper focus through, for example, discussion of “fake news” and its machinery.
Another  interesting  focus  for discussions  could  be to explore  how  we perceive  and  construct  our 
understanding  of the world.  This  could  include  consideration  of the way  that  culture  can be seen  as a lens 
through  which  we look  at the world,  or the impact  of filters,  image  manipulation  and  propaganda.  For 
example,  students  could  consider  at what  point  filters  become  more  important  than  what  really  exists,  or 
the influence of hidden assumptions in shaping us as knowers.
There  are many  possible  ways  to approach  and  structure  the core  theme  in the classroom.  For example, 
teachers may choose to “bookend” the TOK course with the core theme—using it as a way to start and end 
the course,  as well  as spiralling  back  to the theme  at relevant  moments  throughout  the optional  themes 
and  areas  of knowledge.  Additional  guidance  and  examples  on how  the core  theme  could  potentially  be 
approached can be found in the Theory of knowledge teacher support material .
Whatever  approach  to the core  theme  is taken,  it is crucial  that  the focus  remains  clearly  on knowledge . 
Teachers  must  also  ensure  that  within  their  exploration  of the theme,  they  engage  with  the four 
compulsory  elements  required  in every  part  of the TOK  curriculum:  scope , perspectives , methods  and 
tools , and ethics . Suggested knowledge questions for each of these elements are provided in the following 
table, but these should not be taken as prescriptive or exhaustive.
Examples of knowledge questions
Scope • What criteria can we use to distinguish between knowledge, belief and 
opinion?Knowledge questions
14 Theory of knowledge guide
Examples of knowledge questions
• How do we distinguish claims that are contestable from claims that are not?
• Are there situations where “knowing how” is more important than “knowing 
that”?
• Why should we care about acquiring knowledge?
• Why are the criteria for what counts as knowledge not obvious?
• Can other people know us better than we know ourselves?
• How do our interactions with the material world shape our knowledge?
Perspectives • What shapes my perspective as a knower?
• How much of our knowledge depends on our interactions with other knowers?
• Is the truth what the majority of people accept?
• How do empathy and imagination help us to understand other perspectives?
• Presented with the belief system of a community of knowers, how can we 
decide what we personally believe?
• Are there types of knowledge that are specifically linked to particular 
communities of knowers?
• How can we know that current knowledge is an improvement on past 
knowledge?
Methods and tools • How do we acquire knowledge?
• What constitutes a “good reason” for us to accept a claim?
• Are intuition, evidence, reasoning, consensus and authority all equally 
convincing methods of justification?
• Does knowledge always require some kind of rational basis?
• How do our expectations and assumptions have an impact on how we perceive 
things?
• What are the advantages and disadvantages of requiring that all knowledge is 
verified by a group?
Ethics • Are there responsibilities that necessarily come with knowing something or 
knowing how to do something?
• As knowers, do we have a moral duty to examine our own assumptions and 
biases?
• Under what circumstances, if any, do we have a moral duty to share what we 
know?
• In what ways do ethical judgments differ from other kinds of judgments?
• Is there knowledge that a person or society has a responsibility to acquire or not 
to acquire?
• If moral claims conflict, does it follow that all views are equally acceptable?
• What personal traits (such as taking seriously the knowledge of others) do we 
need in order to be ethical knowers?Knowledge questions
15 Theory of knowledge guide
The optional themes allow for a more in-depth look at two themes that are of particular interest to the TOK 
teacher and students.
Teachers must select two  optional themes from the following five options.
• Knowledge and technology
• Knowledge and language
• Knowledge and politics
• Knowledge and religion
• Knowledge and indigenous societies
These  five themes  have  been  selected  because  of their  contemporary  real-world  relevance  and  their  rich 
potential  to stimulate  interesting  and  engaging  TOK  discussions  around  key areas,  such  as the justification 
of, and evidence for, claims.
It is intended  that  all five of these  optional  themes  will have  strong  links  to, and  extend  from,  the core 
theme—Knowledge  and  the knower.  Whereas  the core  theme  focuses  on the student  and  the particular 
communities  of knowers  that  they  belong  to, the optional  themes  broaden  the focus  to five factors  that 
have  a huge  impact  on the world  today  and  that  play  a particularly  key role  in shaping  people’s 
perspectives  and  identities.  They  raise  issues  that  students  are likely  to encounter  in their  lives  both  within 
and, importantly, beyond their school experiences.
The following sections contain guidance on each of these five optional themes. It should be noted that the 
themes  allow  for a great  deal  of flexibility  in how  they  are approached.  There  is opportunity  for teachers  to 
explore a wide range of concepts and issues, and to provide a wide variety of engaging examples. However, 
for each  of the optional  themes  selected  for study,  teachers  must  ensure  that  the focus  remains  clearly  on 
knowledge  in that  theme,  and  that  they  engage  with  the four  compulsory  elements  required  in every  part 
of the syllabus: scope , perspectives , methods and tools , and ethics .
The following  sections  contain  suggested  knowledge  questions  that  could  be used  to explore  these  four 
required  elements  in each  optional  theme;  these  are suggestions  only  and  should  not be taken  as 
prescriptive or exhaustive.
Knowledge and technology
For many,  advances  in technology  have  provided  easy  access  to massive  amounts  of data  and  information, 
and  have  facilitated  unprecedented  levels  of global  interaction.  However,  they  have  also  raised  important 
questions about how we engage with, and understand, information; about our understanding of the world; 
and about our understanding of ourselves.
This optional theme focuses on issues relating to the impact of technology on knowledge and knowers, and 
how  technology  helps  and  hinders  our pursuit  of knowledge.  It examines  the ways  that  technology  can be 
seen  to shape  knowledge  creation,  knowledge  sharing  and  exchange,  and  even  the nature  of knowledge 
itself.
This theme provides an opportunity for students to engage with highly topical and engaging issues, such as 
those  relating  to the impact  of artificial  intelligence  on knowledge  and  knowing.  For example,  there  could 
be discussion of whether humans are needed to create new knowledge; whether machines can know, think 
or learn; or whether a knower is always human.
It also  provides  excellent  opportunities  for discussions  of ethical  and  power  issues  relating  to emerging 
technologies.  For example,  students  could  consider  examples  relating  to biometric  data,  or situations 
where  people  are unaware  that  their  personal  data  is being  collected.  As in all elements  of the course,  it is 
Syllabus
Optional themes
16 Theory of knowledge guide
crucial  that  these  discussions  focus  explicitly  on the knowledge  questions  that  are woven  into  these 
discussions,  rather  than  debating  the ethical  issues  themselves.  For example,  students  could  consider  the 
example of driverless cars—as a 21st-century variation on the “trolley problem”—as a way to identify issues 
about the assumptions that underpin, and the criteria we use to make, our moral decisions.
Social  networks  are another  rich source  of examples  that  could  be discussed  in this theme.  For example, 
there  could  be discussion  of the impact  of social  networks  on knowledge  sharing,  or of whether  social 
networks  create  “echo  chambers”  that  reinforce  existing  perspectives  rather  than  boosting  engagement 
with diverse perspectives.
In addition  to examples  arising  from  the “information  age”,  this theme  also  provides  an opportunity  for 
discussion  of the impact  of historical  technological  developments  on knowledge  and  knowing.  For 
example, students could consider the impact of developments such as mass printing or machine translation 
on access  to knowledge.  They  could  also  consider  the impact  of technological  developments  such  as 
advances  in navigational  instruments  and  map-making,  or developments  in air travel,  and  how  these  have 
had  an impact  on the transmission  of knowledge  and  have  allowed  us to gain  greater  knowledge  of 
different places and cultures.
It is crucial  that  discussions  within  this optional  theme  stay  focused  explicitly  on knowledge  rather  than 
consisting  of general  discussions  about  technology.  The following  examples  of knowledge  questions  can 
help to ensure this focus.
Examples of knowledge questions
Scope • How has technology had an impact on collective memory and how knowledge 
is preserved?
• What is the difference between “data”, “information” and “knowledge”?
• To what extent is the internet changing what it means to know something?
• In what sense, if any, can a machine be said to know something?
• Does technology allow knowledge to reside outside of human knowers?
• Does technology just allow us to arrange existing knowledge in different ways, 
or is this arrangement itself knowledge in some sense?
• Have technological developments had the greatest impact on what we know, 
how we know, or how we store knowledge?
Perspectives • How are online or virtual communities similar to/different from “traditional” 
communities of knowers?
• Do social networks reinforce our existing perspective rather than boosting our 
engagement with diverse perspectives?
• What impact has the fact that English is the primary language of the internet 
had on knowledge sharing?
• How has technology had an impact on how we browse, search and filter data 
and information? Can algorithms be biased?
• Is big data creating a new cognitive paradigm?
Methods and tools • How does technology extend or transform different modes of human cognition 
and communication?
• To what extent are technologies, such as the microscope and telescope, merely 
extensions to the human senses, or do they introduce radically new ways of 
seeing the world?
• Is artificial intelligence restricted to processing information or can it also allow 
machines to acquire knowledge?
• How does computation help people to process data and information to gain 
knowledge?Optional themes
17 Theory of knowledge guide
Examples of knowledge questions
• What is the difference between computational thinking, algorithmic thinking 
and critical thinking?
• How do the tools that we use shape the knowledge that we produce?
Ethics • How might technology exacerbate or mitigate unequal access, and divides in 
our access, to knowledge?
• Does the existence of the deep web influence our view on whether some 
knowledge should remain secret or largely inaccessible?
• Should we hold people responsible for the applications of technologies they 
develop/create?
• Are there situations where ignorance/lack of knowledge is an excuse for 
unethical behaviour?
• On what criteria could we decide whether activities such as “hacktivism” are 
morally justifiable? To what extent have technological developments led to an 
increase in data being collected without people’s consent or when they are 
unaware that it is being collected?
Making connections to the core theme
• How has increased access to images and other multimedia sources had an impact on what we know 
and how we know? (scope)
• How might personal prejudices, biases and inequality become “coded into” software systems? 
(perspectives)
• How does technology extend and modify the capabilities of our senses? (methods and tools)
• Do you use different criteria to make ethical decisions in online environments compared to in the 
physical world? (ethics)
Knowledge and language
Language  is an essential  part  of our daily  lives,  with  most  of our knowledge  coming  to us linguistically 
encoded.  It plays  an important  role  in communicating  and  sharing  knowledge  and  has a significant  impact 
on the way  that  we experience  the world.  However,  some  see language  as having  an even  more  central 
role,  arguing  that  language  doesn’t  just describe  our experiences  of the world  but,  in fact,  actually 
structures those experiences, limiting and shaping what we know.
This  theme  provides  an opportunity  for students  to reflect  on the role  that  language  plays  in our lives,  and 
the influence  it has on thought  and  behaviour.  It also  encourages  students  to draw  on their  personal 
experience  of language-learning  as part  of their  DP studies.  For example,  students  could  reflect  on what 
knowledge of a language consists of, and how that is similar to, or different from, other forms of knowledge. 
They could also consider the extent to which how we know and what we know is dependent on, and differs 
according to, the language that we use.
This theme encourages students to reflect on the role of language in allowing knowledge to be shared with 
others.  Language  plays  a key role  in the communication  and  dissemination  of knowledge;  it also  enables 
knowledge  to be accumulated  for, and  passed  down  to, future  generations.  Language  is also  key to how 
claims are exposed to public scrutiny; it enables what we think to be communicated, debated, confirmed or 
refuted. These characteristics provide extremely rich material for TOK discussions.
One  interesting  focus  for discussions  in this theme  could  be language  and  power.  For example,  students 
could  consider  the role  of language  in sustaining  relationships  of authority  by considering  how  control  of 
written  language  can create  or reinforce  power  structures,  or by considering  the way  that  we change  our 
language  depending  on who  we are speaking  to. They  could  also  consider  the role  of language  in creating 
and reinforcing distinctions of class, ethnicity and gender.Optional themes
18 Theory of knowledge guide
Another  interesting  example  that  could  be discussed  in this theme  is non-human  communication.  For 
example, students could explore how technological developments have affected the ways that language is 
used and the ways that communication takes place, or the nature and qualities of “machine language”. This 
could  also  include  wider  discussion  of what  qualities  and  features  other  forms  of communication,  such  as 
animal communication, might need to have in order to be considered a language.
It is crucial  that  discussions  within  this optional  theme  stay  focused  explicitly  on knowledge  rather  than 
consisting  of general  discussions  about  language.  The following  examples  of knowledge  questions  can 
help to ensure this focus.
Examples of knowledge questions
Scope • Can all knowledge be expressed in words or symbols?
• Is it possible to think or know without language?
• Is being able to speak a language an example of “knowing how” to do 
something?
• What role does language play in allowing knowledge to be shared with future 
generations?
• Are there differences in how knowledge itself is conceived of, or presented, in 
different languages?
• Is it the case that if we cannot express something, we don’t know it?
• To what extent does language allow us to make our private experiences public?
• How does language allow humans to pool resources and share knowledge?
Perspectives • Does the transmission of knowledge from one person or generation to another 
depend on language?
• What knowledge might be lost if the whole world shared one common 
language?
• If a language dies, does knowledge die with it?
• How do our values and assumptions influence the language in which we 
express our ideas?
• Is ambiguity a shortcoming of language that must be eliminated, or can it also 
be seen as making a positive contribution to knowledge and knowing?
• Do all people share some innate linguistic knowledge? If the categories that we 
use necessarily empower or marginalise, is it ever possible to produce 
knowledge that does not either reflect or challenge existing power structures?
Methods and tools • How are metaphors used in the construction of knowledge?
• If language works according to sets of rules and conventions, how much scope 
do we have as individuals to break the rules or challenge these conventions?
• In what ways do values affect our representations of the world, for example, in 
language, maps or visual images?
• To what extent do the classification systems we use in the pursuit of knowledge 
affect the conclusions that we reach?
• In what ways can language be used to influence, persuade or manipulate 
people’s emotions?
• To what extent do the names and labels that we use help or hinder the 
acquisition of knowledge?
Ethics • Does ethical language differ in any significant way from other types of 
language?
• How can we know if language is intended to deceive or manipulate us?Optional themes
19 Theory of knowledge guide
Examples of knowledge questions
• Do ethical statements simply convey our feelings/emotions rather than making 
claims?
• If ethical terms and concepts cannot be easily defined, does this mean that they 
are meaningless?
• Can we define words such as good and bad in terms of objective features of the 
world?
• Do professional interpreters and translators have any special ethical 
obligations?
Making connections to the core theme
• If you speak more than one language, is what you know different in each language? (scope)
• Do people from different linguistic or cultural backgrounds live, in some sense, in different worlds? 
(perspectives)
• What are the implications if we do not produce knowledge in language that respects people’s 
preferred modes of self-identification? (methods and tools)
• Who decides whether language should be censored in films and TV shows, and using what criteria? 
(ethics)
Knowledge and politics
Knowledge itself has an intrinsically political dimension, as questions about how knowledge is constructed, 
used  and  disseminated  are infused  with  issues  relating  to power  and  politics.  Political  issues  and  decisions 
also affect our daily lives in many different ways.
This  theme  provides  an opportunity  for discussions  about  the practice  of politics  and  our everyday 
interactions  with  politics  in the world  around  us. For example,  this theme  is intended  to provide  an 
opportunity  to engage  with  high-profile  contemporary  debates  and  examples,  such  as those  around  “fake 
news” and “post-truth politics”. It considers where our political views and values come from, and how these 
inform and influence other areas of our lives. It encourages students to consider the role and origin of their 
own  political  beliefs  and  positions,  as well  as exploring  issues  relating  to how  groups  make  decisions  that 
affect large numbers of people.
Another  key focus  of this theme  is the “politics  of knowledge”  and  issues  around  knowledge,  power  and 
oppression.  This  could,  for example,  include  discussion  of the concept  of “epistemic  injustice”  and 
situations  where  someone’s  knowledge  or expertise  may  be dismissed  because  they  are a member  of a 
particular  social  group.  It could  also  include  exploration  of examples  relating  to the control  of knowledge; 
for example,  cases  where  political  leaders  and  groups  (such  as the Khmer  Rouge  in Cambodia)  have 
attempted to eradicate specific bodies of knowledge, “rewrite” history or persecute educated elites.
Within  this theme,  there  could  be discussions  around  the impact  of technology  and  the potential  of new 
technologies to give political actors new powers. For example, students could consider the increasing focus 
on data  analytics  in shaping  political  policies  and  decision-making.  They  could  also  consider  the impact  of 
social  media  on political  discussion,  or the challenges  of reducing  complex  political  issues  into  media-
friendly “sound bites”.
Another  interesting  possible  area  of discussion  could  be around  persuasion,  manipulation,  misinformation 
and  propaganda.  This  could  include  discussion  of examples  where  facts  and  knowledge  have  been 
systematically  distorted  for political  gain,  or where  political  actors  have  denied  or subverted  knowledge.  It 
could  also  lead  to a discussion  of the differences  between  political  rhetoric  and  propaganda,  as well  as 
interesting  reflections  on the role  of think  tanks,  pressure  groups,  political  activists,  funded  research  and 
fact checkers.Optional themes
20 Theory of knowledge guide
It is crucial  that  discussions  within  this optional  theme  stay  focused  explicitly  on knowledge  rather  than 
consisting  of general  discussions  about  politics  or political  issues.  The following  examples  of knowledge 
questions can help to ensure this focus.
Examples of knowledge questions
Scope • In what ways is factual evidence sometimes used, abused, dismissed and 
ignored in politics?
• Is being knowledgeable an important quality in a political leader?
• How is the practice of politics distinct from the discipline of political science?
• What issues does politics raise about the difference between knowledge and 
opinion? How might political controversies be triggered by developments in 
scientific knowledge?
• Why have political leaders sometimes tried to control or eradicate specific 
bodies of knowledge?
• With regards to politics, do we know as much as we think we know?
Perspectives • What kinds of knowledge inform our political opinions?
• To what extent are our political views shaped by society, family backgrounds, 
education or social class?
• Why do facts sometimes not change our minds?
• To what extent do museums package past knowledge to serve the needs of 
contemporary political systems and authorities?
• Given access to the same facts, how is it possible that there can be 
disagreement between experts on a political issue?
• When exposed to numerous competing ideologies and explanations, what 
makes an individual settle on a particular framework? Is there ever a neutral 
position from which to write about politics or from which to judge political 
opinions?
• How might knowledge reflect or perpetuate existing power structures?
Methods and tools • What impact has social media had on how we acquire and share political 
knowledge?
• What role do reason and emotion play in the formation of our political affinities 
or in our voting decisions?
• How might emotive language and faulty reasoning be used in politics to try to 
persuade and manipulate?
• To what extent can polls provide reliable knowledge and accurate predictions?
• What role do political authorities and institutions play in knowledge-creation 
and distribution?
• Why are referendums sometimes regarded as a contentious decision-making 
tool?
• In what ways may statistical evidence be used and misused to justify political 
actions?
Ethics • Are political judgments a type of moral judgment?
• Can knowledge be divorced from the values embedded in the process of 
creating it?
• Do political leaders and officials have different ethical obligations and 
responsibilities compared to members of the general public?
• When the moral codes of individual nations conflict, can political organizations, 
such as the United Nations (UN), provide universal criteria that transcend them?Optional themes
21 Theory of knowledge guide
Examples of knowledge questions
• On what criteria could we judge whether an action should be regarded as 
justifiable civil disobedience?
• On what grounds might an individual believe that they know what is right for 
others?
• Are new ethical challenges emerging from the increased use of data analytics in 
political activity and decision-making?
Making connections to the core theme
• How can we know whether we have sufficient knowledge before voting in an election? (scope)
• Has technology changed how and where our political views are shaped? (perspectives)
• Are objective facts or appeals to emotion more effective in shaping public opinion? (methods and 
tools)
• In a democratic system, do we have an ethical obligation to be knowledgeable about political issues 
and events? (ethics)
Knowledge and religion
For many  people,  religion  has a major  impact  on how  they  understand  the world.  It permeates  their 
thinking  and  influences  their  understanding  of other  areas,  providing  a backdrop  to all of the other 
knowledge  they  possess.  Religions  themselves  also  generate  specific  claims  about  knowledge,  as well  as 
competing assertions and interpretations.
This  theme  provides  an opportunity  for students  to think  carefully,  critically  and  respectfully  about 
knowledge  and  religion,  and  to reflect  on the significant  impact  that  religion  has on how  we view  the 
world. Religion is often regarded as a sensitive area in which discussions should be had with caution, in part 
because  people  have  very  personal  and  deeply  held  convictions  regarding  religious  matters.  Yet many  of 
the features  that  make  religion  such  a contentious  topic  are exactly  the features  that  make  it highly 
engaging for students and hugely relevant for a course such as TOK.
Religion  provides  rich ground  for TOK  discussions  as religions  are often  complex  systems  of beliefs, 
practices,  assumptions  and  values.  Religions  also  raise  interesting  issues  around  the exchange  of 
knowledge  between  individuals  and  groups.  Within  their  discussions  in this theme,  students  are 
encouraged  to consider  the diversity  of perspectives  within  individual  religions  as well  as across  different 
religions; for example, considering fundamentalist, conservative and liberal perspectives within Christianity.
An example of a particularly interesting area of discussion in relation to this theme concerns the concept of 
evidence.  Critics  often  argue  that  religions  lack  convincing  evidence  to support  their  claims  and  beliefs. 
However,  others  argue  that  criticism  surrounding  the evidence  for religious  claims  is misplaced,  arguing 
that  religious  knowledge  is an example  of a kind  of knowledge  that  is not based  on empirical  evidence. 
Indeed,  in some  traditions  belief  that  is not based  on evidence  is seen  as superior  to belief  that  is based  on 
evidence, as the demand for concrete evidence is seen to signify a lack of faith or a misunderstanding of the 
nature of religion.
Another  interesting  area  to consider  could  be the relationship  between  religion  and  morality,  and  whether 
religion and ethics are inextricably linked. For example, students could consider whether religion provides a 
way to systematize concepts of right and wrong, or whether religious claims carry any particular obligation 
or responsibility for the knower.
It is crucial  that  discussions  within  this optional  theme  stay  focused  explicitly  on knowledge  rather  than 
consisting  of general  discussions  about  religion.  The following  examples  of knowledge  questions  can help 
to ensure this focus.
Examples of knowledge questions
Scope • If knowledge is a map, what is the territory that religion represents?Optional themes
22 Theory of knowledge guide
Examples of knowledge questions
• What is the value of thinking about questions to which there are no definite 
answers?
• Does religion try to resolve problems that other areas can’t resolve?
• Is the point of knowledge to produce meaning and purpose in our lives?
• Is certainty any more or less attainable in religion than it is in the arts or human 
sciences?
• To what extent do scientific developments have the power to influence 
thinking about religion? Is faith a prerequisite for religious knowledge?
Perspectives • Can there be religious knowledge that is independent of the culture that 
produces it?
• How has our understanding and perception of religious knowledge changed 
over time?
• Are those outside a specific religious tradition really able to understand its key 
ideas?
• What impact has forced religious conversion had on traditional knowledge and 
cultural diversity? To what extent is it legitimate for a non-believer to criticise 
the content of a religious belief?
• To what extent do you agree that there is just as much diversity of perspectives 
within individual religions than there is across different religions?
Methods and tools • Are religious beliefs rational?
• Can theistic beliefs be considered knowledge because they are produced by a 
special cognitive faculty or “divine sense”?
• What is the role of analogy and metaphor in the acquisition of religious 
knowledge?
• Do ritual and habit play a special role in the formation of religious knowledge?
• What difficulties are presented by using human language to discuss religious 
claims?
• What role do authority and testimony play in the pursuit of knowledge?
• How have language developments (such as the shift from Latin to the 
vernacular) had an impact on access to religious knowledge?
• Are faith and reason interdependent?
Ethics • Do we have an ethical responsibility to gain knowledge of different religions to 
help us better understand the world and those around us?
• Does religion provide a way to systematize concepts of right and wrong?
• Do religious knowledge claims carry any particular obligation or responsibility 
for the knower?
• What role do religious leaders and authority figures play in influencing ethical 
debates?
• If religion is intimately connected with ethics, should we expect those with 
religious knowledge to act more ethically than those without it?
Making connections to the core theme
• What kinds of knowledge can be gained through introspection? (scope)
• How does our own theism, atheism or agnosticism have an impact on our perspective? (perspectives)Optional themes
23 Theory of knowledge guide
• Do you agree with Carl Sagan’s claim that “extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence”? 
(methods and tools)
• To what extent does religion influence social norms and values? (ethics)
Knowledge and indigenous societies
In recent years there has been increasing global awareness of the historic and ongoing injustices that many 
groups  of indigenous  peoples  have  faced,  and  of how  threats  to indigenous  societies  can lead  to a loss of 
traditional  knowledge  and  cultural  diversity.  For example,  in 2007  the UN adopted  the “United  Nations 
Declaration  on the Rights  of Indigenous  Peoples”,  which  includes  the statement  that  “Indigenous  peoples 
have  the right  to maintain,  control,  protect  and  develop  their  cultural  heritage,  traditional  knowledge  and 
traditional cultural expressions, as well as the manifestations of their sciences, technologies and cultures”.
This optional theme provides an opportunity to undertake a more detailed exploration of knowledge that is 
principally  bound  to a particular  group,  culture  or society.  It focuses  on knowledge  that  is deeply 
embedded in the culture and traditions of particular communities of knowers, and how what might be seen 
as “traditional” indigenous knowledge and societies operate today.
In their  discussions  in this theme,  it is important  that  students  are encouraged  to reflect  critically  on the 
category  “indigenous  societies”  itself.  For example,  this could  consist  of discussion  of the history  and 
context  of the emergence  of the word  “indigenous”  and  its contested  meanings.  It could  also  include 
discussion of the power relations that influence hierarchies of how knowledge is classified and validated.
Students  should  be encouraged  to consider  the diversity  of indigenous  societies,  as well  as the diversity 
within  these  societies,  and  to avoid  the assumption  that  all members  of a particular  culture  or society  will 
share  exactly  the same  outlook  and  values.  Students  should  also  be encouraged  to engage  with  specific 
examples  rather  than  generalizations;  for example,  they  could  explore  the impact  of the building  of the Ok 
Tedi  mine  on the Wopkaimin  people  of Papua  New  Guinea,  or the importance  of music  and  traditional 
craftsmanship to the Namaqua people of Southern Africa.
This  theme  provides  an opportunity  for discussion  of areas  such  as the focus  in many  indigenous  societies 
on a holistic  view  of knowledge,  and  on the particularly  long-standing  and  close  relationships  between 
many  indigenous  societies  and  the natural  world.  It provides  an opportunity  for rich conversations  around 
examples  such  as the embodiment  and  transmission  of knowledge  in traditional  artistic  and  cultural 
practices, rituals and objects.
Another  interesting  area  of discussion  within  this theme  could  be the impact  and  legacy  of colonialism  on 
indigenous  societies,  or how  external  influences,  such  as globalization,  have  brought  about  changes  and 
challenges  in relation  to the ownership  and  custodianship  of knowledge  in indigenous  societies.  There 
could  be discussion  of how  some  kinds  of knowledge  have  often  been  devalued;  for example,  through  an 
emphasis on the primacy of science, or the viewing of oral tradition as inferior to the written word.
It is crucial  that  discussions  within  this optional  theme  stay  focused  explicitly  on knowledge  rather  than 
consisting  of general  discussions  about  indigenous  societies.  The following  examples  of knowledge 
questions can help to ensure this focus.
Examples of knowledge questions
Scope • Does our culture determine what we know?
• In what ways does the loss of indigenous languages signify a loss of knowledge 
and cultural diversity?
• Does the emphasis on holistic knowledge found in some indigenous societies 
avoid a limited understanding of reality resulting from the 
compartmentalization of knowledge?
• Who owns knowledge?
• How have government education policies and systems compromised the 
transmission of indigenous knowledge?Optional themes
24 Theory of knowledge guide
Examples of knowledge questions
• Why is there sometimes a strong connection between indigenous knowledge 
and cosmology?
Perspectives • To what extent is our perspective determined by our membership of a 
particular culture?
• To what extent does the fact that most early literature on indigenous societies 
was written from a non-indigenous perspective affect its credibility?
• What values and assumptions underpin the use of the term “indigenous” 
knowledge?
• Does a neutral position exist from which to make judgments about competing 
claims from different groups with different traditions?
• As an “outsider”, can we know and speak about the knowledge held by a 
different cultural group?
• How might differences in their worldviews create challenges for collaboration 
between environmental scientists and holders of traditional environmental 
knowledge?
• Does the term “indigenous” knowledge” necessarily suggest power divisions 
between a dominant and non-dominant group?
Methods and tools • How reliable are oral traditions in preserving knowledge in indigenous 
societies?
• What is the role of oral tradition in enabling knowledge to be handed down 
through generations?
• What role do objects and artifacts play in the construction and sharing of 
knowledge?
• Does what is seen to constitute “good evidence” vary from culture to culture?
• What is the role of folklore, rituals and songs in acquiring and sharing 
knowledge?
• What methods have indigenous peoples developed to support the recording, 
preservation and protection of their traditional knowledge?
Ethics • Does the diversity of moral practices that we see in indigenous societies around 
the world support the case for moral relativism?
• To what extent does deliberate disinformation by educational institutions and 
governments threaten indigenous knowledge?
• Is cultural appropriation an example of a violation of collective intellectual 
property rights?
• Is there a difference between moral values and cultural customs?
• Is there any knowledge that a person or a society has a responsibility to acquire, 
or not to acquire?
• Can the practices of one individual or culture be judged with any validity by 
applying the moral values of another generation or another culture?
Making connections to the core theme
• Is it possible to have knowledge of a culture in which we have not been raised? (scope)
• To what extent are we aware of the impact of our culture(s) on what we believe or know? 
(perspectives)
• How can we know when we should trust and defer to the authority of experts? (methods and tools)Optional themes
25 Theory of knowledge guide
• What ethical concerns are raised by the commercialisation of indigenous knowledge and cultures? 
(ethics)Optional themes
26 Theory of knowledge guide
Areas  of knowledge  are structures  within  which  much  human  knowledge  is organized.  In these  areas  there 
are often socially established methods for producing knowledge, as well as norms for what counts as a fact 
or a good explanation.
Students are required to study all five  of the following areas of knowledge.
• History
• The human sciences
• The natural sciences
• The arts
• Mathematics
Within  their  discussions,  students  should  be encouraged  to think  about,  and  draw  examples  from,  specific 
individual academic disciplines that are included within the different areas of knowledge.
The following  sections  contain  guidance  and  examples  of knowledge  questions  for each  of these  five 
compulsory  areas  of knowledge.  These  are suggestions  only  and  should  not be taken  as prescriptive  or 
exhaustive.  However,  teachers  must  ensure  that  the focus  remains  clearly  on knowledge  in that  area,  and 
that  they  engage  with  the four  compulsory  elements  required  in every  part  of the syllabus:  scope , 
perspectives , methods and tools  and ethics .
Making comparisons across areas of knowledge
TOK  discussions  should  explore  the different  areas  of knowledge  to deepen  students’  understanding  of 
what  it is that  gives  each  area  its character.  Crucially,  a key focus  should  then  also  be on encouraging 
students to make comparisons and connections across the areas of knowledge.
The “knowledge  framework”  is intended  to help  support  comparisons  across  areas  of knowledge.  These 
four  elements  provide  a useful  vocabulary  for making  effective  comparisons.  For example,  within 
“perspectives”  students  could  compare  how  knowledge  changes  over  time  in the different  areas  of 
knowledge.  Although  knowledge  in these  areas  is often  highly  structured  and  systematic  in nature,  it also 
changes  and  evolves  over  time.  These  changes  may  be slow  and  incremental,  as areas  of knowledge  often 
possess  a certain  stability.  However,  changes  can also  be more  sudden  and  dramatic  shifts  as an area  of 
knowledge responds to, for example, new experimental results, advances in underlying theories or changes 
in technology.
It is important  to note  that  comparing  and  contrasting  the various  areas  of knowledge  involves  not only 
exploring features that they have in common, but also examining their differences. Comparison of different 
areas  of knowledge  is also  an evaluative  task,  as opposed  to being  simply  descriptive.  It involves  critical 
appraisal  of similarities  and  differences  between  the areas  of knowledge,  rather  than  simply  their 
identification.
More  guidance  on making  effective  connections  across  the areas  of knowledge  can be found  in the Theory 
of knowledge teacher support material .
History
Studying  history  involves  exploration  and  inquiry  into  the past.  This  raises  questions  about  whether  it is 
possible  to talk meaningfully  about  a historical  fact,  or how  far we can speak  with  certainty  about  anything 
in the past.
Syllabus
Areas of knowledge
27 Theory of knowledge guide
History  provides  particularly  interesting  material  for TOK  discussions  because  of the challenges  presented 
by not being  able  to directly  observe  the past,  and  because  the historian  is unable  to utilize  some  of the 
methods  of inquiry  that  are used  in other  areas  of knowledge.  Studying  history  can also  promote  empathy 
with,  and  understanding  of, people  living  in diverse  places  and  at different  times.  These  characteristics 
open  up many  interesting  issues  and  questions  that  are unique,  or particularly  pertinent,  to history  as an 
area of knowledge.
As we cannot  directly  observe  historical  events,  documentary  evidence  plays  a vital  role  in helping 
historians  to understand  and  interpret  the past.  This  raises  questions  about  the reliability  of that  evidence, 
particularly  given  that  historical  sources  are often  incomplete  and  that  different  sources  can corroborate, 
complement or contradict each other.
In addition to being heavily evidence-based, history is also an interpretive discipline that allows for multiple 
perspectives  and  opinions.  Students  could  be encouraged  to consider  the role  and  importance  of 
historians,  particularly  in terms  of why  their  interpretations  may  differ  or how  we evaluate  conflicting 
interpretations  of past  events.  Students  could  also  consider  why  some  might  claim  that  there  is always  a 
subjective  element  in historical  writing  because  historians  are influenced  by the historical  and  social 
environment  in which  they  are writing—which  unavoidably  affects  their  selection  and  interpretation  of 
evidence.
An interesting  focus  for discussions  could  be the concept  of historical  significance.  For example,  students 
could  consider  why  particular  aspects  of history  have  been  recorded  and  preserved  whereas  others  have 
been  lost or excluded  from  historical  accounts.  They  could  also  consider  the way  that  history  is sometimes 
used  to promote  a particular  dominant  perspective  or consider  how  specific  groups,  such  as minorities  or 
women,  may  have  experienced  events  in the past  differently.  This  could  connect  to reflection  on recent 
controversies  surrounding  the historical  events  taught,  and  history  textbooks  used,  in high  school  history 
lessons  in various  countries  around  the world.  This  could  include  how  different  textbooks  can sometimes 
tell different versions of history.
Examples of knowledge questions arising from this area of knowledge are suggested below.
Examples of knowledge questions
Scope • Is it possible to have knowledge of the past?
• Is knowledge about the past different from other kinds of knowledge?
• Are all areas of knowledge concerned with knowledge of the past to some 
extent?
• Why does history enjoy a privileged position as its own dedicated area of 
knowledge in the TOK curriculum?
• Is all knowledge in some sense historical knowledge?
• Is truth the goal of all historical inquiry?
• Is certainty about the past more difficult to attain than certainty about the 
present or the future?
• What counts as a fact in history?
Perspectives • If it is difficult to establish proof in history, does that mean that all versions are 
equally acceptable?
• Are historians’ accounts necessarily subjective?
• Is empathy more important in history than in other areas of knowledge?
• How might the existence of different historical perspectives be beneficial to 
historical knowledge?
• Can the historian be free of bias in the selection and interpretation of material?
• Is it inevitable that historians will be affected by their own cultural context?
• How can we gauge the extent to which history is being told from a cultural or 
national perspective?Areas of knowledge
28 Theory of knowledge guide
Examples of knowledge questions
• Are we more prone to particular cognitive biases (such as hindsight bias) in 
some disciplines and areas of knowledge rather than others?
Methods and tools • What methods do historians use to gain knowledge?
• What is unique about the methodology of history compared to other areas of 
knowledge?
• On what criteria can a historian evaluate the reliability of their sources?
• If our senses are sometimes unreliable, does this mean that eyewitness 
testimony is an unreliable source of evidence?
• Have technological developments enabled us to observe the past more 
directly?
• What challenges does archive-based history emphasize about how knowledge 
is shared and preserved?
• Is there less emphasis on collaborative research in history than there is between 
researchers in other areas of knowledge?
• How do the methods and conventions of historians themselves change over 
time?
Ethics • Is it unfair to judge people and actions in the past by the standards of today?
• Should terms such as “atrocity” or “hero” be used when writing about history, or 
should value judgments be avoided?
• Do historians have a moral responsibility to try to ensure that history is not 
misused and distorted by people for their own ends?
• On what criteria could we decide whether people in the past have a right to 
privacy in the present?
• Do historians have an ethical obligation not to ignore contradictory evidence?
Making connections to the core theme
• Is it possible to know who we are without knowledge of the past? (scope)
• How does the way that we identify with past events, such as military victories or defeats, shape our 
perspective? (perspectives)
• How might the methods of the historian help us to evaluate claims we are exposed to in the media 
today? (methods and tools)
• What ethical concerns are raised by the digitization and online publication of archive material 
containing people’s personal images and documents? (ethics)
The human sciences
The human  sciences  include  a diverse  range  of disciplines,  such  as psychology,  social  and  cultural 
anthropology, economics, political science, and geography. These disciplines share a common focus on the 
study of human existence and behaviour.
The diversity  of the disciplines  included  within  the human  sciences  can itself  be a stimulus  for interesting 
TOK  discussions,  as can the coexistence  of different  approaches  within  a single  discipline  (for example 
psychodynamic versus behaviourist versus humanistic approaches in psychology).
One  interesting  focus  for discussion  could  be, for example,  whether  there  are fundamental  differences 
between  the human  sciences  and  the natural  sciences  in terms  of how  they  interpret  the word  “science”, 
the methods they use for collecting data, or how they test the validity and reliability of hypotheses.
Another  interesting  focus  for discussion  could  be the use of questionnaires  and  polls  in the human 
sciences.  This  could  include  whether  the results  of questionnaires  can be reliable  given  the challenges Areas of knowledge
29 Theory of knowledge guide
around  neutral  language,  leading  questions,  or sampling  and  selection  effect.  It could  also  include 
discussion of issues relating to respondents not being truthful or deliberately giving misleading responses.
Students  could  also  be encouraged  to consider  the ways  in which  social,  political,  cultural  or financial 
factors  may  affect  the types  of research  that  are supported  and  financed  in the human  sciences.  For 
example,  market  research  is often  undertaken  as a way  for companies  to increase  their  profits,  and  social 
science  research  sometimes  seeks  to influence  public  policy.  This  can raise  interesting  questions  about  the 
purpose and context within which knowledge is pursued in the human sciences.
Examples of knowledge questions arising from this area of knowledge are suggested below.
Examples of knowledge questions
Scope • How do we decide whether a particular discipline should be regarded as a 
human science?
• Do the human sciences and literature provide different types of knowledge 
about human existence and behaviour?
• Are predictions in the human sciences inevitably unreliable?
• What are the main difficulties that human scientists encounter when trying to 
provide explanations of human behaviour?
• Is human behaviour too unpredictable to study scientifically?
• Do the boundaries between different disciplines and different areas of 
knowledge help or hinder understanding?
• Is it possible to discover laws of human behaviour in the same way that the 
natural sciences discover laws of nature?
Perspectives • To what extent is it legitimate for a researcher to draw on their own experiences 
as evidence in their investigations in the human sciences?
• Is it possible to eliminate the effect of the observer in the pursuit of knowledge 
in the human sciences?
• How might the beliefs and interests of human scientists influence their 
conclusions? How can we know when we have made progress in the search for 
knowledge in the human sciences?
• If two competing paradigms give different explanations of a phenomenon, how 
can we decide which explanation to accept?
• What forms of protection against research error and bias are available to human 
scientists?
Methods and tools • What role do models play in the acquisition of knowledge in the human 
sciences?
• Are observation and experimentation the only two ways in which human 
scientists produce knowledge?
• What assumptions underlie the methods used in the human sciences?
• To what extent are the methods used to gain knowledge in the human sciences 
“scientific”?
• How does the use of numbers, statistics, graphs and other quantitative 
instruments affect the way knowledge in the human sciences is valued?
• To what extent can the human sciences use mathematical techniques to make 
accurate predictions?
Ethics • To what extent are the methods used in the human sciences limited by the 
ethical considerations involved in studying human beings?
• Do researchers have different ethical responsibilities when they are working 
with human subjects compared to when they are working with animals?Areas of knowledge
30 Theory of knowledge guide
Examples of knowledge questions
• What are the moral implications of possessing knowledge about human 
behaviour?
• Should key events in the historical development of the human sciences always 
be judged by the standards of their time?
• What values determine what counts as legitimate inquiry in the human 
sciences? Can knowledge be divorced from the values embedded in the 
process of creating it?
• Is the role of the human scientist only to describe what the case is or also to 
make judgements about what should be the case?
Making connections to the core theme
• How does advertising utilize knowledge of human psychology to influence and persuade us? (scope)
• What is it about a theory that gives it the power to destabilize our view of ourselves and of the world? 
(perspectives)
• How might the language used in polls and questionnaires influence the conclusions that are reached? 
(methods and tools)
• What moral obligations to act or not act do we have if our knowledge is tentative, incomplete or 
uncertain (ethics)
The natural sciences
The natural sciences are often seen to rely on evidence, rationality and the quest for deeper understanding. 
Observation and experimentation play a key role, and terms such as “theory” have a special meaning in the 
natural sciences compared to how they are used in daily life and in other areas of knowledge.
A focus  for discussions  of the natural  sciences  could  be what  differentiates  the scientific  from  the non-
scientific  or “pseudo-scientific”.  Many  people  would  suggest  that  it is the methods  used  in the natural 
sciences  that  is the key distinguishing  factor—which  raises  the question  of what  it is about  these  methods 
that  means  that  the knowledge  they  generate  is often  regarded  as being  highly  reliable.  Students  could 
also  consider  whether  the word  “science”  means  different  things  in different  languages,  or whether  it has 
been used differently in different periods of history.
Another  interesting  focus  for discussions  could  be scientific  development,  revolutions  and  paradigm  shifts. 
This  could  include  what  is meant  by a paradigm  shift,  whether  scientific  knowledge  has always  grown,  or 
how  technological  developments  have  driven  scientific  progress  and  discoveries.  It could  also  include 
reflection  on whether  we could  ever  reach  a point  where  everything  important  to the natural  sciences  is 
known.
Students  could  also  consider  the role  of consensus  in the natural  sciences,  and  the role  and  importance  of 
the “scientific  community”.  For example,  they  could  consider  the role  of peer  review  as a method  of 
scrutinizing  scientific  claims  and  the extent  to which  this is an effective  and  objective  form  of self-
regulation. This could lead to discussions of whether or not scientific knowledge is, or should be, amenable 
to public  scrutiny.  It could  also  lead  to wider  reflection  on whether  there  are commonly  agreed  values, 
methodologies and assumptions about knowledge that underpin all scientific inquiry.
Another rich source of material for TOK discussions relating to the natural sciences can come from the issue 
of funding.  A great  deal  of scientific  research  is funded  by private  for-profit  companies  and  by 
governments,  which  raises  interesting  questions  around  how  the priorities  for funding  scientific  research 
are determined and who it is that determines which research directions are pursued.
Examples of knowledge questions arising from this area of knowledge are suggested below.
Examples of knowledge questions
Scope • Why might some people regard science as the supreme form of all knowledge?Areas of knowledge
31 Theory of knowledge guide
Examples of knowledge questions
• Should the natural sciences be regarded as a body of knowledge, a system of 
knowledge or a method?
• Could there be scientific problems that are currently unknown because the 
technology needed to reveal them doesn’t exist yet?
• Is human knowledge confined to what the natural sciences discover, or are 
there other important inquiries that are not covered by the natural sciences?
• What knowledge, if any, is likely to always remain beyond the capabilities of 
science to investigate or verify?
• Do the natural sciences rely on any assumptions that are themselves 
unprovable by science?
• Is prediction the primary purpose of scientific knowledge?
• How might developments in scientific knowledge trigger political controversies 
or controversies in other areas of knowledge?
Perspectives • How can it be that scientific knowledge changes over time?
• What role do paradigm shifts play in the progression of scientific knowledge?
• How does the social context of scientific work affect the methods and findings 
of science?
• In what ways have influential individuals contributed to the development of the 
natural sciences as an area of knowledge?
• Does the precision of the language used in the natural sciences successfully 
eliminate all ambiguity?
• Does the list of disciplines included in, or excluded from, the natural sciences 
change from one era to another, or from one culture or tradition to another?
• Does competition between scientists help or hinder the production of 
knowledge?
Methods and tools • Is there a single “scientific method”?
• What is the role of imagination and intuition in the creation of hypotheses in 
the natural sciences?
• What kinds of explanations do natural scientists offer?
• Why are many of the laws in the natural sciences stated using the language of 
mathematics?
• What is the role of inductive and deductive reasoning in scientific inquiry, 
prediction and explanation?
• Does scientific language have a primarily descriptive, explanatory or 
interpretative function?
Ethics • Is science, or should it be, value-free?
• Should scientific research be subject to ethical constraints or is the pursuit of all 
scientific knowledge intrinsically worthwhile?
• Do we tend to exaggerate the objectivity of scientific facts and the subjectivity 
of moral values?
• In what ways have developments in science challenged long-held ethical 
values? Can moral disagreements be resolved with reference to empirical 
evidence?
• Do human rights exist in the same way that the laws of gravity exist?Areas of knowledge
32 Theory of knowledge guide
Examples of knowledge questions
• Do scientists or the societies in which scientists operate exert a greater 
influence on what is ethically acceptable in this area of knowledge?
Making connections to the core theme
• How might we, as members of the public, judge whether to accept scientific findings if we do not have 
detailed scientific knowledge? (scope)
• How is it that scientific knowledge is often shared by large, geographically spread and culturally 
diverse groups? (perspectives)
• Is the depiction of the “scientific method” traditionally found in many school science textbooks an 
accurate model of scientific activity? (methods and tools)
• Do the natural sciences provide us with good examples of people who approach knowledge in a 
rigorous and responsible way? (ethics)
The arts
“The  arts”  is used  in TOK  to include  a diverse  range  of disciplines  such  as visual  arts,  theatre,  dance,  music, 
film  and  literature.  The forms  and  methods  of these  disciplines  are often  dissimilar,  so the diversity  within 
this single area of knowledge can itself be an excellent stimulus for TOK discussions.
The arts provide  rich material  for discussions  of concepts  such  as interpretation.  For example,  students 
could  consider  how  we ascribe  meaning  to works  of art, or whether  the intention  of the artist  is what 
determines meaning. During these discussions, students could be encouraged to draw on their experiences 
from  their  DP studies  in language  and  literature  classes,  where  they  are required  to understand  and 
interpret a range of texts.
Students  could  also  consider  the role  of the audience  in the arts.  This  could  include,  for example,  whether 
art requires a response from, or an emotional interaction with, an audience. It could also include the role of 
critics and experts, and whether everyone is an equally competent judge in the arts.
Another  interesting  focus  for discussions  could  be the social  character  and  function  of the arts.  This  could 
include  the way  that  the arts are often  seen  as helping  to shed  light  on fundamental  questions  about  the 
human  condition,  or how  the arts are often  regarded  as having  an important  function  as a medium  for 
social criticism and a vehicle for social change.
Discussions  of the arts could  also  focus  on exploring  whether  there  are, or should  be, limits  to what  is 
acceptable  in art. Students  could  consider  examples  of controversial  works  of art, such  as Marco  Evaristti’s 
Helena  or Sruli  Recht’s  Forget  Me Knot , considering  whether  there  should  be ethical  constraints  on the 
pursuit of knowledge in the arts, or whether artists or audiences have any particular ethical responsibilities.
Another  focus  for discussions  could  be the relationship  between  arts and  culture.  Students  could  explore 
art forms  and  art works  that  are strongly  rooted  in a particular  culture  or tradition,  as well  as reflecting  on 
the diversity  of the arts across  time,  cultures  and  contexts.  Students  could  also  explore  examples  of 
“outsider  art” as a way  to stimulate  conversations  about  the potential  for art to challenge  established 
values.
Examples of knowledge questions arising from this area of knowledge are suggested below.
Examples of knowledge questions
Scope • Do the disciplines in the arts diverge from one another more fundamentally 
than disciplines within other areas of knowledge?
• Does new knowledge in the arts always build on what is already known?
• How have new technologies changed the nature and scope of the arts as an 
area of knowledge?
• Are the arts best seen as a system of knowledge, a type of knowledge or a 
means of expressing knowledge?Areas of knowledge
33 Theory of knowledge guide
Examples of knowledge questions
• Is artistic knowledge something that cannot be expressed in any other way?
• Is the relationship between “knowing how” and “knowing that” different in the 
arts compared to other areas of knowledge? Does art enlarge what it is possible 
for us to think and know?
Perspectives • Is there such a thing as “obsolete” knowledge in the arts?
• Can a work of art have meaning of which the artist themselves is unaware?
• How does knowing more about the social, cultural or historical context of a 
work of art have an impact on our knowledge of the work itself?
• Can art change the way we interpret the world?
• What are the justifications for, and implications of, claiming that there are 
absolute standards for “good art”?
• Who determines what art is valued, and on what criteria?
• Should your judgments about art be given the same weight as those of an 
expert?
• What role does the history of an artform play in evaluating present work?
Methods and tools • Does convention play a different role in the arts compared to other areas of 
knowledge?
• Does sense perception perform a radically different role in the arts compared to 
other areas of knowledge?
• If the language of an art form is non-verbal, does this free it from being limited 
to propositional knowledge?
• Can some knowledge in the arts only be gained through experience? How does 
the medium used change the way that knowledge is produced, shared or 
understood?
• To what extent are the methods of justification different in the arts compared 
to other areas of knowledge?
Ethics • In what ways are moral judgments similar to, or different from, aesthetic 
judgments?
• Do the arts play a role in the development of our personal value systems?
• How important is the study of literature in our individual ethical development?
• Is the production and enjoyment of art subject to ethical constraints?
• On what criteria could it be decided if the state has the right to censor art that is 
deemed immoral or blasphemous?
• Do the arts have the power to challenge established moral values?
• Are moral and aesthetic judgments more a matter of taste than a matter of 
truth?
• Can we separate the moral character of the artist from the value of the artwork?
Making connections to the core theme
• Does art provide knowledge of the artist or of ourselves? (scope)
• How is art used in advertising to affect the beliefs of individuals and groups? (perspectives)
• Does artistic creation rely more heavily on imagination than on other cognitive tools? (methods and 
tools)
• What moral responsibilities do we have regarding art that has been created or published by other 
people? (ethics)Areas of knowledge
34 Theory of knowledge guide
Mathematics
Mathematics  is sometimes  seen  to have  a degree  of certainty  that  is unmatched  by other  areas  of 
knowledge  or is seen  to be founded  on a set of more  or less universally  accepted  definitions  and  basic 
assumptions. This makes mathematics an excellent source of material for TOK discussions.
One interesting focus for discussions could be the status of mathematics as an area of knowledge. Students 
could  consider  why  disciplines  in the human  sciences  are often  keen  to cast  their  conclusions  in 
mathematical  terms,  or why  mathematical  treatments  of a topic  are often  taken  by many  to be a sign  of 
intellectual  rigour.  They  could  also  consider  why  mathematics  is often  given  a privileged  position  in many 
education systems.
Another  rich source  of material  for TOK  discussions  can be the role  of creativity,  imagination,  beauty  and 
elegance  in mathematics.  Despite,  or perhaps  because  of, the strict  confines  of mathematical  logic, 
mathematics  can be an enormously  creative  subject,  asking  its practitioners  to make  great  leaps  of 
imagination.  This  could  lead  to discussion  of whether,  or why,  elegance  and  beauty  should  be relevant  to 
mathematical value.
Another  interesting  focus  could  be the relationship  between  mathematics  and  the world  around  us. 
Mathematics  is often  used  to model  real-world  processes.  Yet, in some  ways,  mathematics  can also  seem 
quite  abstract  and  detached  from  the real world,  strongly  focused  on the application  of reason  rather  than 
relying on experience and observation of the world.
Students  could  also  consider  the role  and  significance  of proof  in mathematics,  and  how  this relates  to 
concepts  such  as truth.  They  could  reflect  on whether  the term  “proof”  is used  differently  in mathematics 
compared to how it is used in our everyday lives or in other areas of knowledge.
Examples of knowledge questions arising from this area of knowledge are suggested below.
Examples of knowledge questions
Scope • Why is mathematics so important in other areas of knowledge, particularly the 
natural sciences?
• How have technological innovations, such as developments in computing, 
affected the scope and nature of mathematics as an area of knowledge?
• Is absolute certainty attainable in mathematics?
• Is there a distinction between truth and certainty in mathematics?
• Should mathematics be defined as a language?
• Is mathematics better defined by its subject matter or its method?
• Does mathematics only yield knowledge about the real world when it is 
combined with other areas of knowledge?
• Is there a hierarchy of areas of knowledge in terms of their usefulness in solving 
problems?
Perspectives • What is it about mathematics that enables mathematical results to remain 
unchanged over time?
• How significant have notable individuals been in shaping the nature and 
development of mathematics as an area of knowledge?
• What is the role of the mathematical community in determining the validity of a 
mathematical proof?
• Is mathematical knowledge embedded in particular cultures or traditions?
• Does personal experience play any role in the formation of claims in 
mathematics?
• Is progress harder to make in mathematics than in other areas of knowledge?
• If mathematics is created by humans, is it still possible to accept mathematical 
truths as objective facts about the world?Areas of knowledge
35 Theory of knowledge guide
Examples of knowledge questions
• Are all of the areas of knowledge in the TOK course themselves embedded in a 
particular tradition or bound to a particular culture?
Methods and tools • Is mathematical reasoning different from scientific reasoning or reasoning in 
other areas of knowledge?
• What is meant by the term “proof” in mathematics, and how is this similar to, or 
different from what is meant by this term in other areas of knowledge?
• How do mathematicians reconcile the fact that some conclusions seem to 
conflict with our intuitions?
• What does it mean to say that mathematics is an axiomatic system?
• How is an axiomatic system of knowledge different from, or similar to, other 
systems of knowledge?
• Do mathematical symbols have meaning in the same way that words have 
meaning? Is personal experience more important or less important in 
mathematics compared to other areas of knowledge?
Ethics • If mathematical knowledge is highly valued, does this place special ethical 
responsibilities on mathematicians when they are making claims?
• On what criteria could we decide whether mathematicians should be held 
responsible for unethical applications of their work?
• How are unethical practices, such as “data dredging”, used by statisticians to 
deliberately manipulate and mislead people?
• Is it ethically justifiable for academic mathematicians to spend time doing 
research that does not have immediate useful applications?
• Do mathematical judgments and ethical judgments face similar challenges in 
terms of the evidence available to support them?
• Are mathematicians the people best placed to create codes of ethics for 
professional mathematicians?
Making connections to the core theme
• Why do you think mathematics enjoys a privileged status in many education systems? (scope)
• Who judges the validity of a proof? (perspectives)
• What steps can we take to help ourselves avoid being misled by statistics used in unclear or 
disingenuous ways in the media? (methods and tools)
• To what extent do you agree with the claim that mathematics “serves as a training that shapes 
thinking in an ethics-free and amoral way” (Paul Ernest)? (ethics)Areas of knowledge
36 Theory of knowledge guide
Assessment  is an integral  part  of learning  and  teaching.  The most  important  aims  of assessment  are that  it 
should support curricular goals and encourage appropriate student learning.
Both  external  and  internal  assessments  are used  in the DP. IB examiners  mark  work  produced  for external 
assessment,  while  work  produced  for internal  assessment  is marked  by teachers  and  externally  moderated 
by the IB.
The approach  to assessment  used  by the IB is criterion-related,  not norm-referenced.  This  approach  to 
assessment  judges  students’  work  by their  performance  in relation  to identified  levels  of attainment,  and 
not in relation to the work of other students.
Assessment-related resources
For more information about assessment in the IB, please refer to the following resources.
Assessment
• Diploma Programme Assessment procedures (updated annually)
• Assessment principles and practice—Quality assessments in a digital age 
• The conduct of Diploma Programme examinations  (updated annually)
• Academic readiness 2019
• Programme standards and practices 
Assessment access and inclusion
• Access and inclusion policy 
• Learning diversity and inclusion in IB programmes 
• General regulations: Diploma Programme 
Academic integrity
• Academic honesty in the IB educational context 
• Effective citing and referencing 
• Diploma Programme: From principles into practice 
• General regulations: Diploma Programme 
• Academic integrity 
Assessment
Assessment in the DP
37 Theory of knowledge guide
Theory of knowledge: First assessment 2022
Assessment component Weighting
Internal assessment
Theory of knowledge exhibition (10 marks)
For this component, students are required to create an exhibition that explores how 
TOK manifests in the world around us. This component is internally assessed by the 
teacher and externally moderated by the IB at the end of the course.1/3 (33%)
External assessment
TOK essay on a prescribed title (10 marks)
For this component, students are required to write an essay in response to one of the 
six prescribed titles that are issued by the IB for each examination session. As an 
external assessment component, it is marked by IB examiners.2/3 (67%)
Assessment
TOK assessment outline
38 Theory of knowledge guide
The TOK exhibition
The TOK  exhibition  explores  how  TOK  manifests  in the world  around  us. For this reason  it is strongly 
recommended  that  students  base  their  exhibition  on one  of the TOK  themes  (either  the core  theme  or one 
of the optional themes).
The TOK  exhibition  is an internal  assessment  component—it  is marked  by the teacher  and  is externally 
moderated  by the IB. Internal  assessment  is an integral  part  of all DP courses.  It enables  students  to 
demonstrate the application of their skills and knowledge, and to pursue their personal interests.
For this task, students are required to create an exhibition of three objects that connect to one of the 35 “IA 
prompts”  provided  in the “IA prompts”  section  of this guide.  Students  must  select  just one  IA prompt  on 
which to base their exhibition, and all three objects must be linked to the same IA prompt.
Students  are required  to create  an exhibition  comprising  three  objects,  or images  of objects,  and  an 
accompanying  written  commentary  on each  object.  To enable  their  exhibition  to be marked  by their  TOK 
teacher and for samples of student work to be submitted to the IB for moderation, students are required to 
produce a single file containing:
• a title clearly indicating their selected IA prompt
• images of their three objects
• a typed commentary on each object that identifies each object and its specific real-world context, 
justifies its inclusion in the exhibition and links to the IA prompt (maximum 950 words)
• appropriate citations and references.
Each  student  must  create  an individual  exhibition.  Group  work  may  not be undertaken  by students. 
Multiple  students  in the same  TOK  class  are permitted  to create  exhibitions  on the same  IA prompt. 
However, students in the same class are not permitted to use any of the same objects.
The TOK  exhibition  task  has been  explicitly  designed  to be completed  during  the first year  of the DP. To 
support  DP students,  it is important  that  schools  have  a clear  overall  schedule  of internal  deadlines  for the 
completion  of the internal  assessment  tasks  for the different  subjects.  Within  this schedule,  teachers  are 
strongly encouraged to complete the TOK exhibition in the first year of the programme.
Further  guidance  on the TOK  exhibition  task,  including  marked  and  annotated  examples  of student  work, 
can be found in the Theory of knowledge teacher support material .
The TOK exhibition process
It is recommended  that  a total  of approximately  eight  hours  of teaching  time  should  be allocated  to the 
TOK exhibition task.
The TOK exhibition process consists of three key steps.
Summary of the TOK exhibition process
Step 1 Students begin their exhibition by selecting one IA prompt and three objects , or 
images of objects, that show how this question manifests in the world around us.
Students must select one  IA prompt as the basis for their exhibition. All three objects 
must be linked to the same prompt.
To help them approach this task effectively, students are encouraged to root their 
exhibition in one of the TOK themes—either the core theme or one of the optional 
Assessment
TOK assessment details
39 Theory of knowledge guide
themes. This can help to provide an accessible starting point for students and can 
provide a focus to help students narrow down their choice of potential objects.
Within the teaching time allocated to undertaking this task, teachers should ensure 
that they include time to explain the requirements of the task and ensure that 
students are familiar with the assessment instrument.
Step 2 Students should produce a single file containing their TOK exhibition.  This must 
include:
• a title clearly indicating their selected IA prompt
• images of their three objects
• a typed commentary on each object that identifies each object and its specific 
real-world context, justifies each object’s inclusion in the exhibition and links to 
the IA prompt (maximum 950 words)
• appropriate citations and references.
Teachers are permitted to provide feedback on one  draft of this work. They should 
provide oral or written advice on how the work could be improved, but should not 
edit the draft.
Once complete, this file is submitted to the TOK teacher to be marked. Samples of 
student work are then submitted to the IB for moderation.
Step 3 Teachers are required to provide all students with an opportunity for their 
completed exhibitions to be showcased and exhibited to an audience. As this does 
not form part of the formal assessment task, teachers have a great deal of flexibility 
as to how they choose to hold these exhibitions—as in the following examples.
• A class of TOK students could hold an exhibition within one of their regular TOK 
classes.
• Two classes of TOK students in the same school, or different schools, could host 
exhibitions for each other.
• A class of TOK students could host an exhibition for younger students in the 
school.
• A school could host a TOK exhibition for parents and other members of the 
school community.
• Students could display their TOK exhibitions in a “virtual exhibition” (by using 
an online virtual gallery space)
• A school could host a combined event celebrating the PYP exhibition, MYP 
personal project and the TOK exhibition.
IA prompts
The IA prompts  are a set of 35 high-level  knowledge  questions.  Students  must  select  one  of the following 
IA prompts  on which  to base  their  exhibition,  and  all three  objects  must  be linked  to the same  prompt. 
These  IA prompts  apply  for all examination  sessions  for the life of this guide—they  do not change  from 
session to session.
Students  are required  to create  an exhibition  of three  objects  that  connect  to one  of the following  IA 
prompts.
1. What counts as knowledge?
2. Are some types of knowledge more useful than others?
3. What features of knowledge have an impact on its reliability?
4. On what grounds might we doubt a claim?
5. What counts as good evidence for a claim?TOK assessment details
40 Theory of knowledge guide
6. How does the way that we organize or classify knowledge affect what we know?
7. What are the implications of having, or not having, knowledge?
8. To what extent is certainty attainable?
9. Are some types of knowledge less open to interpretation than others?
10. What challenges are raised by the dissemination and/or communication of knowledge?
11. Can new knowledge change established values or beliefs?
12. Is bias inevitable in the production of knowledge?
13. How can we know that current knowledge is an improvement upon past knowledge?
14. Does some knowledge belong only to particular communities of knowers?
15. What constraints are there on the pursuit of knowledge?
16. Should some knowledge not be sought on ethical grounds?
17. Why do we seek knowledge?
18. Are some things unknowable?
19. What counts as a good justification for a claim?
20. What is the relationship between personal experience and knowledge?
21. What is the relationship between knowledge and culture?
22. What role do experts play in influencing our consumption or acquisition of knowledge?
23. How important are material tools in the production or acquisition of knowledge?
24. How might the context in which knowledge is presented influence whether it is accepted or rejected?
25. How can we distinguish between knowledge, belief and opinion?
26. Does our knowledge depend on our interactions with other knowers?
27. Does all knowledge impose ethical obligations on those who know it?
28. To what extent is objectivity possible in the production or acquisition of knowledge?
29. Who owns knowledge?
30. What role does imagination play in producing knowledge about the world?
31. How can we judge when evidence is adequate?
32. What makes a good explanation?
33. How is current knowledge shaped by its historical development?
34. In what ways do our values affect our acquisition of knowledge?
35. In what ways do values affect the production of knowledge?
The chosen IA prompt must be used exactly as given; it must not be altered in any way.
• If the IA prompt has been modified but it is still clear which IA prompt the student is referring to, the 
TOK exhibition should be marked as using the original IA prompt. Any lack of relevance in the 
student’s response arising from this modification will be reflected in the score awarded.
• If it is clear that the TOK Exhibition is not based on one of the IA prompts listed, the TOK exhibition 
should be awarded a score of zero, in accordance with the TOK Exhibition assessment instrument.
Objects
An extremely wide variety of different types of objects are suitable for use in a TOK exhibition. Students are 
encouraged  to choose  objects  that  are of personal  interest  and  that  they  have  come  across  in their 
academic studies and/or their lives beyond the classroom.
It is strongly  recommended  that  students  base  their  exhibition  on one  of the themes  (the  core  theme  or 
one  of the optional  themes).  This  can be an extremely  useful  way  to help  students  narrow  down  their 
choice of objects and give a focus to their exhibition.TOK assessment details
41 Theory of knowledge guide
Digital or physical objects
The objects  may  be digital  rather  than  physical  objects.  For example,  students  could  include  a photograph 
of an object,  such  as a historical  treaty,  where  it would  not be practical/possible  for them  to exhibit  the 
physical  object.  Students  may  also  use digital  objects  such  as a tweet  by a political  leader.  However,  they 
must  be specific  objects  that  have  a specific  real-world  context—objects  that  exist  in a particular  time  and 
place  (including  virtual  spaces).  They  may  be objects  that  the student  has created  themselves,  but they 
must be pre-existing objects rather than objects created specifically for the purposes of the exhibition.
Context of an object
The specific  real-world  context  of each  object  is extremely  important  to the task.  It is, therefore,  important 
that students identify specific objects to discuss rather than using generic objects and generic images from 
the internet.  For example,  a discussion  and  photograph  of a student’s  baby  brother  is an example  of an 
object  that  has a specific  real-world  context,  whereas  a generic  image  of “a baby”  from  an internet  image 
search is not.
Examples of the diverse kinds of objects students could select include the following.
• A tweet from the President of the United States
• An image of the painting Guernica  by Pablo Picasso
• The student’s own extended essay (EE)
• A basketball used by the student during their physical education lessons
• The graphic novel The Colour of Earth  by Kim Dong Hwa
• A painting that the student created in their DP visual arts course
• A refillable water bottle provided to each student in a school as part of a sustainability initiative
• A news article from the popular website Buzzfeed
• A photograph of the student playing in an orchestra
Further guidance on the role of objects in the exhibition and examples of student exhibitions can be found 
in the Theory of knowledge teacher support material .
Images of objects
The image  of each  object  used  in the exhibition  must  be appropriately  referenced.  If an object  is the 
student’s own original work (for example, a painting that they created in a visual arts class) then this should 
be identified  and  acknowledged  to ensure  that  teachers  and  moderators  are clear  about  the origins  of the 
object.
Word count
The maximum overall word count for the TOK exhibition is 950 words . This word count includes the written 
commentaries on each of the three objects. It does not include:
• any text contained on/within the objects themselves
• acknowledgments, references (whether given in footnotes, endnotes or in-text) or bibliography.
If an exhibition  exceeds  the word  limit,  then  examiners  are instructed  to stop  reading  after  950 words  and 
to base their assessment on only the first 950 words. Extended footnotes or appendices are not appropriate 
to a TOK exhibition.
Guidance and authenticity
The work  submitted  for internal  assessment  must  be the student’s  own  work.  However,  it is not the 
intention  that  students  should  be left to work  on the internal  assessment  component  without  any support 
from the teacher. The teacher should play an important role during both the planning stage and the period 
when the student is working on the internally assessed work.
It is recommended  that  a total  of approximately  8 hours  of teaching  time  should  be allocated  to the 
exhibition task. This should include:TOK assessment details
42 Theory of knowledge guide
• time for the teacher to explain the requirements of the task and ensure that students are familiar with 
the assessment instrument
• in-class time for students to ask questions and seek clarifications
• time for the teacher to review and monitor students’ progress, and to check authenticity.
Students  should  be encouraged  to initiate  discussions  with  the teacher  to obtain  advice  and  information, 
and  students  must  not be penalized  for seeking  guidance.  Teachers  should  read  and  give  advice  to 
students  on one  draft  of the work.  They  should  provide  oral  or written  advice  on how  the work  could  be 
improved, but they may not edit the draft. The next version handed to the teacher must be the final version 
for submission.
It is the responsibility of teachers to ensure that all students understand the basic meaning and significance 
of concepts  that  relate  to academic  honesty,  especially  authenticity  and  intellectual  property.  Teachers 
must  ensure  that  all student  work  for assessment  is prepared  according  to the requirements  and  must 
explain clearly to students that the internally assessed work must be entirely their own.
All work  submitted  to the IB for moderation  or assessment  must  be authenticated  by a teacher  and  must 
not include  any known  instances  of suspected  or confirmed  misconduct.  Each  student  must  confirm  that 
the work  is his or her authentic  work  and  constitutes  the final  version  of that  work.  Once  a student  has 
officially  submitted  the final  version  of the work  it cannot  be retracted.  The requirement  to confirm  the 
authenticity  of work  applies  to the work  of all students,  not just the sample  work  that  will be submitted  to 
the IB for the purpose of moderation.
Authenticity  may  be checked  by discussion  with  the student  on the content  of the work,  and  scrutiny  of 
one or more of the following.
• The student’s initial proposal
• The first draft of the written work
• The references provided
• The style of writing compared with work known to be that of the student
• The analysis of the work by a web-based plagiarism detection service
TOK essay on a prescribed title
The TOK  essay  engages  students  in a formal,  sustained  piece  of writing  in response  to one  of the six titles 
that  are prescribed  by the IB for each  examination  session.  These  titles  take  the form  of knowledge 
questions that are focused on the areas of knowledge.
The TOK  essay  is an external  assessment  component.  Each  student’s  essay  is submitted  to the IB to be 
marked by IB examiners. The TOK Essay must be written in standard 12 type size and be double spaced. It is 
not primarily  a research  paper,  but it is expected  that  specific  sources  will be used,  and  these  must  be 
acknowledged.
Essay titles
The IB releases  a set of six prescribed  titles  for each  examination  session.  These  titles  are published  on the 
programme  resource  centre  (TOK >Assessment >Session-specific  material ) six months  before  the 
submission deadline.
It is not intended  that  students  will spend  six months  working  on their  essays—teachers  should  select  a 
window  within  that  six-month  period  for students  to work  on their  essays  that  fits with  the other 
commitments in their school calendars. It is suggested that 10 hours  of teaching time should be dedicated 
to working on the TOK Essay.
The chosen title must be used exactly as given; it must not be altered in any way.
• If the title has been modified but it is still clear which prescribed title for the current session it refers to, 
the essay will be marked against that prescribed title. Any lack of relevance in the student’s response 
to the prescribed title arising from this modification will be reflected in the score awarded.TOK assessment details
43 Theory of knowledge guide
• If it is clear that the title bears no resemblance to any title for the current session, the essay will be 
awarded a score of zero, in accordance with the TOK essay assessment instrument.
Word count
The maximum  length  of the essay  is 1,600  words . Extended  footnotes  or appendices  are not appropriate 
for the TOK essay.
The word count includes:
• the main part of the essay
• any quotations.
The word count does not include:
• any acknowledgments
• the references (whether given in footnotes, endnotes or in-text) and bibliography
• any maps, charts, diagrams, annotated illustrations or tables.
If an essay  exceeds  the word  limit,  then  examiners  are instructed  to stop  reading  after  1,600  words  and  to 
base  their  assessment  on just the first 1,600  words.  Students  are required  to indicate  the number  of words 
when the essay is uploaded during the submission process.
Guidance and authenticity
The TOK essay must be the student’s own work. However, the teacher plays an important role in supporting 
the student  during  the planning  and  writing  of their  essay.  Teachers  are expected  to explain  the 
requirements  of the task  and  ensure  that  students  are familiar  with  the assessment  instrument,  provide 
clarifications  in response  to students’  questions,  monitor  students’  progress,  and  check  the authenticity  of 
the student work.
For the TOK essay, three formal recorded interactions between the student and teacher are required. These 
three  interactions  must  be recorded  on the TOK  essay  Planning  and  Progress  Form  (TK/ PPF). This  form  is not 
referred to by examiners when determining the mark awarded for the essay. However, it is submitted to the 
IB as important evidence that steps have been taken to help ensure the authenticity of the student’s work; it 
also  plays  an important  role  in terms  of helping  to ensure  that  all students  receive  an appropriate  level  of 
support when completing their essays. The procedure for uploading the TOK Essay and forms can be found 
in the Diploma Programme  Assessment procedures  resource on the programme resource centre .
Three required teacher–student interactions for the TOK essay
1. Discuss the list of prescribed 
titles with the student.2. Discuss the student’s initial 
exploration of their selected title 
(for example, an essay plan).3. Comment on one draft of the 
student’s essay.
The student should discuss the 
prescribed titles with the teacher. 
The final choice of title remains 
with the student, who should 
develop their own thinking and 
ideas.After choosing the title and 
developing their initial ideas in 
relation to it, the student must 
discuss their initial work/
explorations with the teacher by 
sharing them in written form. For 
example, this could take the form 
of a set of notes and ideas that 
could then be turned into a more 
formal essay plan following the 
discussion with the teacher.After this, the student is permitted 
to present one full draft of the 
essay to the teacher. The teacher 
should provide oral or written 
advice on how the work could be 
improved. This advice may take 
the form of written comments of a 
global nature, but teachers are not 
permitted to mark or edit this 
draft. While the student may seek 
further advice from the teacher, 
for example, on the 
appropriateness of a particular 
example or on the clarity of a 
section of writing, no further 
written advice on drafts is TOK assessment details
44 Theory of knowledge guide
Three required teacher–student interactions for the TOK essay
permitted. The next version 
handed to the teacher must be 
the final version for submission.
It is the responsibility of teachers to ensure that all students understand the basic meaning and significance 
of concepts  that  relate  to academic  honesty,  especially  authenticity  and  intellectual  property.  Teachers 
must  ensure  that  all student  work  for assessment  is prepared  according  to the requirements  and  must 
explain clearly to students that the work must be entirely their own.
All work  submitted  to the IB for moderation  or assessment  must  be authenticated  by a teacher  and  must 
not include  any known  instances  of suspected  or confirmed  misconduct.  Each  student  must  confirm  that 
the work  is his or her authentic  work  and  constitutes  the final  version  of that  work.  Once  a student  has 
officially submitted the final version of the work it cannot be retracted.
Examples  of ways  that  authenticity  may  be checked  are through  discussions  with  the student  about  the 
content  of their  work,  scrutiny  of the style  of writing  compared  with  work  known  to be that  of the student, 
scrutiny of the references cited, or the analysis of the work by a web-based plagiarism detection service.TOK assessment details
45 Theory of knowledge guide
Global impression marking
The TOK  exhibition  and  the TOK  essay  are both  marked  using  a global  impression  marking  approach.  This 
means that the assessment of both tasks is envisaged as a process of holistic or global judgment rather than 
an analytical process of totalling the assessment of separate criteria.
The assessment  instruments  present  five described  levels  of performance.  These  levels  are to be seen  as 
global and holistic descriptors rather than as a checklist of necessary characteristics. When marking, the aim 
is to find  the descriptor  that  conveys  most  accurately  the level  attained  by the student.  It is not necessary 
for every single aspect of a level descriptor to be met for a mark in that level to be awarded.
When using the TOK assessment instruments, it is to be understood that:
• the described levels are not a checklist; it is the overall impression that is most important
• only whole numbers should be recorded; partial marks are not acceptable
• the highest level of the instruments does not imply faultless performance, and examiners and teachers 
should not hesitate to use the extremes if they are appropriate descriptions of the work being 
assessed
• teachers and examiners should not think in terms of grades, but should concentrate on identifying the 
appropriate level descriptor and mark
• the IB recommends that the assessment instruments be made available to students.
There  are two  marks  available  within  each  level  of the assessment  instruments.  Teachers  and  examiners 
should  award  the upper  mark  if the student’s  work  demonstrates  the qualities  described  in that  level  to a 
great extent—in this case, the work may be close to achieving marks in the level above. They should award 
the lower  mark  if the student’s  work  demonstrates  the qualities  described  to a lesser  extent—in  this case, 
the work may be close to achieving marks in the level below.
If a piece  of work  seems  to fall between  two  descriptors,  teachers,  moderators  and  examiners  should  re-
read  the driving  question  that  underpins  the global  impression  judgment  and  then  read  the two  levels 
again.  The level  that  more  appropriately  describes  the overall  holistic  impression  of the student’s  work 
should  be chosen.  If the decision  is taken  to place  the response  in the higher  of the two  levels  being 
considered,  then  the bottom  of the two  marks  in that  band  should  be awarded.  If the decision  is taken  to 
place  the response  in the lower  of the two  bands  being  considered,  then  the upper  mark  in the band 
should be awarded.
TOK exhibition assessment instrument
The TOK  exhibition  is an opportunity  for students  to explore  links  between  knowledge  questions  and  the 
world around us. The assessment of this task is underpinned by the following single driving question.
Does the exhibition successfully show how TOK manifests in the world around us?
The assessment  instrument  provided  describes  five levels  of performance  in response  to this driving 
question. These levels are to be seen as holistic descriptors rather than as a checklist of characteristics.
Please  note:  If a student  only  provides  images  and  accompanying  commentaries  for two  objects,  teachers 
should  award  a maximum  of 6 marks.  If a student  only  provides  an image  and  accompanying  commentary 
for one object, teachers should award a maximum of 3 marks.
Assessment
TOK assessment instruments
46 Theory of knowledge guide
Does the exhibition successfully show how TOK manifests in the world around us?
Excellent
9-10Good
7-8Satisfactory
5-6Basic
3-4Rudimentary
1-20
The exhibition 
clearly identifies 
three objects 
and their 
specific real-
world contexts. 
Links between 
each of the 
three objects 
and the 
selected IA 
prompt are 
clearly made 
and well-
explained.
There is a strong 
justification of 
the particular 
contribution 
that each 
individual 
object makes to 
the exhibition. 
All, or nearly all, 
of the points are 
well-supported 
by appropriate 
evidence and 
explicit 
references to 
the selected IA 
prompt.The exhibition 
identifies three 
objects and 
their real-world 
contexts. Links 
between each 
of the three 
objects and the 
selected IA 
prompt are 
explained, 
although this 
explanation 
may lack 
precision and 
clarity in parts.
There is a 
justification of 
the contribution 
that each 
individual 
object makes to 
the exhibition. 
Many of the 
points are 
supported by 
appropriate 
evidence and 
references to 
the selected IA 
prompt.The exhibition 
identifies three 
objects, 
although the 
real-world 
contexts of 
these objects 
may be vaguely 
or imprecisely 
stated. There is 
some 
explanation of 
the links 
between the 
three objects 
and the 
selected IA 
prompt.
There is some 
justification for 
the inclusion of 
each object in 
the exhibition. 
Some of the 
points are 
supported by 
evidence and 
references to 
the selected IA 
prompt.The exhibition 
identifies three 
objects, although 
the real-world 
contexts of the 
objects may be 
implied rather 
than explicitly 
stated. Basic links 
between the 
objects and the 
selected IA 
prompt are 
made, but the 
explanation of 
these links is 
unconvincing 
and/or 
unfocused.
There is a 
superficial 
justification for 
the inclusion of 
each object in 
the exhibition. 
Reasons for the 
inclusion of the 
objects are 
offered, but 
these are not 
supported by 
appropriate 
evidence and/or 
lack relevance to 
the selected IA 
prompt. There 
may be 
significant 
repetition across 
the justifications 
of the different 
objects.The exhibition 
presents three 
objects, but the 
real-world 
contexts of 
these objects 
are not stated, 
or the images 
presented may 
be highly 
generic images 
of types of 
object rather 
than of specific 
real-world 
objects. Links 
between the 
objects and the 
selected IA 
prompt are 
made, but these 
are minimal, 
tenuous, or it is 
not clear what 
the student is 
trying to 
convey.
There is very 
little 
justification 
offered for the 
inclusion of 
each object in 
the exhibition. 
The 
commentary on 
the objects is 
highly 
descriptive or 
consists only of 
unsupported 
assertions.The exhibition 
does not reach 
the standard 
described by 
the other levels 
or does not use 
one of the IA 
prompts 
provided.
Possible characteristics
Convincing
Lucid
PreciseFocused
Relevant
CoherentAdequate
Competent
AcceptableSimplistic
Limited
UnderdevelopedIneffective
Descriptive
IncoherentTOK assessment instruments
47 Theory of knowledge guide
TOK essay assessment instrument
The TOK  essay  is an opportunity  for students  to engage  in a formal,  sustained  piece  of writing  in response 
to a prescribed  title  focused  on the areas  of knowledge.  The assessment  of this task  is underpinned  by the 
following single driving question.
Does the student provide a clear, coherent and critical exploration of the essay title?
The assessment  instrument  provided  describes  five levels  of performance  in response  to this driving 
question. These levels are to be seen as holistic descriptors rather than as a checklist of characteristics.
Does the student provide a clear, coherent and critical exploration of the essay title?
Excellent
9-10Good
7-8Satisfactory
5-6Basic
3-4Rudimentary
1-20
The discussion 
has a sustained 
focus on the 
title and is 
linked 
effectively to 
areas of 
knowledge.
Arguments are 
clear, coherent 
and effectively 
supported by 
specific 
examples. The 
implications of 
arguments are 
considered.
There is clear 
awareness and 
evaluation of 
different points 
of view.The discussion 
is focused on 
the title and is 
linked 
effectively to 
areas of 
knowledge.
Arguments are 
clear, coherent 
and supported 
by examples.
There is 
awareness and 
some 
evaluation of 
different points 
of view.The discussion 
is focused on 
the title and is 
developed with 
some links to 
areas of 
knowledge.
Arguments are 
offered and are 
supported by 
examples.
There is some 
awareness of 
different points 
of view.The discussion is 
connected to the 
title and makes 
superficial or 
limited links to 
areas of 
knowledge.
The discussion is 
largely 
descriptive. 
Limited 
arguments are 
offered but they 
are unclear and 
are not 
supported by 
effective 
examples.The discussion 
is weakly 
connected to 
the title.
While there may 
be links to the 
areas of 
knowledge, any 
relevant points 
are descriptive 
or consist only 
of unsupported 
assertions.The discussion 
does not reach 
the standard 
described by 
the other levels 
or is not a 
response to one 
of the 
prescribed titles 
for the correct 
examination 
session.
Possible characteristics
Insightful
Convincing
Accomplished
LucidPertinent
Relevant
Analytical
OrganizedAcceptable
Mainstream
Adequate
CompetentUnderdeveloped
Basic
Superficial
LimitedIneffective
Descriptive
Incoherent
FormlessTOK assessment instruments
48 Theory of knowledge guide
The TOK course offers teachers a great deal of flexibility and room for creativity in the design and delivery of 
their  course.  There  are multiple  possible  entry  points  and  ways  to structure  the course,  and  teachers  have 
the opportunity  to provide  a diverse  range  of examples  that  best  meet  the needs  and  interests  of their 
students.
This  section  contains  examples  of possible  pathways  through  the course.  It should  be noted  that  these  are 
suggestions only, intended simply to indicate some of the wide variety of possible pathways. More detailed 
guidance  and  examples  of different  course  structures  can be found  in the Theory  of knowledge  teacher 
support material .
Example A: TOK course with the core theme as “bookends” at each end of the course
START
Knowledge and the 
knower: Initial 
explorationsKnowledge and 
technologyAreas of knowledge Knowledge and 
indigenous societies
Areas of knowledge TOK exhibition Areas of knowledge Areas of knowledge
Areas of knowledge Areas of knowledge TOK essay writing Knowledge and the 
knower: Final reflections
END
Example B: A TOK course starting with familiar examples drawn from students’ other DP classes
Part 1 Areas of knowledge and 
Knowledge and languageAreas of knowledge and 
Knowledge and languageKnowledge and politics
Part 2 Knowledge and the Knower TOK exhibition Areas of knowledge: A closer 
look at the arts
Part 3 Areas of knowledge: A closer 
look at mathematicsAreas of knowledge: A closer 
look at the human sciencesAreas of knowledge: A closer 
look at the natural sciences
Part 4 Areas of knowledge TOK essay writing Reflections
Example C: A TOK course organized around/framed through an exploration of concepts, with 
discussion of the themes and areas of knowledge embedded within each unit
START
Certainty and ambiguityPerspectives and 
paradigmsTruth and objectivity Tolerance and outrage
Culture and identity Values and 
responsibilitiesTOK exhibition Justification and 
conviction
Evidence and proof Interpretation and 
explanationPower and authority TOK essay writing
END
Appendices
Designing a TOK course
49 Theory of knowledge guide
This  bibliography  lists  the principal  works  used  to inform  the development  of this document.  It is not an 
exhaustive  list and  does  not include  all the literature  available.  This  bibliography  is not a list of 
recommended textbooks.
BOIX  MANSILLA,  V and  JACKSON,  A. 2011.  Educating  for Global  Competence:  Preparing  Our  Youth  to Engage 
the World . New York, New York., USA. Asia Society.
CLAXTON,  G. 2008.  What’s  the Point  of School?  Rediscovering  the Heart  of Education . Oxford,  UK. OneWorld 
Publications.
CLAXTON,  G. 2016.  Intelligence  in the Flesh:  Why  your  mind  needs  your  body  much  more  than  it thinks . New 
Haven, Connecticut, USA. Yale University Press.
COLE, D et al. 2014. “IB Programme: Theory of Knowledge (TOK): Exploring learning outcomes, benefits, and 
perceptions”.  (Prepared  for the International  Baccalaureate  Organization:  Final  Report.).  Penrith,  Australia. 
University of Western Sydney.
COSTA,  A. and  KALLICK,  B. (Ed).  2009.  Habits  of Mind  Across  the Curriculum:  Practical  and  Creative  Strategies 
for Teachers . Alexandria, Virginia, USA. Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development (ASCD).
ERNEST,  P (Ed).  2018.  The  Philosophy  of Mathematics  Education  Today . Cham,  Switzerland.  Springer 
International Publishing AG.
GARDNER,  H. 2012.  Truth,  Beauty  and  Goodness  Reframed:  Educating  for the Virtues  in the Age  of Truthiness 
and Twitter . New York, New York, USA. Basic Books.
HAIDT,  J. 2013.  The  Righteous  Mind:  Why  Good  People  are Divided  by Politics  and  Religion . London,  UK. 
Penguin.
JAMES,  C. 2016.  Disconnected:  Youth,  New  Media,  and  the Ethics  Gap . Cambridge,  Massachusetts,  USA.  The 
MIT Press.
KING,  P and  STROHM  KITCHENER,  K. 2015.  “Cognitive  Development  in the Emerging  Adult:  The Emergence 
of Complex  Cognitive  Skills”.  In JENSEN  ARNETT,  J. (Ed).  2016.  The  Oxford  Handbook  of Emerging  Adulthood . 
New York, New York, USA. Oxford University Press.
MACGREGOR, N. 2013. A History of the World in 100 Objects . London, UK. Penguin.
MCINTYRE, L. 2018. Post-Truth . Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.
PERKINS,  D. 2009.  Making  Learning  Whole:  How  Seven  Principles  of Teaching  Can  Transform  Education . San 
Francisco, California, USA. Jossey-Bass.
PERKINS,  D. 2014.  Future  Wise:  Educating  Our  Children  for a Changing  World . San Francisco,  California,  USA. 
Jossey-Bass.
PETERSON, ADC. 1972. International Baccalaureate . London, UK. Harrap.
RITCHHART,  R. 2002.  Intellectual  Character:  What  It Is, Why  It Matters,  and  How  to Get  It. San Francisco, 
California, USA. Jossey-Bass.
RITCHHART,  R, CHURCH,  M, and  MORRISON,  K. 2011.  Making  Thinking  Visible . San Francisco,  California,  USA. 
Jossey-Bass.
SAID, E.W. 1978. Orientalism . London, UK. Routledge & Kegan Paul.
UNITED  NATIONS.  2007.  “United  Nations  Declaration  on the Rights  of Indigenous  Peoples”.  [viewed  3 May 
2019]. Available from: https://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/documents/DRIPS_en.pdf.
WALKER,  G. 2004.  To Educate  the Nations  2: Reflections  on an international  education . Woodbridge,  USA. 
Peridot Press.
Appendices
Bibliography
50 Theory of knowledge guide
WALKER,  G (Ed).  2011.  The  Changing  Face  of International  Education:  Challenges  for the IB. Cardiff,  UK. 
International Baccalaureate Organization.
WIGGINS,  G and  MCTIGHE,  J. 2005.  Understanding  by Design.  (Expanded  2nd  Edition) . Alexandria,  Virginia, 
USA. Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development (ASCD).
WILLINGHAM,  DT. 2009.  Why  Don’t  Students  Like  School?  A Cognitive  Scientist  Answers  Questions  About  How 
the Mind Works and What It Means for the Classroom . San Francisco, California, USA. Jossey-Bass.Bibliography
51 Theory of knowledge guide
The IB wishes  to thank  the educators  involved  in the curriculum  review  and  their  associated  schools  for 
generously contributing time and resources to the production of this guide.
Appendices
Acknowledgments
52 Theory of knowledge guide
