N21/2/ABCHI/SP1/CHI/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

    November / Novembre / Noviembre de
                   2021



              Chinese / Chinois / Chino B


                           Standard level
                           Niveau moyen
                            Nivel Medio


               Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1


18 pages/páginas
                                            –2–                 N21/2/ABCHI/SP1/CHI/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2021

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2021

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2021

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
             –3–         N21/2/ABCHI/SP1/CHI/TZ0/XX/M




Chinese B – Simplified version

Chinois B – Version simplifiée

Chino B – Versión simplificada
                                             –4–                N21/2/ABCHI/SP1/CHI/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion A: Language

How successfully does the candidate command written language?
• To what extent is the vocabulary appropriate and varied?
• To what extent are the grammatical structures varied?
• To what extent does the accuracy of the language contribute to effective communication?

  Marks                                      Level descriptor
     0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
            Command of the language is limited.
            Vocabulary is sometimes appropriate to the task.
   1–3
            Basic grammatical structures are used.
            Language contains errors in basic structures. Errors interfere with communication.
            Command of the language is partially effective.
            Vocabulary is appropriate to the task.
            Some basic grammatical structures are used, with some attempts to use more
   4–6
            complex structures.
            Language is mostly accurate for basic structures, but errors occur in more complex
            structures. Errors at times interfere with communication.
            Command of the language is effective and mostly accurate.
            Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied.
   7–9      A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used.
            Language is mostly accurate. Occasional errors in basic and in complex grammatical
            structures do not interfere with communication.
            Command of the language is mostly accurate and very effective.
            Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied, including the use of idiomatic
            expressions.
  10–12
            A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used effectively.
            Language is mostly accurate. Minor errors in more complex grammatical structures
            do not interfere with communication.

语言
考官应该记住不是所有的错误都有同等的重要性。有些错误严重影响意思上的
沟通，有些并非如此。有些错误显示出缺乏语言的基本掌控，有些错误只是一
时疏忽所致。
偶尔犯错：有不同难易度的错误，但只是偶尔发生的，比方考生平常可以表达
过去时态，但偶尔疏忽犯错。
经常犯错：经常犯同样语法结构的错误，比如过去时态经常写错，不可靠， 而
且可能有语言基础上的混淆。（比方过去时态不同于现在完成）。
差距：某些句构很少写对，或者从来没出现过，比方需要表达过去时态， 但并
没出现。
                                                 –5–                N21/2/ABCHI/SP1/CHI/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B: Message
To what extent does the candidate fulfil the task?
  • How relevant are the ideas to the task?
  • To what extent are ideas developed?
  • To what extent do the clarity and organization of ideas contribute to the successful delivery of
    the message?

The “descriptor unpacked” explain the assessment criteria in greater detail. Where a candidate’s
response does not correspond exactly to a single mark band, the statements in bold should be
used as a guide for the ‘best fit’ approach.

 Marks            Level descriptor                              Descriptor unpacked
   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
         The task is partially fulfilled.    The link between the response and task tends to
                                                 be unclear; the reader has difficulty understanding
         Few ideas are relevant to the task.     the message.
         Ideas are stated, but with no           The response touches upon some aspects of the task
         development.                            but there is also much unrelated information.
  1–3    Ideas are not clearly presented and     The response addresses the task in a simple manner,
         do not follow a logical structure,      and supporting details and/or examples barely feature,
         making the message difficult to         if at all.
         determine.                              The ideas do not link well together; inadequate or
                                                 inappropriate use of cohesive devices confuse the
                                                 message.
         The task is generally fulfilled.        The link between the response and the task is
                                                 mostly detectable; the reader’s general
         Some ideas are relevant to the          understanding of the message is not impeded,
         task.                                   despite some ambiguity.
         Ideas are outlined, but are not fully   The response covers some aspects of the task, or
         developed.                              touches upon all aspects but superficially.
  4–6
         Ideas are generally clearly             The response includes some supporting details and
         presented and the response is           examples.
         generally structured in a logical       The ideas are organized in a logical way; some
         manner, leading to a mostly             cohesive devices are used appropriately to aid the
         successful delivery of the              delivery of the message, although there may be areas
         message.                                of confusion at times.

         The task is fulfilled.                  The link between the response and the task is
                                                 clear; the reader has a good understanding of the
         Most ideas are relevant to the task.    message conveyed.
         Ideas are developed well, with          The response covers all aspects of the task, despite
         some detail and examples.               losing focus at times.
  7–9
         Ideas are clearly presented and the     The response uses supporting details and examples to
         response is structured in a logical     clarify the message.
         manner, supporting the delivery of      The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive
         the message.                            devices are used appropriately to deliver the message
                                                 with little or no ambiguity.
         The task is fulfilled effectively.      The link between the response and the task is
                                                 precise and consistently evident; the reader has a
         Ideas are relevant to the task.         clear understanding of the message conveyed.
 10–12
         Ideas are fully developed, providing The response covers all aspects of the task fully, and
         details and relevant examples.       maintains focus throughout.
                                                    –6–                N21/2/ABCHI/SP1/CHI/TZ0/XX/M


             Ideas are clearly presented and the    The response uses well-chosen supporting details and
             response is structured in a logical    examples to illustrate and explain ideas persuasively.
             and coherent manner that               The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive
             supports the delivery of the           devices are used appropriately to deliver the message
             message.                               with clarity and ease.


Note: When marking candidate responses, keep in mind that neither the factual accuracy of the
information presented, nor the validity of the candidates’ personal opinions, are being assessed.
Therefore, scripts that are factually inaccurate should not be marked down, provided the ideas
presented have coherence and are sufficiently developed.



Criterion C: Conceptual understanding

To what extent does the candidate demonstrate conceptual understanding?
   •       To what extent is the choice of text type appropriate to the task?
   •       To what extent are register and tone appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of
           the task?
   •       To what extent does the response incorporate the conventions of the chosen text type?

  Marks                                            Level descriptor
       0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
              Conceptual understanding is limited.
              The choice of text type is generally inappropriate to the context, purpose or audience.
   1–2        The register and tone are inappropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response incorporates limited recognizable conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is mostly demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is generally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   3–4        The register and tone, while occasionally appropriate to the context, purpose and
              audience of the task, fluctuate throughout the response.
              The response incorporates some conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is fully demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   5–6        The register and tone are appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response fully incorporates the conventions of the chosen text type.



Note: Examiners must balance all three elements in criterion C (choice of text type,
appropriateness of tone and register, and use of text type conventions) to arrive at the final mark.
                                           –7–   N21/2/ABCHI/SP1/CHI/TZ0/XX/M


Question specific guidance (Criterion B and C)

问题一

    学校最近要举办一个节日庆祝活动，你是这个活动的负责人。但是因为票卖得不
    好，你想介绍这次的活动内容以及这个节日的重要性，吸引更多的学生来参加这个
    活动。

               提案                       传单                演讲稿

Criterion B:

• 内容涵盖题目要求的两个方面：介绍活动的内容及说明相关节日的重要性;
• 简单地提到学校要举办一个节日庆祝活动;
• 清楚地介绍这次活动的内容，并具体说明活动的细节，可包括一个或多个项目;
• 能说明相关节日的重要性，可详细地描述一个原因，或概述几个原因。

Criterion C:

文本类型选择:
                          文本类型             说明
Appropriate               传单               此文本类型非常适合针对广大群众或特定
                                           受众发布公众活动的资讯，这里的受众是
                                           学生们。
Generally appropriate     演讲稿              此文本类型适合对某种议题表达个人看法
                                           及提出建议，有特定的受众，且必须为一
                                           个群体。这里的受众是学生们。 但通常于
                                           特定场合进行发表，题目中没有指明相关
                                           的场合。
Generally inappropriate   提案               此文本类型属专业文本，针对锁定读者提
                                           出建议。这与题目要求并不太相符。

注意：如果回答清楚说明了写作的情境、受众和目的，并且这些内容符合题目的要
求，则可以将“通常适当”的文本类型视为“适当”，或将“通常不适当”的文本类
型视为“通常适当”。

语体和语气:
• 非正式/半正式语体；
• 非正式：语气活泼，有宣传、呼吁的效果；半正式：语气可相对直接，具说明的
  作用。

请参阅附录所列出的文本类型格式。
                                 –8–    N21/2/ABCHI/SP1/CHI/TZ0/XX/M


问题二

 现在素食越来越流行，你居住的城市开了一个新的素食餐馆。你想与广大市民分享
 这次到餐馆用餐的经验及素食对健康的好处。

               传单                博客               提案

Criterion B:

• 内容涵盖题目要求的两个方面：分享到素食餐馆用餐的经验及说明素食对健康的
  好处;
• 简单地提到居住的城市开了一个新的餐馆;
• 清楚地描述这次到餐馆用餐的经验，并具体说明过程及感受;
• 能说明素食对健康的益处，可详细地描述一个好处，或概述几个好处。

Criterion C:

文本类型选择:
                          文本类型    说明
Appropriate               博客      此文本类型适合表达个人看法及观点，并
                                  具有分享、互动的特点，适合与这里的受
                                  众交流。
Generally appropriate     传单      此文本类型虽适合针对广大群众发布资
                                  讯，但多用作宣传、分享的性质，不太适
                                  合分享个人经验。
Generally inappropriate   提案      此文本类型属专业文本，针对锁定读者提
                                  出建议。这与题目要求并不太相符。

注意：如果回答清楚说明了写作的情境、受众和目的，并且这些内容符合题目的要
求，则可以将“通常适当”的文本类型视为“适当”，或将“通常不适当”的文本类
型视为“通常适当”。

语体和语气:
• 非正式/半正式语体；
• 非正式：语调可比较个性化，具有互动、交流的语气；半正式：从理性的角度讨
  论，分析素食对健康的好处。

请参阅附录所列出的文本类型格式。
                                 –9–    N21/2/ABCHI/SP1/CHI/TZ0/XX/M


问题三

 学校浪费资源的现象越来越严重，导致支出过多，经费不足。因此学校不再提供免
 费的课外活动，你很担心这个问题。跟同学谈谈这个问题，提出一些节省资源的方
 法。

               评论                博客              演讲稿

Criterion B:

• 内容涵盖题目要求的两个方面：说明学校浪费资源的现象（或学校不提供免费的
  课外活动的问题）及提出一些节省资源的建议;
• 简单地提到学校因浪费资源的问题导致经费不足而不再提供免费的课外活动;
• 清楚地描述学校资源浪费的现象（或学校不提供免费课外活动的问题），并能恰
  当地举例说明，可包括一个或多个例子;
• 能明確地提出多于一个节省学校资源的方法。

Criterion C:

文本类型选择:
                          文本类型    说明
Appropriate               演讲稿     此文本类型适合对某种议题表达个人看法
                                  及提出建议，有特定的受众，且必须为一
                                  个群体。这里的受众是学生们。
Generally appropriate     博客      此文本类型适合针对广大群众或特定受众
                                  表达对某议题的个人看法，一般没有指定
                                  的受众。
Generally inappropriate   评论      此文本类型多用作针对具体的人物或事物
                                  表达个人的观点及看法，一般具有较强的
                                  主观色彩及批判性，这与题目描述客观现
                                  象的目的不太相符。

注意：如果回答清楚说明了写作的情境、受众和目的，并且这些内容符合题目的要
求，则可以将“通常适当”的文本类型视为“适当”，或将“通常不适当”的文本类
型视为“通常适当”。

语体和语气:
• 半正式/正式语体；
• 半正式：语气亲和、友善； 正式：语气可相对认真，具提醒的作用。


请参阅附录所列出的文本类型格式。
                                          – 10 –   N21/2/ABCHI/SP1/CHI/TZ0/XX/M


Appendix: Text type conventions (Criterion C)

以下为文本类型最常见和可识别的格式要求

提案
 • 针对特定的受众提出建议
 • 清楚地介绍提案的目的及内容，可运用具综合性的标题、分段论点说明等方式
 • 格式清楚，可包括标题、副标题、分段、列点等，让听众能抓到提案重点
 • 内容具说服力，并提出令人信服的结论


传单
• 引人注意的标题或宣传短语
• 分段：使用副标题、列点说明等
• 文宣背景资料，如联系方式（电话号码/电子邮件）、时间、地点等


注解：以上是这些文本类型的共同特点，格式要求应按照不同的要求作调整

演讲稿
• 第一人称（“我”作叙述），强调与受众的互动
• 开始能吸引听众的注意力，最后简洁地总结所述
• 开头有称谓，结尾表示感謝
• 运用演讲相关的语言、技巧，如提问及反复等


博客
• 相关的题目
• 博主的姓名、日期及时间
• 第一人称
• 具有与读者互动的意识


评论
• 题目有吸引力及相关性，可有副标题
• 评论者的姓名、日期、简介及清晰的总结
• 用开门见山的方法来吸引读者的注意力
              – 11 –       N21/2/ABCHI/SP1/CHI/TZ0/XX/M




 Chinese B – Traditional version

Chinois B – Version traditionnelle

  Chino B – Versión tradicional
                                             – 12 –             N21/2/ABCHI/SP1/CHI/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion A: Language

How successfully does the candidate command written language?
● To what extent is the vocabulary appropriate and varied?
● To what extent are the grammatical structures varied?
● To what extent does the accuracy of the language contribute to effective communication?

  Marks                                      Level descriptor
     0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
            Command of the language is limited.
            Vocabulary is sometimes appropriate to the task.
   1–3      Some basic grammatical structures are used, with some attempts to use more
            complex structures.
            Language contains errors in both basic and more complex structures. Errors interfere
            with communication.
            Command of the language is partially effective.
            Vocabulary is generally appropriate to the task and varied.
   4–6      A variety of basic and some more complex grammatical structures is used.
            Language is mostly accurate for basic structures, but errors occur in more complex
            structures. Errors at times interfere with communication.
            Command of the language is effective and mostly accurate.
            Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied, including the use of idiomatic
            expressions.
   7–9
            A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used effectively.
            Language is mostly accurate. Occasional errors in basic and in complex grammatical
            structures do not interfere with communication.
            Command of the language is mostly accurate and very effective.
            Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and nuanced and varied in a manner that
            enhances the message, including the purposeful use of idiomatic expressions.
  10–12     A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used selectively in
            order to enhance communication.
            Language is mostly accurate. Minor errors in more complex grammatical structures
            do not interfere with communication.

語言
考官應該記住不是所有的錯誤都有同等的重要性。有些錯誤嚴重影響意思上的溝通，
有些並非如此。有些錯誤顯示出缺乏語言的基本掌控，有些錯誤只是一時疏忽所致。
偶爾犯錯：有不同難易度的錯誤，但只是偶爾發生的，比方考生平常可以表達過去時
態，但偶爾疏忽犯錯。
經常犯錯：經常犯同樣語法結構的錯誤，比如過去時態經常寫錯，不可靠，而且可能
有語言基礎上的混淆。（比方過去時態不同於現在完成）。
差距：某些句構很少寫對，或者從來沒出現過，比方需要表達過去時態，但並沒出
現。
                                              – 13 –                N21/2/ABCHI/SP1/CHI/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B: Message
To what extent does the candidate fulfil the task?
  ● How relevant are the ideas to the task?
  ● To what extent are ideas developed?
  ● To what extent do the clarity and organization of ideas contribute to the successful delivery of
    the message?

The “descriptor unpacked” explain the assessment criteria in greater detail. Where a candidate’s
response does not correspond exactly to a single mark band, the statements in bold should be
used as a guide for the ‘best fit’ approach.

 Marks           Level descriptor                             Descriptor unpacked
 0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
 1–3     The task is partially fulfilled. The link between the response and task tends to be
                                             unclear; the reader has difficulty understanding the
         Few ideas are relevant to the       message.
         task.
                                             The response touches upon some aspects of the task but
         Ideas are stated, but with no       there is also much unrelated information.
         development.
                                             The response addresses the task in a simple manner, and
         Ideas are not clearly presented     supporting details and/or examples barely feature, if at all.
         and do not follow a logical         The ideas do not link well together; inadequate or
         structure, making the message       inappropriate use of cohesive devices confuse the
         difficult to determine.             message.
 4–6     The task is generally fulfilled.    The link between the response and the task is mostly
                                             detectable; the reader’s general understanding of the
         Some ideas are relevant to the      message is not impeded, despite some ambiguity.
         task.
                                             The response covers some aspects of the task, or
         Ideas are outlined, but are not     touches upon all aspects but superficially.
         fully developed.
                                             The response includes some supporting details and
         Ideas are generally clearly         examples.
         presented and the response is       The ideas are organized in a logical way; some cohesive
         generally structured in a logical   devices are used appropriately to aid the delivery of the
         manner, leading to a mostly         message, although there may be areas of confusion at
         successful delivery of the          times.
         message.
 7–9     The task is fulfilled.              The link between the response and the task is clear;
                                             the reader has a good understanding of the message
         Most ideas are relevant to the      conveyed.
         task.
                                             The response covers all aspects of the task, despite
         Ideas are developed well, with      losing focus at times.
         some detail and examples.
                                             The response uses supporting details and examples to
         Ideas are clearly presented and     clarify the message.
         the response is structured in a     The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive devices
         logical manner, supporting the      are used appropriately to deliver the message with little or
         delivery of the message.            no ambiguity.
 10–12   The task is fulfilled effectively. The link between the response and the task is precise
                                             and consistently evident; the reader has a clear
         Ideas are relevant to the task.     understanding of the message conveyed.
         Ideas are fully developed,          The response covers all aspects of the task fully, and
         providing details and relevant      maintains focus throughout.
         examples.
                                               – 14 –               N21/2/ABCHI/SP1/CHI/TZ0/XX/M


          Ideas are clearly presented and     The response uses well-chosen supporting details and
          the response is structured in a     examples to illustrate and explain ideas persuasively.
          logical and coherent manner         The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive devices
          that supports the delivery of the   are used appropriately to deliver the message with clarity
          message.                            and ease.


Note: When marking candidate responses, keep in mind that neither the factual accuracy of the
information presented, nor the validity of the candidates’ personal opinions, are being assessed.
Therefore, scripts that are factually inaccurate should not be marked down, provided the ideas
presented have coherence and are sufficiently developed.



Criterion C: Conceptual understanding

To what extent does the candidate demonstrate conceptual understanding?
   ● To what extent is the choice of text type appropriate to the task?
   ● To what extent are register and tone appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
      task?
   ● To what extent does the response incorporate the conventions of the chosen text type?

  Marks                                        Level descriptor
     0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
           Conceptual understanding is limited.
           The choice of text type is generally inappropriate to the context, purpose or audience.
   1–2     The register and tone are inappropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
           task.
           The response incorporates limited recognizable conventions of the chosen text type.
           Conceptual understanding is mostly demonstrated.
           The choice of text type is generally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   3–4     The register and tone, while occasionally appropriate to the context, purpose and
           audience of the task, fluctuate throughout the response.
           The response incorporates some conventions of the chosen text type.
           Conceptual understanding is fully demonstrated.
           The choice of text type is appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   5–6     The register and tone are appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
           task.
           The response fully incorporates the conventions of the chosen text type.



Note: Examiners must balance all three elements in criterion C (choice of text type,
appropriateness of tone and register, and use of text type conventions) to arrive at the final mark.
                                          – 15 –   N21/2/ABCHI/SP1/CHI/TZ0/XX/M


Question specific guidance (Criterion B and C)

問題一

 學校最近要舉辦一個節日慶祝活動，你是這個活動的負責人。但是因為票賣得
 不好，你想介紹這次的活動內容以及這個節日的重要性，吸引更多的學生來參
 加這個活動。

               提案                        傳單                  演講稿

Criterion B:

• 內容涵蓋題目要求的兩個方面：介紹活動的內容及說明相關節日的重要性;
• 簡單地提到學校要舉辦一個節日慶祝活動;
• 清楚地介紹這次活動的內容，並具體說明活動的細節，可包括一個或多個項目;
• 能說明相關節日的重要性，可詳細地描述一個原因，或概述幾個原因。

Criterion C:

文本類型選擇:
                         文本類型          說明
Appropriate              傳單            此文本類型非常適合針對廣大群眾或特定受眾
                                       發佈公眾活動的資訊，這裏的受眾是學生們。
Generally appropriate    演講稿           此文本類型適合對某種議題表達個人看法及提
                                       出建議，有特定的受眾，且必須為一個群體。
                                       這裏的受眾是學生們。但通常於特定場合進行
                                       發表，題目中沒有指明相關的場合。
Generally                提案            此文本類型屬專業文本，針對鎖定讀者提出建
inappropriate                          議。這與題目要求並不太相符。

注意：如果回答清楚說明了寫作的情境、受眾和目的，並且這些內容符合題目的要求，
則可以將「通常適當」的文本類型視為「適當」，或將「通常不適當」的文本類型視
為「通常適當」。

語體和語氣：
• 非正式/半正式語體;
• 非正式：語氣活潑，有宣傳、呼籲的效果; 半正式：語氣可相對直接，具說明的
  作用。

請參閱附錄所列出的文本類型格式。
                                – 16 –   N21/2/ABCHI/SP1/CHI/TZ0/XX/M


問題二

現在素食越來越流行，你居住的城市開了一個新的素食餐館。你想與廣大市民分享
這次到餐館用餐的經驗及素食對健康的好處。

              傳單               博客                  提案

Criterion B:

• 內容涵蓋題目要求的兩個方面：分享到素食餐館用餐的經驗及說明素食對健康的
  好處;
• 簡單地提到居住的城市開了一個新的餐館;
• 清楚地描述這次到餐館用餐的經驗，並具體說明過程及感受;
• 能說明素食對健康的益處，可詳細地描述一個好處，或概述幾個好處。


Criterion C:

文本類型選擇:
                        文本類型   說明
Appropriate             博客     此文本類型適合表達個人看法及觀點，並具有
                               分享、互動的特點，適合與這裏的受眾交流。
Generally appropriate   傳單     此文本類型雖適合針對廣大群眾發佈資訊，但
                               多用作宣傳、分享的性質，不太適合分享個人
                               經驗。
Generally               提案     此文本類型屬專業文本，針對鎖定讀者提出建
inappropriate                  議。這與題目要求並不太相符。

注意：如果回答清楚說明了寫作的情境、受眾和目的，並且這些內容符合題目的要求，
則可以將「通常適當」的文本類型視為「適當」，或將「通常不適當」的文本類型視
為「通常適當」。

語體和語氣:
• 非正式/半正式語體;
• 非正式：語調可比較個性化，具有互動、交流的語氣; 半正式：從理性的角度討
  論，分析素食對健康的好處。

請參閱附錄所列出的文本類型格式。
                                – 17 –   N21/2/ABCHI/SP1/CHI/TZ0/XX/M


問題三

學校浪費資源的現象越來越嚴重，導致支出過多，經費不足。因此學校不再提供免
費的課外活動，你很擔心這個問題。跟同學談談這個問題，提出一些節省資源的方
法。

              評論               博客                 演講稿

Criterion B:

• 內容涵蓋題目要求的兩個方面：說明學校浪費資源的現象（或學校不提供免費的
  課外活動的問題）及提出一些節省資源的建議;
• 簡單地提到學校因浪費資源的問題導致經費不足而不再提供免費的課外活動;
• 清楚地描述學校資源浪費的現象（或學校不提供免費課外活動的問題），並能恰
  當地舉例說明，可包括一個或多個例子;
• 能明確地提出多於一個節省學校資源的方法。

Criterion C:

文本類型選擇:
                        文本類型   說明
Appropriate             演講稿    此文本類型適合對某種議題表達個人看法及提
                               出建議，有特定的受眾，且必須為一個群體。
                               這裏的受眾是學生們。
Generally appropriate   博客     此文本類型適合針對廣大群眾或特定受眾表達
                               對某議題的個人看法，一般沒有指定的受眾。
Generally               評論     此文本類型多用作針對具體的人物或事物表達
inappropriate                  個人的觀點及看法，一般具有較強的主觀色彩
                               及批判性，這與題目描述客觀現象的目的不太
                               相符。

注意：如果回答清楚說明了寫作的情境、受眾和目的，並且這些內容符合題目的要求，
則可以將「通常適當」的文本類型視為「適當」，或將「通常不適當」的文本類型視
為「通常適當」。

語體和語氣:
• 半正式/正式語體;
• 半正式：語氣親和、友善; 正式：語氣可相對認真，具提醒的作用。


請參閱附錄所列出的文本類型格式。
                                          – 18 –   N21/2/ABCHI/SP1/CHI/TZ0/XX/M


Appendix: Text type conventions (Criterion C)

以下為文本類型最常見和可識別的格式要求

提案
• 針對特定的受眾提出建議
• 清楚地介紹提案的目的及內容，可運用具綜合性的標題、分段論點說明等方式
• 格式清楚，可包括標題、副標題、分段、列點等，讓聽眾能抓到提案重點
• 內容具說服力，並提出令人信服的結論

傳單
• 引人注意的標題或宣傳短語
• 分段：使用副標題、列點說明等
• 文宣背景資料，如聯繫方式（電話號碼/電子郵件）、時間、地點等


演講稿
• 第一人稱（「我」作敘述），強調與受眾的互動
• 開始能吸引聽眾的注意力，最後簡潔地總結所述
• 開頭有稱謂，結尾表示感謝
• 運用演講相關的語言、技巧，如提問及反復等


博客
• 相關的題目
• 博主的姓名、日期及時間
• 第一人稱
• 具有與讀者互動的意識


評論
• 題目有吸引力及相關性，可有副標題
• 評論者的姓名、日期、簡介及清晰的總結
• 用開門見山的方法來吸引讀者的注意力
