N21/2/ABENGHP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

    November / Novembre / Noviembre de
                   2021

                  English / Anglais / Inglés B


                         Higher level
                       Niveau supérieur
                        Nivel Superior


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




9 pages/páginas
                                            –2–              N21/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2021

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2021

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2021

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                –3–              N21/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion A: Language

How successfully does the candidate command written language?
• To what extent is the vocabulary appropriate and varied?
• To what extent are the grammatical structures varied?
• To what extent does the accuracy of the language contribute to effective communication?

  Marks                                         Level descriptor
     0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
             Command of the language is limited.
             Vocabulary is sometimes appropriate to the task.
    1–3      Some basic grammatical structures are used, with some attempts to use more
             complex structures.
             Language contains errors in both basic and more complex structures. Errors interfere
             with communication.
             Command of the language is partially effective.
             Vocabulary is generally appropriate to the task and varied.
    4–6      A variety of basic and some more complex grammatical structures is used.
             Language is mostly accurate for basic structures, but errors occur in more complex
             structures. Errors at times interfere with communication.
             Command of the language is effective and mostly accurate.
             Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied, including the use of idiomatic
             expressions.
    7–9
             A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used effectively.
             Language is mostly accurate. Occasional errors in basic and in complex grammatical
             structures do not interfere with communication.
             Command of the language is mostly accurate and very effective.
             Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and nuanced and varied in a manner that
             enhances the message, including the purposeful use of idiomatic expressions.
  10–12      A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used selectively in
             order to enhance communication.
             Language is mostly accurate. Minor errors in more complex grammatical structures
             do not interfere with communication.

Language
Not all errors have the same importance, and examiners should bear this in mind. Some errors
affect the communication of meaning significantly, and others do not. Also, some errors indicate a
fundamental lack of command of the language, while others may simply indicate a moment of
forgetfulness.

SLIPS – mistakes at all levels of difficulty, but erratic and occasional – eg the candidate normally
forms past tenses well, but occasionally forgets “-ed”.

FLAWS – errors occur more regularly, particularly in certain structures – eg past tenses are formed
correctly quite often, but are not really reliable, and there may be basic confusions (eg past simple
versus present perfect).

GAPS – some structures are rarely correct, or simply don’t appear – eg the past tenses are
needed, but do not appear.
                                               –4–                N21/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B: Message
To what extent does the candidate fulfil the task?
  • How relevant are the ideas to the task?
  • To what extent are ideas developed?
  • To what extent do the clarity and organization of ideas contribute to the successful delivery of
    the message?

The “descriptor unpacked” explain the assessment criteria in greater detail. Where a candidate’s
response does not correspond exactly to a single mark band, the statements in bold should be
used as a guide for the ‘best fit’ approach.

 Marks           Level descriptor                             Descriptor unpacked
   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
         The task is partially fulfilled. The link between the response and task tends to be
                                             unclear; the reader has difficulty understanding the
         Few ideas are relevant to the       message.
         task.
                                             The response touches upon some aspects of the task but
         Ideas are stated, but with no       there is also much unrelated information.
  1–3    development.
                                             The response addresses the task in a simple manner, and
         Ideas are not clearly presented     supporting details and/or examples barely feature, if at all.
         and do not follow a logical         The ideas do not link well together; inadequate or
         structure, making the message       inappropriate use of cohesive devices confuse the
         difficult to determine.             message.
         The task is generally fulfilled.    The link between the response and the task is mostly
                                             detectable; the reader’s general understanding of the
         Some ideas are relevant to the      message is not impeded, despite some ambiguity.
         task.
                                             The response covers some aspects of the task, or
         Ideas are outlined, but are not     touches upon all aspects but superficially.
         fully developed.
  4–6                                        The response includes some supporting details and
         Ideas are generally clearly         examples.
         presented and the response is       The ideas are organized in a logical way; some cohesive
         generally structured in a logical   devices are used appropriately to aid the delivery of the
         manner, leading to a mostly         message, although there may be areas of confusion at
         successful delivery of the          times.
         message.
         The task is fulfilled.              The link between the response and the task is clear;
                                             the reader has a good understanding of the message
         Most ideas are relevant to the      conveyed.
         task.
                                             The response covers all aspects of the task, despite
         Ideas are developed well, with      losing focus at times.
  7–9    some detail and examples.
                                             The response uses supporting details and examples to
         Ideas are clearly presented and     clarify the message.
         the response is structured in a     The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive devices
         logical manner, supporting the      are used appropriately to deliver the message with little or
         delivery of the message.            no ambiguity.
         The task is fulfilled effectively. The link between the response and the task is precise
                                             and consistently evident; the reader has a clear
         Ideas are relevant to the task.     understanding of the message conveyed.
 10–12
         Ideas are fully developed,          The response covers all aspects of the task fully, and
         providing details and relevant      maintains focus throughout.
         examples.
                                                   –5–               N21/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


             Ideas are clearly presented and     The response uses well-chosen supporting details and
             the response is structured in a     examples to illustrate and explain ideas persuasively.
             logical and coherent manner         The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive devices
             that supports the delivery of the   are used appropriately to deliver the message with clarity
             message.                            and ease.


Note: When marking candidate responses, keep in mind that neither the factual accuracy of the
information presented, nor the validity of the candidates’ personal opinions, are being assessed.
Therefore, scripts that are factually inaccurate should not be marked down, provided the ideas
presented have coherence and are sufficiently developed.



Criterion C: Conceptual understanding

To what extent does the candidate demonstrate conceptual understanding?
   •       To what extent is the choice of text type appropriate to the task?
   •       To what extent are register and tone appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
           task?
   •       To what extent does the response incorporate the conventions of the chosen text type?

  Marks                                           Level descriptor
       0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
              Conceptual understanding is limited.
              The choice of text type is generally inappropriate to the context, purpose or audience.
   1–2        The register and tone are inappropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response incorporates limited recognizable conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is mostly demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is generally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   3–4        The register and tone, while occasionally appropriate to the context, purpose and
              audience of the task, fluctuate throughout the response.
              The response incorporates some conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is fully demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   5–6        The register and tone are appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response fully incorporates the conventions of the chosen text type.



Note: Examiners must balance all three elements in criterion C (choice of text type,
appropriateness of tone and register, and use of text type conventions) to arrive at the final mark.
                                                 –6–                N21/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Question specific guidance (Criterion B and C)

Task 1
 You recently listened to a podcast which suggested that supportive friendships make a major
 contribution to teenagers’ well-being. This made you reflect on your own friendships. Write a text
 to a good friend summarizing the ideas expressed in the podcast, comparing them to your own
 experience and stating the extent to which you agree with them.

 Email                             Set of guidelines                Social media posting

Criterion B:
• The three elements that require coverage are (i) summarizing the ideas expressed in the
  podcast (ii) comparing such ideas to the writer’s experience and (iii) stating the degree to which
  the writer agrees with the ideas in the podcast.
• Equal weight does not have to be given to all three elements, but all should be given some
  developed attention. If one is ignored, or given only cursory attention (e.g. dismissed in one
  sentence), no more than the 4-6 band should be awarded, since the task has only been
  “generally fulfilled” at best. If the three elements are discussed but thinly addressed, then no
  more than the 7-9 band should be awarded since the task has been fulfilled but not “effectively”.
• All three action verbs should be relevant, ie related closely to the core task in reasonably clear
  and organised ways: how (a) supportive “friendships” as presented in the podcast (b) contribute
  to the writer’s/teenagers’ well-being. “Friendships” (or one “friendship” specifically) should be
  interpreted broadly, including social media followers, family members regarded as friends, pets,
  and others, as long as that relationship is supportive and contributes to the writer’s well-being. If
  connections are loose, then this should be marked down under “relevance”. If the ideas are not
  well linked or explained, they should be marked down under “clarity and organization”.

Criterion C:
Choice of text type:
                            Text type        Rationale
Appropriate                 Email            The text type is suitable for sharing ideas and giving
                                             information with an individual (‘a good friend’).
Generally appropriate       Social media     The text type is suitable for sharing ideas and giving
                            posting          information, but it is not necessarily used to
                                             communicate with an individual. The choice may be
                                             considered “appropriate” only if the response makes
                                             clear that the message is written for one person.
Generally inappropriate     Set of           The text type is primarily used to give practical
                            guidelines       instructions to a large group of people. It is not usually
                                             used to share ideas with an individual.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the
“generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.

Register and tone:
• Informal, though some touches of semi-formality would be suitable when there is reflection.
• Enthusiastic, positive, reflective tone.

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                  –7–               N21/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Task 2
 The youth magazine that you work for is running a competition to find “The Teenage Journalist
 of the Year”. You have been asked to inform the readers of the magazine about how the
 competition will work. Write a text in which you present the task that the journalists must
 undertake, set out the rules they must follow and explain how their performance will be
 evaluated.

 Email                              News report                     Set of guidelines

Criterion B:
• The three elements that require coverage are (i) presenting the task that the journalists must
  undertake (ii) setting out the rules they must follow and (iii) explaining how their performance
  will be evaluated.
• Equal weight does not have to be given to all three elements, but all should be given some
  developed attention. If one is ignored, or given only cursory attention (e.g. dismissed in one
  sentence), no more than the 4-6 band should be awarded, since the task has only been
  “generally fulfilled” at best. If the three elements are discussed but thinly, then no more than the
  7-9 band should be awarded since the task has been fulfilled but not “effectively”.
• All three action verbs should be relevant, i.e. related closely to the core task in reasonably clear
  and organised ways: (a) informing the teenage magazine readers about (b) a competition (c) to
  become “The Teenage Journalist of the Year”. The information does not necessarily have to be
  credible but there should be some connection between being a Teenage Journalist and the
  competition task that the journalists are requested to undertake for the response to be
  “coherent” and “logical”. If connections are loose, then this should be marked down under
  “relevance”. If the ideas are not well linked or explained, this should be marked down under
  “clarity and organization”.

Criterion C:
Choice of text type:
                            Text type        Rationale
Appropriate                 Set of           The text type is suitable for giving practical
                            guidelines       instructions to a defined group of people (‘readers of
                                             the magazine’).
Generally appropriate       Email            The text type is suitable for giving practical
                                             instructions, but it is typically used to communicate
                                             with an individual or a small group of people. The
                                             choice may be considered “appropriate” if the
                                             response makes clear that the Email is sent to
                                             readers of the magazine.
Generally inappropriate     News report      The text type is primarily used to inform the public
                                             about a recent event. It is not usually used to give
                                             instructions to a defined group of people.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the
“generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.

Register and tone:
• Informal / semi-formal; some colloquialism may be used to express encouragement.
• Informative, engaging, convincing, enthusiastic tone.

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                 –8–                N21/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Task 3
 You have read that some teenagers do not read enough to reach their full potential. You want to
 share your ideas with your peers. Write a text in which you state your own opinion on the
 subject, outline one idea to improve the situation and explain how this idea could improve
 teenagers’ life chances.

 News report                       Social media posting             Speech

Criterion B:
• The three elements that require coverage are (i) stating your own opinion on the subject (ii)
  outlining one idea to improve the situation and (iii) explaining how this idea could improve
  teenagers’ life chances.
• Equal weight does not have to be given to all three elements, but all should be given some
  developed attention. If one is ignored, or given only cursory attention (e.g. dismissed in one
  sentence), no more than the 4-6 band should be awarded, since the task has only been
  “generally fulfilled” at best. If the three elements are discussed but thinly, then no more than the
  7-9 band should be awarded since the task has been fulfilled but not “effectively”.
• All three action verbs should be relevant, i.e. related closely to the core task in reasonably clear
  and organised ways: (a) sharing with peers (b) the problem of (c) teenagers not reading enough
  to reach their full potential. There should be a close connection between the problem presented
  and the solution(s) discussed. If connections are loose, then this should be marked down under
  “relevance”. If the ideas are not well linked or explained, this should be marked down under
  “clarity and organization”.

Criterion C:
Choice of text type:
                            Text type        Rationale
Appropriate                 Social media     The text type is suitable for sharing ideas with a large
                            posting          group of people who are connected to the writer
                                             (‘peers’).
Generally appropriate       Speech           The text type is suitable for sharing ideas, but it is not
                                             typically used in more informal contexts. The choice
                                             may be considered appropriate if the response makes
                                             clear that the speech is addressed to peers.
Generally inappropriate     News report      The text type is primarily used to inform the public
                                             about a recent event. It is not usually used to share
                                             ideas with those who are connected to the writer.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the
“generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.

Register and tone:
• Informal, with some hints of semi-formal or even formal register when giving opinion.
• Serious (when presenting the problem), reflective, engaging, encouraging tone.

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                              –9–              N21/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Appendix: Text type conventions (Criterion C)

The most common and recognisable conventions of the text types are given below:

Email
  • clear sense of address to a specific person
  • statement of Subject in the heading
  • appropriate opening and closing salutations


Set of guidelines
  • clear and focused heading/title
  • clearly set-out format e.g. bullets, sub-headings, numbering, etc.
  • short introduction and conclusion.


Social media posting
  • first person narration/statement
  • seek to engage the reader, e.g. direct address, lively and interesting style
  • may include typical online communication techniques, e.g. references to other postings,
     members and forums, hashtags, @references, and ‘likes’ etc.


News report
  • relevant title/headline
  • neutral/objective style, e.g. presents ideas with only minimal embellishment (if any)
  • clearly presented layout, e.g. sub-headings, short brief paragraphs/sections, etc.


Speech
  • catch the audience’s attention at the beginning, and leave a clear impression at the end
  • address the audience and keep contact with them throughout, e.g. use of “we” and “you” etc.
  • elements of speech rhetoric e.g. rhetorical questions, repetition etc.
