© International Baccalaureate Organization 2021

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2021

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2021

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
English B – Higher level – Paper 2 – Reading comprehension
Anglais B – Niveau supérieur – Épreuve 2 – Compréhension écrite
Inglés B – Nivel Superior – Prueba 2 – Comprensión de lectura
Monday 8 November 2021 (afternoon)
Lundi 8 novembre 2021 (après-midi)
Lunes 8 de noviembre de 2021 (tarde)

1h


Text booklet – Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this booklet until instructed to do so.
y This booklet accompanies paper 2 reading comprehension.

Livret de textes – Instructions destinées aux candidats
y N’ouvrez pas ce livret avant d’y être autorisé(e).
y Ce livret accompagne la partie de l’épreuve 2 portant sur la compréhension écrite.

Cuadernillo de textos – Instrucciones para los alumnos
y No abra este cuadernillo hasta que se lo autoricen.
y Este cuadernillo acompaña a la parte de comprensión de lectura de la prueba 2.




                                                                                              8821 – 2236
     4 pages/páginas                                      © International Baccalaureate Organization 2021
                                                      –2–                                               8821 – 2236


Text A

                                       4 Ways to Spot Greenwashing




   1     Finding the truth behind labels on your favorite beauty product or health food isn’t always
         easy. Now that the marketplace is seeing more environmentally-friendly products, companies
         are using just about every expression possible to convince consumers to buy their products.
         “Greenwashing” is a term that’s used to describe when companies use misleading marketing
         terms to persuade potential customers that their products are safer, or more natural than they
         really are. But, how can you spot it?

   2     [–3–]
         Avoid buying products that have a strong scent and list “fragrance” on the ingredient list.
         Fragrances are protected by trade secrets and can contain hundreds of chemicals. Any
         company which doesn’t fully disclose the contents of their fragrances should not label their
         products as “natural”, or “organic”. Please note that companies can use essential oils to scent
         their products, but they should label them accordingly.

   3     [–4–]
         Double-check the ingredient list of products to confirm how much of the product is actually
         organic. Since organic foods are healthier, many people assume that all organic products
         are healthier, but that’s not always the case. Beauty products may use certified organic raw
         ingredients (like coconut oil), but the rest of the ingredient list could be full of artificial chemicals.

   4     [–5–]
         How green can your company really be if the carbon footprint of each product is excessive?
         Case in point, one company I love makes plant-based protein. Their veggie burger looks
         delicious but is packed in excessive plastic, paper and cardboard. Being “green” isn’t just about
         what’s inside the box, it’s also about how the product is stored and shipped.

   5     [–6–]
         For beauty products, check to see how they rate on the handy Skin Deep database created by
         the Environmental Working Group. This scores common beauty products, helping consumers
         to effortlessly navigate a complicated marketplace and understand what is safe and what is not.
         You’ll notice several brands that are marketing themselves as “natural” have items that rank
         7–10 on the hazard scale. I aim only to buy those that score 3 or less.

   6     I hope these simple tips help you. Feel free to ask me questions if you’re particularly stumped,
         and always hold companies accountable for truth and transparency in their labeling.
                                                    –3–                                             8821 – 2236


Text B
                      Heart emoji: The language of love in the 21st century
                                           by University of South Australia

         It may not be a Shakespearean sonnet,1 but the language of love in
         the 21st century is just as affectionate and meaningful as it ever was,
         according to University of South Australia linguist, Dr. David Caldwell.

         “Romance is alive and well in the digital realm, and that opens new
     5   ways of communicating love and affection, different from the traditional
         handwritten love letter,” Dr. Caldwell says.

         “Modern love communication features images (selfies or images of a couple together),
         emoticons, emojis and memes, and many other combinations of words, sounds, images and
         animations that, in essence, combine to function as a love letter.

    10   “With digital communications, we also have unprecedented access to each other’s love letters.
         It is not uncommon for couples to publicly post and or announce their affections.”

         Dr. Caldwell says love language today is typically less formal, less poetic, less elaborate and
         less metaphorical.

         “There isn’t much room for comparing your beloved to a summer’s day, at least not as superbly
    15   as Shakespeare does in Sonnet 18, but the sentiment is no less loving or meaningful,” he says.

         “Today’s love language is more immediate, often a two-way online exchange, likely to be more
         concise in language form, and can often include ‘youth speak’—abbreviations, acronyms and
         humour.

         “The change perhaps reflects a shift in what we value in a prospective partner’s
    20   linguistic repertoire.

         “Are we less attracted to a wordsmith than we once were? Does poetic, elaborate, metaphorical
         language in the context of romance, now feel outdated, excessive, and possibly inauthentic?

         “Perhaps today, the value is in a prospective partner’s ability to use digital communicative
         tools—humour, emojis, memes and the like—to show a mastery of modern life.”

    25   Dr. Caldwell says the current generation are “doing love” quite differently from the
         romantic stereotype.

         “There are no doubt fewer love letters, but online dating is booming.

         “The most common written genre people produce for these sites is a kind of information report
         or auto-biography.

    30   “It is designed to ‘sell’ a person to potential partners. And this commodification of self has
         specific language patterns, which are often very efficient, and certainly not metaphorical or
         poetic, like the language patterns of love letters.

         “At the end of the day, love is love and people will express their affection in ways that elicit a
         positive response—and it may be that successful wooing today, relies a lot more on the right
    35   emojis than the structural rigours of a sonnet or a haiku2.”

1
    sonnet: a form of poem with 14 lines
2
    haiku: a type of short form poetry originally from Japan

                                                                 Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                     –4–                 8821 – 2236


Text C




         Removed for copyright reasons





Disclaimer:

Texts used in IB language assessments are taken from authentic, third-party sources. The views expressed within
them belong to their individual authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the IB.



References:

Text A   Dahl, L., 2017. 4 Ways to Spot Greenwashing. Lindsay Dahl, [blog] 7 March. Available at:
         https://lindsaydahl.com/4-ways-spot-greenwashing/ [Accessed 4 October 2020]. Source adapted.

Text B   University of South Australia, 2020. Heart emoji: The language of love in the 21st century, 8 February. Available at:
         www.unisa.edu.au/media-centre/Releases/2020/shall-i-compare-thee-to-an-emoji-of-a-summers-day---what-is-the-
         language-of-love-in-the-21st-centurynew-page/ [Accessed 4 October 2020]. Source adapted.
