N21/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

    November / Novembre / Noviembre de
                   2021

        English / Anglais / Inglés ab initio


                         Standard level
                         Niveau moyen
                          Nivel Medio


               Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




13 pages/páginas
                                            –2–              N21/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2021

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2021

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2021

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                –3–              N21/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Criterion A: Language

How successfully does the candidate command written language?
• To what extent is the vocabulary appropriate and varied?
• To what extent are the grammatical structures varied?
• To what extent does the accuracy of the language contribute to effective communication?

  Marks    Level descriptor
    0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
           Command of the language is limited
           Vocabulary is sometimes appropriate to the task.
    1-2    Basic grammatical structures are used.
           Language contains errors in basic structures. Abundant repetition and inaccuracies
           interfere with meaning.
           Command of the language is generally effective.
           Vocabulary is generally appropriate to the task, and varied.
           Some basic grammatical structures are used, with some attempts to use more complex
    3-4
           structures.
           Language is generally accurate for basic structures, but errors occur in more complex
           structures. Errors at times interfere with communication.
           Command of the language is effective and mostly accurate.
           Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied.
    5-6
           A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used effectively.
           Language is mostly accurate. Occasional errors do not interfere with communication.


Language
Not all errors have the same importance, and examiners should bear this in mind. Some errors
affect the communication of meaning significantly, and others do not. Also, some errors indicate a
fundamental lack of command of the language, while others may simply indicate a moment of
forgetfulness.

SLIPS – mistakes at all levels of difficulty, but erratic and occasional – eg the candidate normally
forms past tenses well, but occasionally forgets “-ed”.

FLAWS – errors occur more regularly, particularly in certain structures – eg past tenses are formed
correctly quite often, but are not really reliable, and there may be basic confusions (eg past simple
versus present perfect).

GAPS – some structures are rarely correct, or simply don’t appear – eg the past tenses are
needed, but do not appear.
                                                 –4–              N21/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B: Message

To what extent does the candidate fulfil the task?
   • How relevant are the ideas to the task?
   • To what extent are ideas developed?
   • To what extent do the clarity and organization of ideas contribute to the successful delivery
      of the message?

The “descriptor unpacked” explain the assessment criteria in greater detail. Where a candidate’s
response does not correspond exactly to a single mark band, the statements in bold should be
used as a guide for the ‘best fit’ approach.

 Marks   Level descriptor                    Descriptor unpacked
 0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
 1–2     The task is partially fulfilled. The link between the response and task is unclear at
                                          times; the reader has difficulty in understanding the
         Some ideas are relevant.
                                          message.
         Ideas are stated, but with no
                                          The response covers only some points in the task, and
         development.
                                          not all the points expressed are relevant.
         Ideas are not clearly presented
                                          Supporting details and/or examples barely feature, if at
         and do not follow a logical
                                          all.
         structure, making the message
         difficult to determine.          The ideas do not link well together; inadequate or
                                          inappropriate use of cohesive devices confuse the
                                          message.
 3–4     The task is generally fulfilled.    The link between the response and the task is mostly
                                             clear; the reader’s overall understanding is not
         Most ideas are relevant to the
                                             impeded, despite some ambiguity.
         task.
                                             The response covers most of the points in the task, and
         Some ideas are developed with
                                             most of the points expressed are relevant.
         some detail and examples.
                                             The response includes some supporting details and
         Ideas are generally clearly
                                             examples.
         presented and the response is
         generally structured in a logical   The ideas are organized in a logical way; basic cohesive
         manner, leading to a mostly         devices are used correctly to aid the delivery of the
         successful delivery of the          message, although they may be areas of slight confusion
         message.                            at times.
 5–6     The task is fulfilled               The link between the response and the task is clear;
         effectively.                        the reader has a good understanding of the message
                                             conveyed.
         Ideas are relevant to the task.
                                             The response covers all the points in the task, and the
         Ideas are developed well,
                                             points expressed are relevant.
         providing details and relevant
         examples.                           The response uses supporting details and examples to
                                             clarify the message.
         Ideas are clearly presented and
         the response is structured in a     The ideas are organized well; a range of basic cohesive
         logical manner, supporting the      devices are used correctly to deliver the message with
         delivery of the message.            little or no ambiguity.


Note: When marking candidate responses, keep in mind that neither the factual accuracy of the
information presented, nor the validity of the candidates’ personal opinions, are being assessed.
Therefore, scripts that are factually inaccurate should not be marked down, provided the ideas
presented have coherence and are sufficiently developed.
                                                    –5–              N21/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion C: Conceptual understanding

To what extent does the candidate demonstrate conceptual understanding?
   •       To what extent is the choice of text type appropriate to the task?
   •       To what extent are register and tone appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of
           the task?
   •       To what extent does the response incorporate the conventions of the chosen text type?

  Marks       Level descriptor
    0         The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
              Conceptual understanding is limited.
              The choice of text type is generally inappropriate to the context, purpose or audience.
       1
              The register and tone are inappropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the task.
              The response incorporates limited recognizable conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is mostly demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is generally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
       2      The register and tone, while occasionally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience
              of the task, fluctuate throughout the response.
              The response incorporates some conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is fully demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
       3
              The register and tone are appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the task.
              The response fully incorporates the conventions of the chosen text type.


Note: Examiners must balance all three elements in criterion C (choice of text type,
appropriateness of tone and register, and use of text type conventions) to arrive at the final mark.
                                                   –6–              N21/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Question specific guidance (Criterion B and C)


Task 1

    You want to go on a trip to the countryside with a small group of friends from school. Write a text
    to your friends to explain when you want to go, why you want to go and what you will do when
    you get there.

    Blog                              Email                            Note



Criterion B:

Points to be covered:
•     When you want to go on a trip to visit the countryside (context and information).
      Accept any reference to time: next month, in the holidays, on Wednesday…
•     Why you want to go (to the countryside).
•     What you will do when you get there.
Note: if the candidate confuses “a trip to the countryside” with “a trip to a country”, the maximum
mark for message is 4.


Criterion C:

Choice of text type:
                               Text type            Rationale
Appropriate                    Email                The text type is suitable for making arrangements
                                                    with a small group of people known to the writer.

Generally appropriate          Note                 The text type is suitable for communicating
                                                    various messages but it is usually written for a
                                                    single person. The choice may be considered
                                                    “appropriate” if the response makes clear that the
                                                    note addresses multiple people.
Generally inappropriate        Blog                 The text type is primarily used to communicate with
                                                    a large group of people not necessarily known to
                                                    the writer. It is not usually used to communicate
                                                    with a small group of friends.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”, and the
“generally inappropriate” text type can considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• Standard or informal register
• Enthusiastic and persuasive tone

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                  –7–               N21/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Task 2

    You are on holiday and you have made an important decision about your life. You want to write
    this down so you don’t forget. In your text, describe where you are staying, what decision you
    have made and why you have made it.

    Diary                             Email                            Note



Criterion B:

Points to be covered:
•     Describe where you are staying.
      “Describe” must include at least one detail (“a hotel + with a pretty beach”). A single reference
      to a town or to accommodation (Cancun, in a hotel) should not be considered as a description.
•     State the decision you have made.
•     Explain why you have made it.


Criterion C:

Choice of text type:
                              Text type            Rationale
Appropriate                   Diary                The text type is suitable for recording personal
                                                   decisions and reflections.

Generally appropriate         Note                 The text type is suitable for communicating
                                                   various short messages, but it is not necessarily
                                                   used to communicate with oneself. The choice
                                                   may be considered “appropriate” if it is clear the
                                                   writer is addressing themselves (e.g. ‘note to
                                                   self’).
Generally inappropriate       Email                The text type is typically used to communicate
                                                   with another individual or small groups. It is not
                                                   usually used for self reflection.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”, and the
“generally inappropriate” text type can considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• Standard or informal register
• Reflective tone

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                 –8–                N21/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Task 3

    You recently read an article saying there should be no school exams. Your teacher has asked
    you to share your thoughts with your classmates. In your text, say whether you agree with the
    article and give at least two reasons.

    Blog                               Diary                           Speech



Criterion B:

Points to be covered:
•     Share thoughts with classmates about school exams.
      Topic, context or audience (students) should be made clear in the introduction. Candidate may
      address the students or use the inclusive “we”.
•     Give your personal opinion about school exams.
•     Give 2 reasons to justify their opinion.


Criterion C:

Choice of text type:
                               Text type          Rationale
Appropriate                    Speech             The text type is suitable for sharing personal
                                                  views/ideas with classmates in a school context.

Generally appropriate          Blog               The text type is suitable for sharing personal
                                                  views/ideas, but it is not usually used to
                                                  communicate with a specified group of people.
                                                  The choice may be considered “appropriate” if the
                                                  response makes clear the blog is to be read by
                                                  classmates (e.g. a class/school blog).
Generally inappropriate        Diary              The text type is primarily used for self reflection. It
                                                  is not used to share ideas with others.


Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”, and the
“generally inappropriate” text type can considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• Standard register
• Informative and reflective tone

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                   –9–              N21/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Task 4

    An important event is planned in your town or city about climate change. You want everyone in
    your local area to go. Write a text to give information about the aim of the event, where it will
    take place and what activities are planned

    Leaflet                             Letter                           Social media posting



Criterion B:

Points to be covered:
•     What is the aim of the event.
      Do not accept “The event is about climate change” as an aim. This is the subject of the event.
•     Where the event will take place.
      This information should go beyond quoting the text, “in our town” / “in our city” / “in our area of
      the city”.
•     What activities are planned.
      At least 2 activities should be mentioned.


Criterion C:

Choice of text type:
                               Text type            Rationale
Appropriate                    Leaflet              The text type is suitable for promoting an event
                                                    with a mass audience within a specific geographic
                                                    range (‘everyone in your local area’).
Generally appropriate          Social media         The text type is suitable for promoting an event,
                               posting              but it is not necessarily written for a group of
                                                    people within a specific geographic range. The
                                                    choice may be considered “appropriate” if the
                                                    response makes clear the target audience are
                                                    those living in the local area.
Generally inappropriate        Letter               The text type is typically used to communicate
                                                    with those known to the writer. It is not usually
                                                    used to communicate with a mass audience.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”, and the
“generally inappropriate” text type can considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• Standard register
• Informative and encouraging tone

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                   – 10 –            N21/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Task 5

    You have decided to apply for a part-time job in an office. Write a text for the office manager to
    explain why you want the job and give at least two of your skills that are relevant for the job.

    Letter                            Presentation                       Social media posting



Criterion B:

Points to be covered
•     Introduction: name, reason for writing.
•     Why you want the job.
•     Two skills that are relevant for the job.
      Credit should be given for making a link between the skills and the requirements of the job.


Criterion C:

Choice of text type:
                               Text type             Rationale
Appropriate                    Letter                The text type is suitable for providing information
                                                     about oneself to another individual in a job-
                                                     hunting context.
Generally appropriate          Presentation          The text type is suitable for providing information,
                                                     but it is not necessarily used to speak about
                                                     oneself to another individual. The choice may be
                                                     considered “appropriate” if the response makes
                                                     clear that the presentation is given to the office
                                                     manager in a professional context.
Generally inappropriate        Social media          The text type is typically used to communicate
                               posting               with a mass audience. It is not usually used to
                                                     communicate with an individual.


Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”, and the
“generally inappropriate” text type can considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• Standard or more formal register
• Informative and factual tone

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                 – 11 –             N21/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Task 6

    Online computer games are very popular these days. You want to inform other students at your
    school about this topic. Write a text to explain why online computer games are popular, and give
    both the positive and negative effects of this activity on young people.

    Article                             Letter                         Presentation



Criterion B:

Points to be covered:
•     Inform other students at your school about this topic (why online games are popular).
•     The positive effects of online computer games.
•     The negative effects of online computer games.
      Several effects could be listed as examples or one positive and one negative effect could be
      developed with details and examples.


Criterion C:

Choice of text type:
                              Text type           Rationale
Appropriate                   Presentation        The text type is suitable for providing information
                                                  to a specific group of people (‘other students at
                                                  your school’) in a school context.
Generally appropriate         Article             The text type is suitable for providing information,
                                                  but it is not necessarily used to communicate with
                                                  a specific group of people. The choice may be
                                                  considered “appropriate” if the response makes
                                                  clear the target audience is ‘other students’ (e.g.
                                                  article for school news paper).
Generally inappropriate       Letter              The text type is typically used to communicate
                                                  with an individual. It is not usually used to inform
                                                  a large group of people.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”, and the
“generally inappropriate” text type can considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• Standard register (addressing peers so an informal register may also be appropriate)
• Informative tone

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                – 12 –           N21/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Appendix: Text type conventions (Criterion C)

The most common and recognisable conventions of the text types are given below:


Blog
• Title
• Time / Date
• Writer’s name / username
• Reference to audience (directly, or through use of “we” and “you” etc)


Email
• Form of address (“Dear…”, “To…”)
• Opening and closing greeting
• Sender’s name


Note
• Identify the recipient (unless the audience is the self)
• Opening or closing comment
• Writer’s name


Diary
• Date
• First person narration
• Opening and closing statement


Speech
• Opening address / greeting / statement
• Reference to audience (directly, or through use of “we” and “you” etc)
• Concluding remarks / closing statement


Leaflet
• Title
• Other format features, e.g. subtitles / bullet points / numbering
• Practical elements, e.g. name of distributor / contact info / links / diagrams


Letter
• Date
• Opening salutations / greeting
• Closing salutations
• Name of the sender


Social media posting
• General greeting / opening salutation
• First person narration/statement
• Closing comment
                                               – 13 –   N21/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Article
• Headline
• Writer’s name
• Date of publication
• Brief introduction and conclusion


Presentation
• Opening address
• Reference to the topic of the presentation
• Concluding remarks / closing statement
