M13/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                           May 2013



           BUSINESS AND MANAGEMENT



                        Higher Level



                               Paper 1




25 pages
                              –2–            M13/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.
                                       –3–             M13/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



The markbands on pages 3–6 should be used where indicated in the markscheme.


            Section A

  Q1 (c)      Q2 (c)      Q3 (c)                     Level descriptors

              Marks
               0–7

                                     • No knowledge or understanding of relevant
                0                      issues, concepts and theories.
                                     • No use of appropriate terminology.

                                     • Little knowledge and understanding of relevant
                                       issues, concepts and theories.
               1–2                   • Little use of appropriate terminology.
                                     • No reference is made to the information in the
                                       case study.

                                     • A description or partial analysis/examination
                                       with relevant knowledge and/or understanding of
                                       relevant issues, concepts and theories.
                                     • Some use of appropriate terminology.
               3–5                   • Some reference is made to the information in the
                                       case study, not just to the name of the
                                       organization.
                                     • At the lower end of the markband responses are
                                       mainly theoretical.

                                     • A balanced analysis/examination with accurate,
                                       specific,     well-detailed  knowledge     and
                                       understanding of relevant issues, concepts and
                                       theories.
               6–7
                                     • An analysis/examination that uses appropriate
                                       terminology throughout the response.
                                     • Explicit references are made to the information
                                       in the case study.
                        –4–             M13/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




Section B

 Q4 (d)
                                 Level descriptors
 Marks
  0–8

            • No knowledge or understanding of relevant issues,
   0          concepts and theories.
            • No use of appropriate terminology.

            • Little knowledge and understanding of relevant issues,
              concepts and theories.
  1–2       • Little use of appropriate terminology.
            • No evidence of judgments and/or conclusions.
            • No reference is made to the information in the case study.

            • A description with some knowledge and/or understanding
              of relevant issues, concepts and theories.
            • Some use of appropriate terminology.
  3–4       • No evidence of judgments and/or conclusions.
            • Some reference is made to the information in the case
              study, not just to the name of the organization.
            • The response is mainly theoretical.

            • A response with relevant knowledge and understanding of
              relevant issues, concepts and theories.
            • A response that uses relevant and appropriate terminology.
  5–6       • Evidence of judgments and/or conclusions that are little
              more than unsubstantiated statements that has balanced
              analysis and demonstrates understanding.
            • Explicit references to the information in the case study are
              made at places in the response.

            • A response with accurate, specific, well-detailed
              knowledge and understanding of relevant issues, concepts
              and theories.
            • A response that uses appropriate terminology competently
  7–8         throughout the response.
            • A response that includes judgments and/or conclusions
              that is well supported and underpinned by a balanced
              analysis.
            • Explicit references to the information in the case study are
              made throughout the response.
                        –5–             M13/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




Section C

 Q5 (c)                          Level descriptors

Marks 0–9

            • No knowledge or understanding of relevant issues,
    0         concepts and theories.
            • No use of appropriate terminology.

            • Little knowledge and understanding of relevant issues,
              concepts and theories.
   1–3      • Little use of appropriate terminology.
            • No reference is made to the information in the case study
              and/or the extension material within Section C.

            • A description or partial analysis/examination with relevant
              knowledge and/or understanding of relevant issues,
              concepts and theories.
            • Some use of appropriate terminology.
   4–6      • Some reference is made to the information in the case
              study and/or the extension material within Section C, not
              just to the name of the organization.
            • At the lower end of the markband responses are mainly
              theoretical.

            • A balanced analysis/examination with accurate, specific,
              well-detailed knowledge and understanding of relevant
              issues, concepts and theories.
   7–9      • An analysis/examination that uses appropriate terminology
              throughout the response.
            • Explicit references are made to the information in the case
              study and/or the extension material within Section C.
                                                   –6–               M13/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Section C

 Q5 (d)
                                                     Level descriptors
 Marks
 0–12

   0        • No knowledge or understanding of relevant issues, concepts and theories.
            • No use of appropriate terminology.

            • Little knowledge and understanding of relevant issues, concepts and theories.
            • Little use of appropriate terminology.
            • No evidence of synthesis of information from the case study, the extension material in Section C
  1–3         and, where applicable, from other responses within Section C. Information is merely lifted and
              copied into the response.
            • No evidence of judgments and/or conclusions.
            • No reference is made to the information in the case study and the extension material within
              Section C.

            • A description with some knowledge and/or understanding of relevant issues, concepts and
              theories.
            • Some use of appropriate terminology.
            • No evidence of synthesis of information from the case study, the extension material in Section C
  4–6         and, where applicable, from other responses within Section C. Information is merely lifted and
              copied into the response.
            • Evidence of judgments and/or conclusions that are no more than unsubstantiated statements.
            • Limited reference is made to the information in the case study and the extension material within
              Section C.
            • The response is mainly theoretical.


            • A response with relevant knowledge and understanding of relevant issues, concepts and theories.
            • A response that uses appropriate terminology.
            • At places in the response information from the case study, the extension material in Section C
              and, where applicable, from other responses within Section C is (synthesised and) integrated to
  7–9         provide a basis for analysis and evaluation.
            • A response that includes judgments and/or conclusions that have limited support and are
              underpinned by a balanced analysis.
            • Explicit references to the information in the case study and the extension material within Section
              C are made at places in the response.

            • A response with accurate, specific, well-detailed knowledge and understanding of relevant issues,
              concepts and theories.
            • A response that uses appropriate terminology competently throughout the response.
            • Information from the case study, the extension material in Section C and, where applicable, from
 10–12        other responses within Section C is proficiently (synthesised and) integrated to provide a basis for
              analysis and evaluation.
            • A response that includes judgments and/or conclusions that is well supported and underpinned by
              a thorough and balanced analysis.
            • Explicit references to the information in the case study and the extension material within Section
              C are made throughout the response.
                                                    –7–               M13/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



                                                SECTION A

1.   (a)   Define the following terms:

           (i)    regional trading bloc (line 30)                                                     [2 marks]

                  A regional trading bloc is “an organization of countries which have formed
                  economic alliances for mutual benefit” (Clark, P. et al., 2009, Business and
                  Management Course Companion, page 391, Glasgow, U.K., Oxford
                  University Press) eg CARICOM (in the Caribbean Community), EU
                  (European Union). Regional trading blocks typically have some type of
                  written agreement (between states, regions, or countries) whereby rules
                  regarding trade are specified (such as reducing barriers between
                  participating states, regions, or countries).


                  Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

                  Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and
                  understanding.

                  Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
                  understanding similar to the answer above.

                  For only a relevant example or application to the stimulus award [1 mark].

           (ii)   corporate social responsibility (lines 88–89).                                      [2 marks]

                  Corporate social responsibility is a voluntary approach by businesses that
                  recognises they have an obligation to assess and take responsibility for the
                  organizations effects on the environment and on social welfare. A socially
                  responsible business incorporates the interests of various stakeholders in a
                  way which is beneficial and correct (“right”) according to societal values,
                  eg a socially responsible ball bearing business will manufacture its products
                  in a way that limits pollution in the vicinity of its factories (which is not the
                  case of RDB). Socially responsible businesses often go beyond what is
                  required by law.


                  Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

                  Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and
                  understanding.

                  Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
                  understanding similar to the answer above.

                  For only a relevant example or application to the stimulus award [1 mark].
                                             –8–              M13/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



(b)   Explain two reasons why innovation is important for RDB.                               [4 marks]

      Innovation is important for RDB for several reasons:
      • As mentioned at the start of the case study, the market size of the ball bearing
         industry keeps increasing. It is a very dynamic industry (as exemplified by the
         fact that there are ball bearings in fighter jets and space shuttles); with the
         development of new materials (lighter and stronger) and of new technologies
         (especially “green” technologies), there is a need to keep innovating.
      • To remain competitive: if RDB fails to innovate, it will lose its market share
         and maybe its reputation. RDB has successfully overcome several competitive
         challenges (eg against UAB and FIB in the 1930s, or against Japanese
         companies after the second world war) but sustaining a competitive advantage
         is key to any business strategy (this is in fact how Michael Porter defines
         strategy).
      • To attract potential customers: if RDB is to widen its pools of customers (not
         just from the manufacturing community but also from the design community),
         it may need to offer slightly different types of ball bearings; R&D are essential
         in terms of innovation, which is why Anna wants to invest in that part of
         RDB’s activities.
      • Innovation is required to save energy, which was RDB’s main aim and was a
         key element of the company’s credentials as a “green” business.

      Accept any other relevant reason and explanation.


      Mark as 2 + 2.

      Award [1 mark] for each relevant and correct reason identified and [1 mark] for
      an explanation of that reason up to a maximum of [2 marks].

(c)   Anna Holstein believes that “the marketing department should start carrying
      out market research” (lines 114–115). Analyse the roles that primary and
      secondary research could play for RDB.                                      [7 marks]

      Market research could play several roles:
      • Primary market research could help RDB’s marketing department find out
        more precisely from their existing customers what they need and want (the case
        study implicitly suggests that RDB has followed a product-orientation
        marketing strategy as opposed to a market orientation one). One of the tasks of
        the “engineers-turned-salesmen” could be to carry out primary research
        (eg through interviews) to feedback to the R&D department about ways in
        which RDB can produce competitive ball bearings.
      • Secondary market research could help RDB’s marketing department understand
        the current demand for ball bearings and trends in the market; it would offer a
        background picture, including an analysis of existing products offered by
        RDB’s competitors. This could provide useful indications to the R&D
        department about the directions in which they should develop new products
        (for example, greener ball bearings, or ball bearings adapted to the needs of the
        design community).

      Accept any other relevant analysis.
                                                  –9–              M13/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



           Candidates are not expected to refer to all the above points for full marks, but
           their analysis must be balanced in order to reach the top markband. This balance
           could be about primary vs secondary research, or it could be articulated in terms
           of supply vs demand, or product orientation vs market orientation.

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.


2.   (a)   Using a SWOT analysis framework, identify two weaknesses and two threats
           to RDB.                                                                  [4 marks]

           RDB weaknesses could include the following:
           • senior management does not always pay attention to some warning signals
             (eg the need for maintenance and technological upgrades)
           • there are high pollution levels near RDB factories (which has attracted some
             environmental campaigners), so they may need to review their operations,
             especially if they want to enhance their corporate social responsibility and their
             “green” credentials
           • the conflict between father and daughter, the two top figures in the
             family-owned business, could lead to problems for the company overall
           • marketing activities are limited, which is a weakness in any competitive
             business environment
           • no cultural understanding of customers.

           RDB threats could include the following:
           • Demand for ball bearings is slowing down in Europe, whereas growing
             substantially in countries such as Brazil, China and India. At present, RDB is
             not present in these countries.
           • Demographic changes in Europe may eventually undermine Valdemar’s vision
             of a “happy European family”.
           • Global economic interconnectedness: any economic crisis, such as the global
             banking crisis of 2008 or economic recession in almost any part of the world
             may affect RDB.
           • Competition past (eg Japanese companies in the 1970s) and present.

           Accept any other relevant weakness/threat.


           N.B. The threats must be explicitly about external factors (ie factors that could be
           identified through a PEST/STEEPLE analysis); the weaknesses must be internal
           (ie about finance, marketing, leadership etc).

           Mark as 2 + 2.

           Award [1 mark] for each relevant and correct weakness identified, up to a
           maximum of [2 marks].

           Award [1 mark] for each relevant and correct threat identified, up to a maximum
           of [2 marks].
                                             – 10 –              M13/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



(b)   Using data from the additional information on page 3, calculate RDB’s:

      (i)    return on capital employed (ROCE) in 1965 and 1975.                      [2 marks]

                      Net profit before interest and tax
             ROCE =                                      × 100
                           Total capital employed

                                    1965                               1975

              ROCE            22                                 34
                                 × 100 = 18.18%                      × 100 = 16.75%
                             121                                 203



             N.B. Do not penalize the absence of % sign. Candidates can give their
             responses to 1 or 2 decimal places.

             Award [1 mark] for each correct answer (no working required), up to a
             maximum of [2 marks].

             Candidates should not be awarded any marks merely for writing down a
             formula (as the formula is provided).

      (ii)   stock turnover in 1965 and 1975.                                         [2 marks]

             Stock turnover is calculated in one of two ways:

                         Cost of goods sold
             Method 1:
                            Average stock
                         = number of times stock turned over in a year

             or

                            Average stock
             Method 2:                        × 365
                         Cost of goods sold
                         = stock turnover in days

             COGS = Sales revenue – gross profit

             For 1965 COGS = 113 − 35 = 78
             For 1975 COGS = 194 − 56 = 138
                                    – 11 –           M13/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



    In the absence of an average stock figure being provided, or in the absence
    of two consecutive years’ figures, candidates should use the stock figure for
    the year requested. Thus, stock turnover for RDB would be:

                               1965                              1975
Method 1:          78                               138
Stock turnover        =                                 =
                   29                                54
(times per year)
                   2.69 times per year              2.56 times per year
Method 2:          29                                54
Stock turnover        × 365 = 136 days                  × 365 = 143 days
                   78                               138
(in days)


    N.B. Do not penalize the absence of units: times per year or days.
    Candidates can give their responses to 1 or 2 decimal places when using
    Method 1.

    Award [1 mark] for each correct answer (no working required), up to a
    maximum of [2 marks]. If the candidate incorrectly calculates cost of goods
    sold but otherwise performs the calculations correctly, award [1 mark]
    because of own figure rule (OFR).

    Candidates should not be awarded any marks merely for writing down a
    formula (as the formulae are provided).
                                             – 12 –           M13/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



(c)   Interpret your results from part (b).                                                   [7 marks]

      Apply Own Figure Rule (OFR) from calculations made in part (b).

      The comparison of the two sets of ratios suggests a company that has experienced
      a slight deterioration in efficiency between 1965 and 1975. The decrease in
      ROCE from 18.18 % to 16.75 % is not a dramatic decline, but it is not a positive
      indicator. Were ROCE to continue to decline by this amount for another two or
      three decades (as the case study implies), these minor negative concerns would
      grow into major concerns about efficiency. The increase in stock turnover is
      similar. Though the increase in stock turnover from 136 to 143 days is not a huge
      increase, it is not a positive sign. This ratio means that, on average, raw materials
      purchased by RDB and converted into stock is on the company’s books for
      136–143 days, between four and five months. Without industry comparisons, it is
      not possible to fully understand the implications of this length of time.

      Nevertheless, this stock situation seems like a long time to hold stock and that
      implies the company relies on a just-in-case stock control method. As with the
      ROCE, the increase is relatively minor but nevertheless a worrisome sign.
      In combination, the two sets of ratios suggest a slippage of the company in terms
      of efficiency, coming at a time when RDB is facing increased competition from
      foreign competitors (Japanese). One of the major issues facing RDB is just as
      these ratios indicate: a slow deterioration of its situation, one that Valdemar did
      not fully appreciate and which, by the twenty-first century, had become a much
      greater problem. Still a profitable company, a smouldering problem was
      occurring at RDB over many decades, and the changes suggested by the changes
      in these ratios are an indication of it.


      If a candidate uses only one of the sets of ratios (for example only ROCE), award
      a maximum of [4 marks]. For [6–7 marks], answers must be balanced, which is
      to say some recognition that the company is still healthy and profitable even
      though there are some worrying signs. Also the balance required for higher marks
      means that both efficiency ratios need to be interpreted.

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                  – 13 –           M13/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



3.   (a)   Define the following terms:

           (i)    retrenchment (line 133)                                                        [2 marks]

                  Retrenchment occurs when a business cuts its workforce (by laying-
                  off/redundancy), closing factories / branches and is sometimes called
                  downsizing.


                  Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

                  N.B. Strictly speaking, retrenchment is not necessarily only about HR (as it
                  could imply streamlining production or downsizing a product portfolio,
                  however candidates are only expected to refer to the HR dimension).

                  Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and
                  understanding.

                  Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
                  understanding similar to the answer above.

                  For only a relevant example or application to the stimulus award [1 mark].

           (ii)   commission (line 153).                                                         [2 marks]

                  A commission is a form of payment to an agent (eg salesperson) often
                  calculated on a percentage basis of sales made.


                  Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

                  Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and
                  understanding.

                  Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
                  understanding similar to the answer above.

                  For only a relevant example or application to the stimulus award [1 mark].
                                           – 14 –           M13/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



(b)   With reference to RDB, distinguish between flow production and job
      production (lines 63–66).                                          [4 marks]

      Flow production (also called mass production and line production) means
      producing a standardized product using a continuous flow of production, typically
      through an assembly line. As mentioned in the case study, RDB manufactures its
      standard-sized ball bearings using a flow production process – this corresponds to
      the archetypal imagery of the conveyor belt on the shop floor of Fordist
      megafactories. It is about high volumes ie quantity.

      Job production, on the other hand, is not about quantity and standardization,
      but about designing and producing a special product that precisely fits the
      customer’s requirements; a typical example would be a wedding cake of a
      particular size and shape, or in the case of RDB: “one-off special orders, such as
      large ball bearing systems for power stations or mines”. The mark-up and the
      prices are then high, but it is much more expensive and complex to produce, as
      opposed to flow production.


      [1–2 marks]
      Award [1 mark] for an answer that shows some knowledge of flow production
      and job production. Award [2 marks] for an answer that refers to the difference
      between flow production and job production at a generic, theoretical level.

      [3–4 marks]
      Award [3 marks] for an answer that combines “theory” (ie definitions) and
      “practice” (ie reference to the case study). Award [4 marks] for an answer that
      fully and clearly distinguishes between flow production and job production with
      reference to RDB.
                                            – 15 –           M13/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



(c)   Analyse the advantages and disadvantages for RDB of forming “strategic
      alliances with ball bearing companies in Brazil, China and India” (line 155). [7 marks]

      A strategic alliance is a collaborative agreement between two or more firms to
      pursue a set of agreed goals, but where the firms remain completely independent
      organizations. The alliance ends when the goals are achieved.

      Advantages:
      Demand for ball bearings is growing in Brazil, China and India. The proposed
      strategic alliances with companies based in these countries will provide cheaper
      options for RDB to sell directly to them by providing access to the markets and
      local knowledge of their specific cultures and characteristics. This would satisfy
      Anna’s objective to be closer to customers. RDB would be able to share fixed
      costs, technical knowledge and resources with its strategic partners and would
      gain access to new distribution channels.

      For Valdemar, it means that RDB would not need to close or downsize its
      European megafactories.

      Disadvantages:
      RDB may lose control over important issues as product quality, operating costs
      and employees. The RDB brand may be damaged by partners who do not meet
      their high operational standards. In addition finding suitable partners may be time
      consuming and therefore costly, especially because potential partners are in three
      different countries in which RDB have not operated. There may be language and
      cultural barriers between RDB and its strategic partners and the possibility of
      conflicting objectives, strategies, corporate values, and ethical standards.

      Strategic alliances must be mutually beneficial, typically reducing overall costs
      (for the companies involved) and better satisfying customers. The strategic
      partners could probably benefit from RDB’s experience and long tradition of
      manufacturing high quality ball bearings, however RDB would have to convince
      them. With strategic alliances, the businesses remain independent and still
      compete on some markets, which might not be sustainable for RDB in the long
      term.

      Accept any other relevant analysis.


      Candidates are not expected to cover all the above-mentioned points.

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                 – 16 –            M13/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



                                              SECTION B

4.   (a)   With reference to RDB, outline one advantage and one disadvantage
           of offshoring.                                                    [4 marks]

           For RDB, advantages of offshoring include the following:
           • the local workforce (in Brazil, China and India) would be paid a lot less than
             their European counterparts, so for RDB this would represent substantial
             savings in terms of salaries (labour costs) – this is one of the most common
             reasons why many companies opt for offshoring as a method of cost reduction
           • for RDB, business relationships with customers (ie businesses based in Brazil,
             China and India) may be easier (especially as the current workforce (in the
             European factories) does not seem to culturally understand their customers in
             those new markets.

           For RDB, disadvantages of offshoring include the following:
           • this would require building/opening new factories, as well as hiring local
              workers and local managers; all this would be very complex for RDB:
              “(Anna) calculated that the transition costs for such a large-scale restructuring
              would be enormous” (which is why RDB would need not only to sell two of
              the three megafactories, but would also need to go public in order to raise
              enough capital)
           • RDB would have to make many European employees redundant;
              as “Northern European countries have generous redundancy payments (…)
              these costs would be significant in the short term” for RDB, not to mention the
              tensions in the local communities (whereas up to now RDB has been held in
              high esteem).

           Accept any other relevant advantage/disadvantage outlined.


           Mark as 2+2.

           Award [1 mark] for each relevant and correct advantage/disadvantage identified
           and an additional [1 mark] for the development of each advantage/disadvantage
           up to a maximum of [2 marks].
                                            – 17 –           M13/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



(b)   Explain why shortening the working capital cycle would be “an important
      benefit for RDB” (line 83).                                             [4 marks]

      Working capital is that portion of (long-term) capital invested in current assets.
      The working capital cycle can be defined as “money tied up in the business and
      used to finance its day-to-day needs, such as buying raw materials” (Clark, P.
      et al., 2009, Business and Management Course Companion, page 149, Glasgow,
      U.K., Oxford University Press). In the case of RDB, the working capital cycle
      includes money spent to buy raw materials (eg steel) which then becomes (unsold)
      stock (eg ball bearings); when the stock is sold, consumers (debtors) pay for it
      (sometimes after a slight delay expressed in debtors days) and cash is returned
      into the business (to pay for new raw materials from suppliers as well as workers’
      salaries etc). Having factories in Brazil, China and India would mean that the
      customers based there would receive the goods more quickly (without delays due
      to distribution and delivery). This could ensure prompter payment which, in turn,
      could result in a faster purchase of new raw materials to produce more ball
      bearings (a sort of virtuous circle). Utilizing working capital more effectively is
      actually an internal source of finance that also enables the company (RDB in this
      case) to manage its stock better. Just as the Japanese companies adopting
      just-in-time (JIT) production in the 1970s (as mentioned in the case study),
      RDB could also consider that approach in order to further shorten the
      working capital cycle in its new, flexible factories.

      A full definition of working capital is not necessary to explain the importance of
      the working capital cycle, though some candidates may offer a definition. What
      is important is that candidates convey an understanding that, with factories around
      the world, both inventory turnover and debtor turnover may contract. When that
      occurs, RDB will be able to divert some of its long-term capital away from short-
      term needs and, possibly, use it more productively (use funds generated by the
      contraction of working capital as an internal source of finance).

      Accept any other relevant explanation. Candidates are not expected to incorporate
      all of the above points in their response.


      Award [1 mark] for a basic answer showing some limited knowledge of the
      working capital cycle (for example, a definition of “working capital”, but no
      reference to the cycle that includes raw materials, stock and payment).

      Award [2 marks] for an answer which shows some knowledge and understanding
      of the working capital cycle (yet without application to RDB).

      Award [3 marks] for an answer which correctly applies the working capital cycle
      to RDB.

      Award [4 marks] for an answer which correctly applies the working capital cycle
      to RDB and explains why shortening it would be an important benefit for the
      company.
                                            – 18 –           M13/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



(c)   Valdemar Holstein has adopted management techniques “such as total
      quality management (TQM), benchmarking and Kaizen” (lines 36–37).
      With reference to RDB, explain what is meant by TQM and Kaizen.    [4 marks]

      TQM is an approach to quality enhancement that should involve the whole
      organization in improving not only products (goods and services) but also
      processes and productivity. TQM is often presented as a philosophy that should
      be embraced by all staff in order to be totally quality-driven. In the case of RDB,
      TQM means that all departments need to be involved and not just those
      manufacturing ball bearings.

      Kaizen is the Japanese word for “continuous improvement”; its aim is to ensure
      ongoing incremental improvement as opposed to just occasional radical changes.
      As with TQM, a key aspect is the involvement of all staff in the process. At RDB,
      a possible technique would be the use of suggestion boxes giving everyone the
      opportunity to make recommendations as to how to improve RDB’s operations.


      Mark as 2 + 2.

      Award [1 mark] for a basic definition/explanation of each technique and [1 mark]
      for an explanation of the technique in the context of RDB up to a maximum of
      [2 marks].
                                              – 19 –         M13/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



(d)   Using Lewin’s force field analysis model, discuss the differences between
      Anna Holstein’s driving forces for change presented in her strategic plan
      “RDB 2020” and Valdemar Holstein’s resistance to these changes.           [8 marks]

      Lewin’s framework is a useful tool to help contrast Anna’s strategic plan (with her
      driving forces for change) and Valdemar’s resistance (as the restraining forces).

      The driving forces for change (presented by Anna) include the following:
      • the market demand for ball bearings is shifting from Europe to countries such
        as Brazil, China and India; the sites of production (the factories) should be
        located closer to the sites of consumption (where customers are)
      • the current workforce (in the European factories) does not culturally
        understand their customers in those new markets; they could lose them to
        competitors that are local or are more culturally-aware
      • RDB must adopt new values especially about “green” technology: it should
        take first-mover advantage in that field
      • RDB must embrace globalization instead of remaining stuck in its traditional,
        Eurocentric, post-fordist operational model.

      The restraining forces (presented by Valdemar) include the following:
      • “RDB 2020” is extremely expensive; it would require colossal changes that
        would eventually dilute the Holstein family’s ownership of RDB
      • RDB has had almost a century of strong links with the local communities
        where it has been based, contributing to the development of “company towns”,
        working in partnerships with national governments and other stakeholders who
        have held it in high respect; that respect would be annihilated
      • RDB has a sort of “social contract”, “a moral obligation to provide jobs in
        Denmark” and a corporate social responsibility: it would not be ethical to make
        some of the changes suggested by Anna, especially those about closing two of
        the three megafactories in Europe.

      The differences between Anna and Valdemar are fundamental and difficult to
      reconcile. Anna’s proposed changes will require that the business culture changes
      completely. Anna’s proposals which are driven by changes in the external market
      are highly risky in the short-term in terms of costs, and will require a total
      overhaul of the corporate identity of RDB. Valdemar wishes to retain the core
      business and the focus on Denmark. He has proposed some compromises, but
      Anna is clear that these are only short-term fixes and will only be an unnecessary
      delay. Anna is prepared to push her changes through despite Valdemar’s
      objections, which may not be the most appropriate way of implementing her
      proposed vision and the required changes.

      Accept any other relevant discussion.

      Candidates are not expected to draw a diagram, but they are expected to make use
      of the model (for example by using the terminology of “driving forces” and
      “restraining forces” or at least referring to arguments “for” and “against” Anna’s
      strategic plan).


      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 4.
                                                  – 20 –            M13/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



                                              SECTION C

5.   (a)   Referring to Item 1, identify for RDB one opportunity and one threat as a
           result of demographic changes forecasted in the twenty-first century.     [2 marks]

           Opportunities stemming from the demographic changes forecasted in the
           twenty-first century include:
           • Northern Europe will face many retirements in the next decade. Thus, if RDB
             can plan its contraction in northern Europe carefully, it may be able largely to
             reduce its workforce through retirements rather than redundancies.
           • As the number of young people (age 0–14) as well as those age 15–64
             contracts, RDB will face less pressure from governments to provide
             employment.

           Threats stemming from the demographic changes forecasted in the twenty-first
           century include:
           • As the pool of available workers contracts, the competition for highly trained
              and highly effective workers and young professionals will intensify.
              Recruitment efforts will have to be improved.
           • RDB, and all northern European countries, could face higher taxes as society
              has to support an ageing population.

           Accept any other relevant opportunity and threat, and other reasonable, relevant
           assertions.


           Award [1 mark] for a relevant and correct opportunity identified and [1 mark] for
           a relevant and correct threat identified up to a maximum of [2 marks].

     (b)   Explain Valdemar’s statement that “choosing between Jens and Per is the
           same as choosing between a manager and a leader: it is a key strategic
           decision for RDB”.                                                      [7 marks]

           Many business writers have noted a distinction between management and
           leadership. One source (http://www.futurevisions.org/ldr_mgr.htm) defines the
           difference as follows:

           Managers supervise complexity, plan and budget, determine staffing levels and
           select personnel, control the organization and solve problems.

           Leaders cope with and promote change, determine an organization’s direction,
           organize and align people, motivate and inspire people.

           Another source (Hall, Jones et al., Business Studies, pages 519–525 (2001))
           makes similar distinctions. To Hall, Jones et al., managers plan, organize,
           command, coordinate, control, and set objectives. Leaders, according to Hall and
           Jones et al., are best characterized by characteristics, such as have a positive self-
           image, can get to the essence of a problem, are intelligent and well read, are
           creative and innovative, and have good skills with people.
                                      – 21 –            M13/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



These distinctions can be over-emphasized, as to some degree (many authors
argue) the tasks of a manager and the characteristics of a leader overlap: a good
leader has some capacity to manage and a good manager has some capacity
to lead.




                    Manager                           Leader




Candidates should demonstrate an understanding of these distinctions and apply
them to the stimulus material. In their application, the candidate should probably
point out that as RDB goes through with the many changes of “RDB 2020”, it will
require someone who is detail oriented – a manager – as the transition to
“RDB 2020” has the potential for many operational problems until the “new” RDB
is up and running. At the same time, the company will also need a genuine leader
to help refashion the corporate identity and culture. Formerly, RDB was very
grounded in its identity as a northern European company with
German/Scandinavian traditions. The new RDB will have plants operating all
over the world with a far more diverse workforce. It will take a leader to bring all
the people from all over the world together.


N.B. if the candidate does not use the concept of strategic decision making in their
response they cannot access the top markband.

[1–2 marks]
A limited response, but with some understanding of what is a manager and what is
a leader.

[3–5 marks]
The explanation is relevant with some understanding of the differences between a
leader and a manager. At the top of the markband there is more detail and
development of the explanation.

[6–7 marks]
A clear, relevant and developed explanation of why choosing between a manager
and a leader is a key strategic decision for RDB. The concepts are well explained
and clearly linked to RDB.
                                             – 22 –           M13/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



(c)   Using information in Item 2, calculate the expected values for each option
      using only the five-year net profit after interest and tax totals. Interpret the
      results and information from the decision tree (Item 2) and the critical path
      analysis (Item 3) to help the board decide on whether to approve
      “RDB 2020”.                                                                      [9 marks]

       Option A                   Success       0.4 × 269      107.6
       “RDB 2020”
                                  Satisfactory                  46.8
                                  Failure      0.4 × 135        54.0
       TOTAL                                                  €208.4 million

       Option B                   Success       0.1× 205         20.5
       No major change
                                  Satisfactory 0.8 × 200       160.0
                                  Failure      0.1× 195         19.5
       TOTAL                                                  €200 million

      N.B. for the calculations above, do not penalize candidates if they use the net
      profit after interest and tax for “Year 5” instead of the “total” for the 5 years.

      Based upon Items 2 and 3, the decision facing the board can be summed as
      follows: from a strictly profit standpoint, “RDB 2020” offers greater potential
      profits and great potential risks. If RDB proceeds with “RDB 2020” and it is fully
      successful, over five years, the business stands to make €64 million more than if it
      makes no change and has the highly predictable outcome of a satisfactory
      performance.

      In addition, a reasonable inference is that, after five years, RDB would be
      significantly more profitable than RDB operating without any major change.
      On the other hand, were “RDB 2020” not to be successful (that is, “failure”),
      RDB would see a significant fall in profits. Moreover, there is far greater
      sensitivity regarding potential outcomes with “RDB 2020”. If RDB makes no
      major change, there is an 80 % likelihood it will make €200 million – a very safe
      and satisfactory profit.

      What is the key to success? It requires two sets of events to fall into place.
      New (smaller) factories have to be setup as two old megafactories are closed and
      sold, and the other downsized. Both have to proceed without problems.
      The business needs to sell the megafactories and use the proceeds from the sale to
      finance the construction of the new factories. As a practical matter, RDB will
      probably borrow money while the megafactories are put up for sale. However,
      if buyers are not found, RDB will have significant interest costs on the loans to
      construct the new smaller factories. Over time, that marginal interest will eat into
      profits. In addition, whenever older industrial sites are sold, questions arise about
      the degree to which there has been environmental degradation. If one of the
      megafactories has left more environmental contamination than RDB anticipates,
      the cost (and time) of the clean up could eat into future profits.
                                             – 23 –            M13/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



      Overall, the construction of the new factories should not be too much of a
      problem. The company projects that it will take about six months for each
      factory. RDB will proceed one, two, or three factories at a time and the
      construction of four factories should correspond to the sale/closure of one
      megafactory.

      The company anticipates that it will take approximately 15 months for the
      sale/closure of each megafactory; thus, on the construction of the new factories,
      RDB will have some float to work with. Further, the hosting countries will
      probably be eager for the new factories, which should facilitate the process.
      However, with any construction, there can be unanticipated problems (permits,
      materials, labour, etc), any of which could slow down construction.

      Accept any other relevant interpretation.


      In responding to the prompt, candidates should offer interpretations of both
      Item 2 and Item 3.

      When interpreting Item 3, candidates should make use of the CPA by referring to
      RDB’s ability to raise finance by selling off the megafactories in Sweden and
      northern Germany. Reference to CPA need not be more than observing that the
      megafactory sales are critical and if there is a risk of delay it could have an impact
      on the decision.

      If the response is a one-sided relevant approach with no analysis, award a
      maximum of [5 marks].

      Balanced analysis for more than [7 marks] (making good use of decision tree and
      critical path analysis). Partial analysis (making some use of decision tree and
      critical path analysis) award a maximum of [6 marks].

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 5.

(d)   Using information contained in the case study and Items 1 to 5, discuss how
      RDB could plan strategically for any future crises.                         [12 marks]

      It should be recognized that, given time constraints, answers are likely to include a
      much narrower range of issues and concepts than identified below. There is no
      “correct” answer.

      Examiners must be prepared to award full marks to answers which synthesize and
      evaluate even if they do not examine all the stimulus materials.

      It is to be expected that the answer will include relevant information from the case
      study, extension material and Items 1–5 and employ a range of business concepts,
      tools and terminology.
                                       – 24 –           M13/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



The scholarly literature on crisis management is extensive and candidates could
approach this question in several different ways. Be open to a range of answers.
However, there are several key issues that candidates should address:

Even if RDB were not to adopt “RDB 2020”, the organization will face changes:
from globalization, from technological innovation, from changing
demographics (Item 1).           According to Erika Hayes James at the
University of Virginia’s Darden Graduate School of Business, businesses face
two kinds of crises: those that are sudden and those that are “smoldering”
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crisis_management#Crisis_Leadership). The latter
are more likely to occur when a business is in a stable situation, such as RDB
currently is in its European megafactories. Businesses need to plan for problems
that can grow out of complacency.

If RDB adopts “RDB 2020”, it will, in the short term face, many new kinds of
“sudden risks”. Any of a number of breakdowns could occur as the company
transitions running three megafactories in safe, secure northern Europe to a
decentralized operation with factories around the world. RDB needs to be
prepared for possible problems in the transition process. A careful examination of
Items 2 and 3 reveal that the critical path of the transition can break down in any
number of ways, mostly the failure of the sale of the megafactories or problems in
the construction of new factories. In case of the former, RDB would not have
access to funds to pay for the debts from the construction loans; in case of the
latter, RDB could, if the sale of a megafactory proceeded in a timely fashion but
construction did not, be in a position where it cannot fulfill orders.

RDB is aware of these risks. The decision tree shows that if the transitions
proceed under the best possible scenario, RDB will see significant improvements
in its profits. However, there is (projected) an equal risk that it will not go well,
and RDB’s profits could fall considerably. RDB has to plan for contingencies:
• flexibility with financial institutions
• contingency plans for operations (in case a factory does not open on time).

In the long run, having a dozen or so factories around the world decreases certain
types of risk. If one of the factories were to have a problem (fire, environmental,
terrorism, etc), the other factories could continue production more easily than
under the current, much more centralized structure. It will also have certain new
risks: risks associated with operating in less stable countries
(aka country risk), which in some cases have less reliable infrastructure
(power, roads, etc). In addition, RDB also has to have management succession
plans for many more factories than at present. This will mean more training.
RDB can take advantage of the fact that it will build its new factories over a
period of time. Lessons learned with the early factories can be utilized with
subsequent factories, adapted to local circumstances.
                                        – 25 –          M13/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



RDB can plan strategically by putting some person or some committee in charge
of risk management and the development of contingency planning. That person or
committee should be sufficiently empowered to evaluate risks, both in terms of
probability (of particular crises occurring) and in terms of potential cost to RDB.
Once these risks are evaluated, the person or committee could then begin the
process of the development of contingency plans for the greater risks (greater in
terms either of probability or in terms of costs). Further, the committee could then
establish its own time frame for periodic review of risk assessments and
contingency plans.

RDB will also have to make a strategic decision about the tone that it wants to set
and the degree to which it wants to commit resources to crisis management and
contingency planning. On the one hand, businesses in the twenty-first century
will face many more risks (Item 4). On the other hand, too great a concern over
potential risks can foster a climate that discourages creativity and innovation,
which could be a smoldering problem for a business in the twenty-first century
(Item 5).

Candidates would be expected to offer a substantiated judgment as to whether
RDB can improve. They might consider the fact that despite the proposed
changes this still leaves RDB without any consistent direction for future progress.

Accept any other relevant discussion.


Award a maximum of [7–9 marks] where both the case study and Items 1–5 have
not been used, ie only one set of data.

Marks should be allocated according to the marksbands on page 6.
