M13/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                           May 2013



              SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
                ANTHROPOLOGY



                        Higher Level



                               Paper 1




5 pages
                              –2–            M13/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.
                                                   –3–               M13/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.   Describe what fairtrade means to both Northern consumers and African
     producers.                                                           [6 marks]

     This question requires a primarily descriptive answer and much of the material can be found in the
     text itself. Candidates are required to show that meanings are inscribed in the forms and uses
     of goods, and that different groups attribute different meanings to a particular form of action,
     in this case, a commodity exchange.

     Northern consumers conceptualize and interpret their purchase of fairtrade commodities not only as
     an economic exchange, but as a moral act. Northern consumers understand their purchasing
     practices as a benevolent act that helps a distant other, an act that will “allow them to take control of
     their own destiny”. In another consumer’s statement one can identify a moral dimension.
     Individuals express, maintain and reproduce personal and social identity through consumption.
     The consumers see themselves, rather than institutions and states, as the agent of progress
     and transformation.

     African producers have different understandings of fairtrade. Helen interprets the exchange as
     control and power, in which the fairtrade system can impose labour codes on these people.
     In this sense the agents of fairtrade are not dissimilar from colonial agents of yesteryear.
     Other African producers are perplexed by fairtrade, understanding it as a form of labour regulation.
     It is significant that Kenyan producers link fairtrade to the figure of the Mzunguu. For the African
     producers, the meaning of fairtrade is imbued with contradictory feelings. The charity that some
     fairtrade agents provide in addition to the economic transaction only aggravates the complexities of
     what fairtrade represents for the African producers.

     Good answers will capture the different groups’ perceptions of fairtrade, and also the complexities
     of these perceptions.


            Marks                            Level descriptor
                  0 The work does not reach a standard described by the
                    descriptors below.
               1–2 There is an attempt to organize the response and identify
                   relevant points or examples, but the response relies too
                   heavily on quotations from the text and/or limited
                   generalizations are offered.
               3–4 The response is organized, identifies and explains some
                   relevant points or examples, and offers generalizations.
               5–6 The response is organized, identifies and explains detailed
                   relevant points or examples, and links them to generalizations,
                   demonstrating good anthropological understanding.
                                                –4–             M13/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   Using theoretical perspectives, analyse the power relations found in fairtrade
     practices.                                                                     [6 marks]

     This question requires candidates to develop answers that move towards a more analytical account.
     Most straightforwardly, fairtrade acquires the same characteristics as colonialism, which is by
     definition suffused with power. The agent of fairtrade is a “Fairtrade Mzunguu”, who inherits the
     patronizing image of the colonial agent. Producers see him as telling them how to do their work.

     The Northern consumer sees fairtrade shopping as a gift whereby he or she pays more for a product
     in order to help the producer and places the consumer in a morally self-satisfying position.
     Fairtrade shopping absolves the consumer’s complicity in the continued economic inequalities
     between North and South. Yet this view obscures the fact that a gift places the recipient in an
     inherently subservient position, a power dynamic that escapes completely Northern consumers.

     Candidates need to refer to the theoretical perspectives in terms of which the author frames the
     analysis and refer to, for example, diachronic perspectives, conflict-centred approaches and
     structure-centred approaches. Candidates can usefully refer to such theorists as Mauss, Foucault
     and Bourdieu, as well as anthropologists like Wolff, Miller, Mintz, Roseberry and many others.


          Marks                          Level descriptor
                0 The work does not reach a standard described by the
                  descriptors below.
             1–2 The response is mainly descriptive and relies on quotations,
                 but may demonstrate limited understanding of relevant
                 anthropological issues and concepts.
             3–4 The response demonstrates some understanding of relevant
                 anthropological issues and concepts or theory, or the response
                 recognizes the viewpoint of the anthropologist, but not all
                 of these.
             5–6 The response demonstrates a critical understanding of relevant
                 anthropological issues, concepts and theory, and recognizes
                 the viewpoint of the anthropologist.
                                               –5–             M13/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   Compare and contrast the exchange of fairtrade Kenyan flowers with one
     exchange system that you have studied in detail.                       [8 marks]

     The target societies for this comparative question are varied and many. The question requires
     candidates to demonstrate an understanding of exchange systems as ways of interactions that take
     place within and between groups or societies. While this text describes an economic exchange,
     other types of exchange can be brought to the comparison. Different scales and social and
     economic systems other than transnational capitalism can also be compared.

     Candidates may choose to use theoretical perspectives (ideally introduced in their question 2
     response) to help frame their comparison.


           Marks                          Level descriptor
                 0 The work does not reach a standard described by the
                   descriptors below.
              1–2 Comparative ethnography is presented in limited detail and its
                  relevance is only partly established. It is not identified in
                  terms of place, author or historical context. The response may
                  not be structured as a comparison.
              3–4 Comparative ethnography is presented in limited detail but its
                  relevance is established. The comparative ethnography is
                  identified in terms of place, author and historical context,
                  or the response is clearly structured as a comparison.
              5–6 Comparative ethnography is presented and its relevance is
                  successfully established. The comparative ethnography is
                  identified in terms of place, author and historical context,
                  and the response is clearly structured as a comparison.
                  Either similarities or differences are discussed in detail,
                  but not both.
              7–8 Comparative ethnography is presented and its relevance is
                  successfully established. The comparative ethnography is
                  identified in terms of place, author and historical context,
                  and the response is clearly structured as a comparison.
                  Similarities and differences are discussed in detail. The
                  response demonstrates good anthropological understanding.
