N10/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX




       88102239


ENGLISH B – HIGHER LEVEL – PAPER 2
ANGLAIS B – NIVEAU SUPÉRIEUR – ÉPREUVE 2
INGLÉS B – NIVEL SUPERIOR – PRUEBA 2

Wednesday 10 November 2010 (morning)
Mercredi 10 novembre 2010 (matin)
Miércoles 10 de noviembre de 2010 (mañana)

1 h 30 m


instructions to candidates
 Do not turn over this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Choose one task.

INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS
 Ne retournez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
 Choisissez une tâche.

INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS
 No dé la vuelta al examen hasta que se lo autoricen.
 Elija una tarea.




8810-2239                                                                                       2 pages/páginas
                                                                 © International Baccalaureate Organization 2010
                                                     –2–                  N10/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Complete one of the following tasks in at least 400 words.

1.    Filmed versions of novels and of plays are not always successful. For your school newspaper, write
      a review of a film based on a novel or on a play that you feel was successful and explain the reasons
      why you think it was successful. Remember to name the novel or play and its author.


2.    Your principal has asked you to summarize your experience of the last two years in just a few words
      or phrases (such as “study”, “homework”, “relationships” or any other similar words or phrases).
      Write a letter of advice to the parents of students about to begin their IB studies next year, using these
      words or phrases as your topic. Write your letter.


3.    A politician in your country has recently suggested that all young people, when they finish high
      school, should have to do a year of voluntary service in their own country or in a developing
      country. Your teacher has set this suggestion as the topic for your next class essay. Write your
      essay.


4.    After the IB exams, you and a couple of good friends plan to go on a week-long expedition in an
      uninhabited area of your own country or a neighbouring country. Imagine you have completed this
      expedition and decide to write a diary entry or a blog about the most exciting part of it. Write your
      diary entry or blog and indicate which of these it is.


5.    Thanks to your school newspaper, you had a most unusual opportunity to interview a world leader
      about a topic of importance for the whole world. Write the report of your interview. Do not simply
      write the exact words (transcript) of the interview.


6.    You have decided to enter a competition in a national magazine for young people. The challenge is
      to imagine that you could meet and spend a few hours with a famous person from history or from the
      present day. Write an article, explaining your choice by describing this person’s character and some
      of his or her achievements.




8810-2239
