N10/2/A2ENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


  November / novembre / noviembre 2010

        ENGLISH / ANGLAIS / INGLÉS A2


                        Higher Level
                      Niveau Supérieur
                       Nivel Superior


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2




6 pages/páginas
                          –2–         N10/2/A2ENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive
use of examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate
and must not be reproduced or distributed to any other
person without the authorisation of IB Cardiff.
                                               –3–           N10/2/A2ENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Higher Level, paper 2

These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking. They are not offered as
an exhaustive and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must rigidly adhere.
Good ideas or angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate.
Similarly, answers which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here should not be so
heavily penalized as to distort appreciation of individuality.

These questions invite the candidate to consider the Cultural Option “Language and culture”.

1.   A barely satisfactory answer will offer a general discussion of how English has been
     influenced by other languages. One or two examples will be given.

     A better answer will draw on appropriate examples in its discussion of the ways in which
     English has been influenced by other languages. The essay will have a coherent structure.

     The best answers will demonstrate a range of reasons for the arguments maintained and will
     support those arguments with examples that are pertinent, precise, and varied. The essay will
     be well organized.


2.   A barely satisfactory answer will offer a general discussion of the idea that language is not
     just a means of communication but is more a matter of national identity. One or two
     examples will be given.

     A better answer will draw on appropriate examples in discussing the idea that language is not
     just a means of communication but is more a matter of national identity. The essay will have
     a coherent structure.

     The best answers will demonstrate a range of reasons for the arguments maintained and will
     support those arguments with examples that are pertinent, precise, and varied. The essay will
     be well organized.


These questions invite the candidates to consider the Cultural Option “Media and culture”.

3.   A barely satisfactory answer will offer a general discussion of the idea that for better or for
     worse we live in a world created and maintained by media. One or two examples will
     be given.

     A better answer will draw on appropriate examples in discussing the idea that we live in a
     world created and maintained by media. The essay will have a coherent structure.

     The best answers will demonstrate a range of reasons for the arguments maintained and will
     support those arguments with examples that are pertinent, precise, and varied. The essay will
     be well organized.
                                                –4–           N10/2/A2ENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   A barely satisfactory answer will offer a general discussion of the ways in which the
     mass media has both broadened and limited our world view of different nations, cultures
     and people. It will identify some reasons for its argument. One or two examples will
     be given.

     A better answer will draw on appropriate examples in discussing the ways in which the
     powerful reach of the mass media has broadened and limited our world view. The essay will
     have a coherent structure.

     The best answers will demonstrate a range of reasons for the arguments maintained and will
     support those arguments with examples that are pertinent, precise, and varied. The essays will
     be well organized.


This question invites the candidate to consider the Cultural Option “Future issues”.

5.   A barely satisfactory answer will acknowledge an affirmative or negative position. It will
     identify some reasons for its argument. One or two examples will be given.

     A better answer will draw on appropriate examples in discussing the idea that technology may
     be a hindrance or a benefit to our future. The essay will have a coherent structure.

     The best answers will provide a range of reasons for the arguments made and will support
     these arguments with examples that are pertinent, precise and varied. The essay will be
     persuasive and well organized.



This question invites the candidate to consider the Cultural Option “Global issues”.

6.   A barely satisfactory answer will offer a general discussion of what part national or
     international education might play in addressing at least one global issue studied.

     A better answer will draw on appropriate examples to offer a reasonable discussion of the part
     that national or international education might play in addressing some of the global
     issues studied.

     The best answers will use a range of precise and pertinent examples to discuss the part
     national or international education might play in addressing global issues studied.
     The essays will demonstrate a thorough understanding of the issues. They will be well
     organized and persuasive.
                                                –5–            N10/2/A2ENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


This question invites the candidate to consider the Cultural Option “Social issues”.

7.   A barely satisfactory answer will identify at least one social group that seems to be most
     at risk. One or two examples of what can be done to assure their rights and well-being will
     be given.

     A better answer will discuss one or more social groups which are at risk and will identify at
     least one specific measure to assure their rights and well-being. It will draw on appropriate
     evidence to make its argument and will have a coherent structure.

     The best answers will offer a persuasive summary of the risks faced by more than one social
     group before discussing specific measures that can be taken to assure their rights and
     well-being. The essay will be well organized.


These questions invite the candidate to consider a Literary Option.

8.   A barely satisfactory answer will identify characters who are blind to the reality of their own
     circumstances in at least two works studied. It will acknowledge at least one lesson learned
     with a supporting example from each text.

     A better answer will draw on appropriate examples of characters who are blind to the reality
     of their own circumstances and the fact that they are often those from whom we learn
     the best lessons. The essay will include some detailed references to the texts and will
     demonstrate a good understanding of them. It will have a coherent structure.

     The best answers will use a range of pertinent, precise examples to discuss the ways
     characters who are blind to the reality of their own circumstances are often those from whom
     we learn the best lessons. Analysis will be thoughtful and will take into account differences
     between and within texts. Essays will be well organized and persuasive.


9.   A barely satisfactory answer will offer a general discussion of betrayal in at least two
     works studied, providing some evidence from each text.

     A better answer will draw on appropriate examples to offer a fuller discussion of betrayal in at
     least two literary works. To this end, the essay will go beyond merely identifying betrayal to
     develop an argument about the significance of the theme to the overall work. It will have a
     coherent structure.

     The best answers will use a range of pertinent, precise examples to compare the ways in
     which betrayal is used in at least two works studied. Analysis will be thoughtful and will
     take into account differences between and within texts. Essays will be well organized
     and persuasive.
                                                –6–            N10/2/A2ENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


10.   A barely satisfactory answer will discuss the fact that authors often change the order of events
      in their works. It will use at least one supporting example from each text.

      A better answer will use a range of appropriate examples to discuss why authors often change
      the order of events and the effect this creates. It will show a good working knowledge of the
      structure of each text. The essay will have a coherent structure.

      The best answers will use a range of precise, pertinent examples to discuss the ways authors
      often change the order of events in their works and why. The answers may show an
      understanding of the implications of changing the chronology of events (e.g. development of
      theme, characterization). They will be well organized and persuasive.
