N10/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


  November / novembre / noviembre 2010

         ENGLISH / ANGLAIS / INGLÉS B


                        Higher Level
                      Niveau Supérieur
                       Nivel Superior

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2




5 pages/páginas
                              –2–         N10/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                                 –3–            N10/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


These notes are not intended to replace the published criteria but to supplement them in some instances.

These notes are intended to define the top mark of the scale in this examination. The phrase,
“a good answer”, is intended to refer to scripts which are likely to be placed in the 9 to 10 band
of descriptors. Scripts should be marked proportionately lower to the degree to which they fail to
meet these requirements.

In each case, good answers will meet most, though not necessarily all, of the following requirements.


1.    Filmed versions of novels and of plays are not always successful. For your school
      newspaper, write a review of a film based on a novel or on a play that you feel was successful
      and explain the reasons why you think it was successful. Remember to name the novel or play
      and its author.

      Analysis and critique – semi-formal to informal – film review

      A good answer
       will have the title, either of the review itself or of the film
       will adopt a register in the range semi-formal to informal, depending on the film/novel/
         play itself
       will not retell the story but only as much of it as is necessary to illustrate the candidate’s
         reasons
       will concentrate on successful aspects; if more than a third of the script deals with
         “balancing criticisms”, the answer should not receive more than 6 for Criterion C
       may explain how the film adaptation gave enjoyment by giving a visual perspective to
         verbal description, or how seeing characters represented by good actors brought them
         to life; this should be rewarded.


2.    Your principal has asked you to summarize your experience of the last two years in just a few
      words or phrases (such as “study”, “homework”, “relationships” or any other similar words
      or phrases). Write a letter of advice to the parents of students about to begin their IB studies
      next year, using these words or phrases as your topic. Write your letter.

      Written interaction – formal – letter

      A good answer
       will adopt the style of a fairly formal letter; if the style is chatty and informal, as if to
         students, no more than 6 for Criterion B should be awarded
       may use headings within the letter, to add clarity; this should be rewarded
       will discuss at least two representative words or phrases; any answer discussing only one
         should be awarded no more than 6 marks for Criterion C
       may include flashes of informality, lightness or humour; these, if appropriate, should be
         rewarded
       may explain context – that the principal has asked for the letter, and/or that the student has
         experienced the course; such reference to context should be rewarded under Criterion C.
                                                  –4–            N10/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   A politician in your country has recently suggested that all young people, when they finish
     high school, should have to do a year of voluntary service in their own country or in a
     developing country. Your teacher has set this suggestion as the topic for your next
     class essay. Write your essay.

     Balanced argument – formal – essay

     A good answer
      will have a title
      will adopt a formal register
      will address both sides of the argument though the essay need not be evenly balanced;
        failure to devote at least a third of the essay to each side of the argument should result in a
        mark no higher than 6 marks for Criterion C.


4.   After the IB exams, you and a couple of good friends plan to go on a week-long expedition in
     an uninhabited area of your own country or a neighbouring country. Imagine you have
     completed this expedition and decide to write a diary entry or a blog about the most exciting
     part of it. Write your diary entry or blog and indicate which of these it is.

     Imaginative narration – informal to very informal – diary entry or blog

     A good answer
      will clearly identify the candidate’s chosen text type
      will adopt an informal or very informal register
      will focus on the most exciting part of the expedition; an answer that merely describes the
         whole of the expedition should score no higher than 4 marks for Criterion C
      will not be about an inhabited area; an answer that does so should score no higher than 6
         marks for Criterion C
      will, if it is a diary entry, avoid explanatory words or phrases such as “James, my older
         brother” or “Mrs Jackson, our school principal”
      may include some “textese” (abbreviations, acronyms); excessive and/or
         incomprehensible use of such terms should be penalized under Criterion A, in proportion
         as it obscures meaning.

     N.B. A blog is a type of website, usually written by an individual with regular entries of commentary,
          descriptions of events, or other material. Entries are often displayed in reverse chronological
          order. Many blogs provide commentary or news on a particular subject; others function as
          more personal online diaries. The personal blog, an ongoing diary or commentary by an
          individual, is the most common. It often becomes more than a way just to communicate: it
          becomes a way to reflect on life. Unlike a diary entry, it may contain explanatory words or
          phrases. One way of contrasting the two forms is that a “diary” is narrative + private personal
          reflection; a “blog” is narrative + public personal reflection.
                                                –5–            N10/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


5.   Thanks to your school newspaper, you had a most unusual opportunity to interview a world
     leader about a topic of importance for the whole world. Write the report of your interview.
     Do not simply write the exact words (transcript) of the interview.

     Spoken interaction – formal to fairly informal – reported interview

     A good answer
      will have a title
      will adopt a register in the range formal to fairly informal
      will clearly base most of the interview on just one topic of importance; if more than one
        topic is dealt with at length, a maximum of 6 marks should be awarded for Criterion C
      will not be a mere transcript of the interview; a transcript should score no higher than 3
        marks for Criterion B
      will occasionally quote the world leader’s words; direct quotation should not exceed about
        a third of the total length.


6.   You have decided to enter a competition in a national magazine for young people.
     The challenge is to imagine that you could meet and spend a few hours with a famous person
     from history or from the present day. Write an article, explaining your choice by describing
     this person’s character and some of his or her achievements.

     Evocative/factual description – formal to very informal – portrait of a person

     A good answer
      will have a title
      will adopt a register in the range formal to very informal, depending on the person
         described: Winston Churchill would suggest a fairly formal description; Bob Geldof
         would suggest something rather less formal
      will address both aspects of the task: the person’s character and his or her achievements;
         failure to devote at least a third of the description to each of these aspects should result in
         a score no higher than 6 marks for Criterion C
      may balance factual and evocative description of the person; this should be rewarded
         under Criterion B
      may take a more concrete approach, describing the imagined meeting, or a more
         generalized approach, analysing the person’s character and achievements.
