N10/2/A2ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


  November / novembre / noviembre 2010

        ENGLISH / ANGLAIS / INGLÉS A2


                       Standard Level
                       Niveau Moyen
                        Nivel Medio


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2




6 pages/páginas
                          –2–          N10/2/A2ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive
use of examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate
and must not be reproduced or distributed to any other
person without the authorisation of IB Cardiff.
                                               –3–           N10/2/A2ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Standard level, paper 2

These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking. They are not offered as
an exhaustive and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must rigidly adhere.
Good ideas or angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate.
Similarly, answers that do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here should not be so
heavily penalized as to distort appreciation of individuality.

These questions invite the candidate to consider the Cultural Option “Language and culture”.

1.   A barely satisfactory answer will acknowledge an affirmative or negative position and will
     provide some reasons for its argument. One or two examples will be given.

     A better answer will draw on appropriate examples in order to argue that it is (im)possible to
     learn a new language without becoming familiar with a new culture. The essay will have a
     coherent structure.

     The best answers will demonstrate a range of reasons for the arguments maintained and will
     support those arguments with examples that are pertinent, precise, and varied. The essays will
     be well organized.


2.   A barely satisfactory answer will acknowledge an affirmative or negative position and will
     provide some reasons for its argument. One or two examples will be given.

     A better answer will draw on appropriate examples in order to argue that it is or is not
     important to safeguard the world’s languages. The essay will have a coherent structure.

     The best answers will demonstrate a range of reasons for the arguments maintained and will
     support those arguments with examples that are pertinent, precise, and varied. The essays will
     be well organized.
                                                –4–            N10/2/A2ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


These questions invite the candidate to consider the Cultural Option “Media and culture”.

3.   A barely satisfactory answer will acknowledge an affirmative or negative position and will
     provide some reasons for its argument. One or two examples will be given.

     A better answer will draw on appropriate examples in order to argue that the mass media does
     or does not promote positive social values and attitudes in young children and teenagers.
     The essay will have a coherent structure.

     The best answers will demonstrate a range of reasons for the arguments maintained and will
     support those arguments with examples that are pertinent, precise, and varied. The essays will
     be well organized.


4.   A barely satisfactory answer will make a general argument about the reliability and accuracy
     of information communicated by the media. One or two examples will be given.

     A better answer will draw on appropriate examples in discussing the reliability and accuracy
     of information communicated by the media. The essay will have a coherent structure.

     The best answers will provide a range of reasons for the arguments made and will support
     these arguments with examples that are pertinent, precise and varied. The essays will be
     persuasive and well organized.



This question invites the candidate to consider the Cultural Option “Future issues”.

5.   A barely satisfactory answer will acknowledge an affirmative or negative position and will
     provide some reasons for its argument. One or two examples will be given.

     A better answer will draw on appropriate examples in discussing the positive or negative
     changes that result from progress. The essay will have a coherent structure.

     The best answers will demonstrate a range of reasons for the arguments maintained and will
     support these arguments with examples that are pertinent, precise and varied. The essays will
     be well organized.
                                                –5–            N10/2/A2ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


This question invites the candidate to consider the Cultural Option “Global issues”.

6.   A barely satisfactory answer will consider our priorities and how they prevent certain global
     issues from being resolved. One or two examples will be given.

     A better answer will identify more than one global issue and how our priorities prevent them
     from being resolved. The essay will have a coherent structure.

     The best answers will provide a range of reasons for the arguments made and draw
     on pertinent, specific and varied evidence. The essay will be well organized.



This question invites the candidate to consider the Cultural Option “Social issues”.

7.   A barely satisfactory answer will take a position on the question posed and consider the
     potential role men and women may play in resolving at least one social issue studied.

     A better answer will draw on appropriate examples to make an argument about the
     roles played by men and women in resolving social issues. The essay will have a
     coherent structure.

     The best answers will use a range of precise and pertinent examples to discuss the part played
     by men and women in addressing social problems studied. The essays will demonstrate a
     thorough understanding of the issues. They will be well organized and persuasive.



These questions invite the candidate to consider a Literary Option.

8.   A barely satisfactory answer will acknowledge an affirmative or negative position and will
     provide some reasons for its argument. One supporting example from each text should
     be evident.

     A better answer will draw upon appropriate examples to offer a reasonable discussion of
     whether characters are better judged by their actions than their words. The essay will have a
     coherent structure.

     The best answers will demonstrate a range of reasons for the arguments maintained and will
     support those arguments with examples that are pertinent, precise and varied. The essays will
     be well organized and persuasive.
                                                –6–            N10/2/A2ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


9.    A barely satisfactory answer will offer a general discussion of the importance of trust in at
      least two literary works. It will use at least one example from each of the works.

      A better answer will use appropriate examples to offer a reasonable discussion of the
      importance of trust in at least two literary works. It will demonstrate a good knowledge of
      the texts, and will provide a deeper understanding of how the theme is manifested. The essay
      will have a coherent structure.

      The best answers will draw upon precise references to trust in at least two texts, use pertinent
      evidence and offer a thoughtful analysis of trust as represented in each. The essays will be
      well organized and persuasive.


10.   A barely satisfactory answer will compare in very general terms the opening scenes of
      two literary works and note at least one reason to explain how each may inspire the
      reader’s interest.

      A better answer will draw on appropriate examples to offer a reasonable discussion of the
      ways in which opening scenes inspire the reader’s interest and expectation. The essay will
      have a coherent structure.

      The best answers will take up a position with more analysis. They will use pertinent, precise
      and varied examples to discuss how opening scenes function with specific references to reader
      interest and expectation. The essays will be well organized.
