N10/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T




       88102238


ENGLISH B – HIGHER LEVEL – PAPER 1
ANGLAIS B – NIVEAU SUPÉRIEUR – ÉPREUVE 1
INGLÉS B – NIVEL SUPERIOR – PRUEBA 1

Wednesday 10 November 2010 (morning)
Mercredi 10 novembre 2010 (matin)
Miércoles 10 de noviembre de 2010 (mañana)

1 h 30 m


TEXT BOOKLET – INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES
• Do not open this booklet until instructed to do so.
• This booklet contains all of the texts required for Paper 1.
• Answer the questions in the Question and Answer Booklet provided.

LIVRET DE TEXTES – INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS
• N’ouvrez pas ce livret avant d’y être autorisé(e).
• Ce livret contient tous les textes nécessaires à l’Épreuve 1.
• Répondez à toutes les questions dans le livret de questions et réponses fourni.

CUADERNO DE TEXTOS – INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS
• No abra este cuaderno hasta que se lo autoricen.
• Este cuaderno contiene todos los textos para la Prueba 1.
• Conteste todas las preguntas en el cuaderno de preguntas y respuestas.




8810-2238                                                                                       5 pages/páginas
                                                                 © International Baccalaureate Organization 2010
                                                    –2–                 N10/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

TEXT A

                                 CLIMBING THE BRIDGE
I was taking in the spectacular view from the top of Sydney Harbour Bridge when I sensed I was about to
witness something even more dramatic right in front of me.

Although we were all tied to lines running along the steel
girders, a fellow climber called Mike had somehow managed to
drop onto bended knee and turn to face his girlfriend, Wendy.
I knew what was coming. “Wendy, will you marry me?”
he asked. There was a quick smile and an attempted kiss and
then a big beam. Mike had the answer he hoped for and all of
us burst into a spontaneous round of applause.

Apparently more than 2000 couples have become engaged at the summit since 1998, when it became
possible to climb it in organized tour groups. The bridge, perhaps the most recognized symbol of this
beautiful city, opened in 1932. It’s still the world’s largest (but not longest) steel-arch bridge.

We returned to the fantastic view: the famous Sydney Opera House, ferries and sailboats making their way
through the harbour, the city skyline – but I had to force myself to look down. We had climbed 1423 steps to
the top of the bridge and I didn’t know whether to be delighted or scared.

Nicole Kidman has done it. So have Bruce Springsteen, Prince Harry and scores of other celebrities.
But climbing to the top clearly isn’t just for the rich and famous. On the contrary, Australian youngsters do
it to celebrate their 12th birthdays. (You have to be at least 12 years old to do the climb.) A 100-year-old
woman climbed it and told guides it was on her list of things to do before she died.

                                   You can climb during the day, at twilight, or even after dark with headlamps.
                                   People climb in all weathers except when there’s lightning in the area.
                                   In fact, over two million people have made the three-and-a-half-hour
                                   climb to the top of the famous bridge – an adventure that cannot be
                                   replicated anywhere else in the world on a bridge this big. That’s probably
                                   why this climb has won a host of tourism awards.

                                   Today, the climb is firmly on the “to-do” list for locals as well as tourists.


                                                                                    Bridge photo from:
                      http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Sydney_Harbour_Bridge_from_Circular_Quay.jpg,
                                                                      by Wikipedia user Noodle snacks.




8810-2238
                                                        –3–                 N10/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

TEXT B


                               The YouTube Billionaires
            Sudden riches
       There are overnight success stories and then there is YouTube. Set up in 2005 by colleagues
       Chad Hurley and Steve Chen in a garage, it was sold just over a year later for $ 1.65 billion.
       The figures are incredible. More than 200 million videos are watched every day on the site,
       with 10 hours of new content posted every minute.

            [–X–]
  5    Its estimated 34 million registered users can upload video clips onto the site and broadcast them
       to the world. The “user-generated content” is not just home movies, but also clips of people’s
       favourite TV shows, films, sporting events and music videos. Its most popular clip, a music video by
       Avril Lavigne, has been watched more than 90 million times.

            [–7–]
       It is hard to believe YouTube is still in its infancy. Hurley, Chen and another friend, Jawad Karim,
 10    all colleagues at PayPal, the Internet payment service, had the idea after getting frustrated when
       they tried to swap video clips from a dinner party in February 2005. At the dinner, hosted by Chen,
       a Taiwan-born Computer Science student from the University of Illinois, they spent most of the
       evening shooting videos and digital photos of each other. The next day they easily uploaded the
       photos to the web. But the videos? Not a chance. The trio had stumbled across a niche and,
 15    between them, they had the means to address it.

            [–8–]
       Financed on their credit cards and based in a garage in San Francisco, the first YouTube video
       featured Karim standing before elephants at a zoo. “The cool thing about these guys is that
       they have really, really, really long trunks,” he said. “And that’s cool. And that’s pretty much all.”
       With that breakthrough, YouTube was born. Days later the three opened their website to
 20    the public. Word of mouth did the rest and YouTube grew at enormous speed.

            [–9–]
       They were firm about doing it on their own terms and were adamant that there would be
       no intrusive advertising. Ultimately, it was a stroke of genius, setting YouTube apart from its
       competitors whose sites were dominated by sponsors and pop-up adverts. Users flocked to
       the website, considering it to be anti-establishment and independent.

            [ – 10 – ]
 25    It became more successful than MySpace and Google. In August 2006, Google decided if you cannot
       beat them, buy them. The deal was signed in October 2006. Chen, who was single, and Hurley,
       a married father-of-two, would remain in charge. Karim had left YouTube to pursue his degree at
       Stanford University. In return they were given $ 1.65 billion in Google shares. Chen said that he was
       overawed with the success. “I’m definitely astounded by everything that has happened.”
                 http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/2480280/YouTube-Overnight-success-has-sparked-a-backlash.html.
                                                                  31 July 2008. © Telegraph Media Group Limited 2008.


8810-2238                                                         Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                      –4–                  N10/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

TEXT C


                            All Summer in a Day
             “Ready?”
             “Ready.”
             “Now?”
             “Soon.”
  5          “Do the scientists really know? Will it happen today, will it?”
             “Look, look; see for yourself!”
             The children pressed to each other like so many roses, so many weeds, intermixed, peering out for
      a look at the hidden sun.
             It rained.
10           It had been raining for seven years; thousands upon thousands of days compounded and filled from
      one end to the other with rain, with the drum and gush of water, with the sweet crystal fall of showers
      and the concussion of storms so heavy they were tidal waves come over the islands. A thousand forests
      had been crushed under the rain and grown up a thousand times to be crushed again. And this was the
      way life was forever on the planet Venus, and this was the schoolroom of the children of the rocket men
15    and women who had come to a raining world to set up civilisation and live out their lives.
             “It’s stopping, it’s stopping!”
             “Yes, yes!”
             Margot stood apart from them, from these children who could never remember a time when there
      wasn’t any rain. They were all nine years old and, if there had been a day, seven years ago, when the
20    sun came out for an hour and showed its face to the stunned world, they could not recall. Sometimes,
      at night, she heard them stir, in remembrance, and she knew they were dreaming and remembering gold
      or yellow crayon or a coin large enough to buy the world with. She knew they thought they remembered
      a warmness, like a blushing in the face, in the body, in the tatting drum, the endless shaking down
      of clear bead necklaces upon the roof, the walk, the gardens, the forests, and their dreams were gone.
25           Now the rain was slackening, and the children were crushed in the great thick windows.
             Margot stood alone. She was a very frail girl who looked as if she had been lost in the rain for years
      and the rain had washed out the blue from her eyes and the red from her mouth and the yellow from
      her hair. Now she stood, separate, staring at the rain and the loud, wet world beyond the huge glass.
             “What’re you looking at?” said William.
30           Margot said nothing.
             “Speak when you’re spoken to.” He gave her a shove. But she did not move; rather she let herself
      be moved only by him and nothing else.
             They edged away from her; they would not look at her. She felt them go away. [ – X – ] this
      was [ – 32 – ] she would play no games with them in the echoing tunnels of the underground city.
35    [ – 33 – ] they tagged her and ran, she stood blinking after them and would not follow. When the class
      sang songs about happiness and life and games, her lips barely moved. Only [ – 34 – ] they sang about
      the sun and the summer did her lips move as she watched the drenched windows.
             And then, of course, the biggest crime of all was that she had come here only five years ago
      from Earth, and she remembered the sun and the way the sun was and the sky was when she was four in
40    Ohio. And they, they had been on Venus all their lives, and they had been only two years old when last
      the sun came out and had long since forgotten the colour and heat of it and the way it really was. But
      Margot remembered.
                                              ‘All Summer in a Day’, adapted from the short story ‘All Summer in a Day’
                                                                      by Ray Bradbury in To Sing Strange Songs (1979),
                                                published by Wheaton, Exeter, Devon. Used with the author’s permission.


8810-2238
                                                –5–              N10/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

TEXT D


            ARE YOU A RESPONSIBLE TRAVELLER?
 Some people – very lucky journalists or TV reporters, for example – are paid to visit
 foreign countries. But the vast majority of ordinary folk have to pay travel and accommodation
 expenses, often saving up so that they can afford it.

 So why has tourism become such a massive industry? Because most people want to get away
 from work or study: they want to relax and they want to have a good time with family or friends.
 Nothing at all wrong with that, but most holiday-makers would claim that it is their legal right to
 choose whatever kind of holiday they want without considering its effects on the environment
 or on the inhabitants of the visited country. “How can we enjoy ourselves if we’re worrying
 about things like that all the time?” they ask. “Surely tour companies wouldn’t organize and sell
 holidays that weren’t OK.” Well, yes actually; many of them would. Besides, holiday-makers
 don’t have to be worrying “all the time” as long as they do some investigating before they decide
 on their holiday.

 Some stay in a hotel, swim in the hotel pool instead of
 where the locals swim, eat in the hotel restaurant instead
 of where the locals eat. Boring! Others complain about
 the weather, the lack of hot water, the biting insects.
 That’s a great way not to enjoy a holiday! If they want
 everything to be the way it is at home and if they want
 things changed to suit them, they should just stay at home
 and watch TV, play with their games console or send
 emails or text messages 24/7. Actually, some people do
 take their mobile or laptop with them on holiday! Crazy! Because they feel uncomfortable,
 they don’t interact with the locals: they simply stare rudely and take photos.

 They feel uncomfortable because, before they left home, they didn’t read anything about the
 culture of the country they were about to visit. They didn’t even learn a few simple words in the
 local language such as “please”, “thank you” and “good morning”. Instead, they keep repeating
 words in their own language, louder and louder. It’s hard to believe, but lots of holiday-makers
 presume the poor people in the country they’re visiting can’t teach them anything; often they can
 do exactly that if only visitors ask them. Instead, they make up their mind about a place almost
 as soon as they arrive.

 What is needed is a campaign in the media, especially TV, educating the general population
 about the best ways to approach foreign holidays. This would benefit the people in the country
 visited, but it would also greatly increase the visitors’ enjoyment of their holidays. I’m sure
 that young people still at school would welcome a similar campaign in the classroom. Can we
 do it? Yes we can!




8810-2238
