N11/2/A2ENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


  November / novembre / noviembre 2011

        ENGLISH / ANGLAIS / INGLÉS A2


                        Higher Level
                      Niveau Supérieur
                       Nivel Superior


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2




6 pages/páginas
                          –2–         N11/2/A2ENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive
use of examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate
and must not be reproduced or distributed to any other
person without the authorisation of IB Cardiff.
                                               –3–           N11/2/A2ENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Higher level, paper 2

These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking. They are not offered as
an exhaustive and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must rigidly adhere.
Good ideas or angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate.
Similarly, answers which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here should not be so
heavily penalized as to distort appreciation of individuality.

These questions invite the candidates to consider the Cultural Option “Language and culture”.

1.   A barely satisfactory answer will offer a general discussion about how one becomes bilingual
     and bicultural. One or two examples will be given.

     A better answer will draw on appropriate examples in making its argument and will have a
     coherent structure.

     The best answers will demonstrate a wide range of reasons for their arguments and will
     support those arguments with examples that are pertinent, precise, and varied. The essays will
     be well organized.


2.   A barely satisfactory answer will offer a general discussion of the idea that English is a
     variety of languages. One or two examples of how English is used differently will be given.

     A better answer will draw on appropriate examples in making its argument and will have a
     coherent structure.

     The best answers will demonstrate a wide range of reasons for their arguments and will
     support those arguments with examples that are pertinent, precise, and varied. The essays will
     be well organized.
                                                –4–           N11/2/A2ENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


These questions invite the candidate to consider the Cultural Option “Media and culture”.

3.   A barely satisfactory answer will show some awareness of the limitations the mass media
     are subject to, give some examples, but only superficially discuss the issue of freedom of
     the press.

     A better answer will show awareness of other rights than those of freedom of the press,
     give appropriate examples and put forward a coherent argument.

     The best answers will include discussion of freedom of the press as a relative concept,
     and detailed examples of media freedom and control of media.


4.   A barely satisfactory answer will offer a general discussion of the influence of the mass media
     on our political opinions. One or two examples will be given.

     A better answer will discuss the question using appropriate examples, both positive
     and negative, of media influence.

     The best answers will above all provide detailed examples, both positive and negative, of
     media influence in a balanced assessment of the question.



This question invites the candidates to consider the Cultural Option “Future issues”.

5.   A barely satisfactory answer will provide some interpretation of the question statement and
     offer a general discussion of the question. One or two examples will be given.

     A better answer will provide a more developed personal understanding of the
     question statement, give specific examples and provide some discussion of the question.

     The best answers will provide a clear interpretation of the question statement, give more
     detailed examples and discuss them critically.
                                                –5–            N11/2/A2ENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


This question invites the candidates to consider the Cultural Option “Global issues”.

6.   A barely satisfactory answer will offer a general discussion of whether globalization has
     any drawbacks, offering one or two examples.

     A better answer will offer a definition of globalization, show more detailed knowledge of
     some of the drawbacks and benefits of globalization and provide an opinion on the question.

     The best answers will show more detailed knowledge of some of the drawbacks and benefits
     of globalization and sustain a coherent argument on the question.



This question invites the candidates to consider the Cultural Option “Social issues”.

7.   A barely satisfactory answer will give one or two examples of social conflict or unrest and
     their causes as well as a general discussion of solutions for dealing with them.

     A better answer will give more detailed examples of social conflict or unrest and their causes
     in specific social contexts and recommend some solutions for dealing with them.

     The best answers will show detailed knowledge of the causes of social conflict or unrest
     in specific social contexts and recommend in some detail specific solutions for dealing
     with them.



These questions invite the candidate to consider a Literary Option.

8.   A barely satisfactory answer will offer one or two examples of emotions aroused by
     literary texts.

     A better answer will provide some understanding of different ways and techniques used by
     writers to appeal to the emotions of the reader using appropriate examples.

     The best answers will provide more detailed understanding of ways and techniques as well as
     discussing the subjectivity of the reader’s response.


9.   A barely satisfactory answer will offer one or two examples of authoritarian behaviour in the
     works studied and offer a general discussion of it being a strength or a weakness, without
     necessarily reaching a conclusion.

     A better answer will give more detailed examples of authoritarian behaviour in the
     works studied, offer a discussion of whether or not it can be regarded as a strength or a
     weakness and arrive at a conclusion.

     The best answers will give detailed and pertinent examples of authoritarian behaviour in the
     works studied and arrive at a convincing conclusion after a balanced discussion of whether or
     not it can be regarded as a strength or a weakness.
                                                –6–           N11/2/A2ENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


10.   A barely satisfactory answer will give one or two examples of unhappiness in the literary
      works studied and offer a general discussion of some of the main causes.

      A better answer will attempt to discuss the concept of unhappiness and give more detailed
      examples of it in the literary works studied. It will offer more substantial discussion of some
      of the main causes.

      The best answers will discuss the concept of unhappiness more thoroughly and give detailed
      and pertinent examples of it in the literary works studied. It will offer convincing discussion
      of some of the main causes.
