N11/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX




     88112239

ENGLISH B – HIGHER LEVEL – PAPER 2
ANGLAIS B – NIVEAU SUPÉRIEUR – ÉPREUVE 2
INGLÉS B – NIVEL SUPERIOR – PRUEBA 2

Tuesday 8 November 2011 (afternoon)
Mardi 8 novembre 2011 (après-midi)
Martes 8 de noviembre de 2011 (tarde)

1 h 30 m


instructions to candidates
 Do not turn over this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Choose one task.

INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS
 Ne retournez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
 Choisissez une tâche.

INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS
 No dé la vuelta al examen hasta que se lo autoricen.
 Elija una tarea.




8811-2239                                                                                       2 pages/páginas
                                                                 © International Baccalaureate Organization 2011
                                                   –2–                 N11/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Complete one of the following tasks in at least 400 words.

1.    Your teacher has set this as the topic of your next essay: “Is it morally acceptable to download
      music and films from the Internet illegally?” Write an essay discussing the positive and negative
      aspects of this issue.


2.    If the main character in a book that you have read had been of the opposite gender, how do you
      think this might have affected the story? Write a letter to the literary critic of the local newspaper
      explaining what changes might have occurred. Remember to identify the character and the book.


3.    You are unhappy with some of your school rules. Write a proposal to your principal, explaining why
      you think these rules need to be changed and suggesting alternatives.


4.    You are participating in a class debate on whether it is better to attend a university in the town
      in which you live or in another place. Write your speech, either agreeing or disagreeing with
      this motion.


5.    As you were looking out of the window, you witnessed something happening to a car that was parked
      in front of your home. Write a statement for the insurance company, describing what happened.


6.    A classmate comes from a region that was recently affected by a serious natural disaster. To gain
      support from fellow students, interview him or her and write the report of your interview for
      your school newspaper. Do not simply write the exact words (transcript) of the interview.




8811-2239
