N11/2/A2ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


  November / novembre / noviembre 2011

        ENGLISH / ANGLAIS / INGLÉS A2


                        Higher Level
                      Niveau Supérieur
                       Nivel Superior

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




4 pages/páginas
                          –2–         N11/2/A2ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive
use of examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate
and must not be reproduced or distributed to any other
person without the authorisation of IB Cardiff.
                                                  –3–             N11/2/A2ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Higher level, paper 1

These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking. They are not offered as
an exhaustive and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must rigidly adhere.
Good ideas or angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate.
Similarly, answers which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here should not be so
heavily penalized as to distort appreciation of individuality.

                                              SECTION A

This question invites candidates to compare two texts about the human brain. Text 1 is a newspaper
article, text 2 an extract from a work of fiction.

A barely satisfactory comparative commentary may:

 identify that one text is a newspaper article, the other prose fiction
 identify that text 1 is a scientific point of view by an expert, that the point of view in text 2 is that
  of a fictional character who, in this extract, is about to operate on someone’s brain
 note that both texts use technical vocabulary and give examples
 note that text 2 is more poetic than text 1 and give at least one example
 observe that text 1 makes simple analogies while the comparisons in text 2 are more complex
 comment on the different purpose and audience of each text.


A better comparative commentary may:

 observe that the discourses about the brain in text 1 and text 2 are very different and attempt to
  explain how
 comment more fully on the differences in point of view
 observe that text 1 answers questions while text 2 asks them
 contrast the confident tone of text 1 with the uncertainty expressed in text 2
 give examples of stylistic devices in text 2, particularly simile and metaphor.


The best comparative commentaries may:

 observe that the discourse in text 1 is technological in character, whilst in text 2 it is both
  physiological and metaphysical
 comment more fully on the technological analogies in text 1 and the poetic ones of text 2
 comment on the very different ways in which the brain is perceived
 explore the literary text more thoroughly, noticing the contrast between familiarity in the first
  half and ignorance in the second
 extend this to discuss how both writers approach the known and the unknown.
                                                   –4–            N11/2/A2ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                              SECTION B

This question invites candidates to compare two texts about rivers. Text 3 is an extract from a book
about the Thames, text 4 an advertisement for a cruise on Australia’s Murray River.

A barely satisfactory comparative commentary may:

   identify the common theme and observe that purposes are different
   illustrate that text 3’s main purpose is to give facts, text 4’s to persuade people to go on a cruise
   mention at least one stylistic device in the advertisement, and the book
   make at least one comment on the different points of view.


A better comparative commentary may:

 note that text 3 focuses on the river and how it moves, whereas text 4 focuses on the steamer and
  what can be seen from it
 note the emphasis on technical details in text 3, on colours, nature and wildlife in text 4
 notice that both texts show pride in the rivers
 recognize that text 3 is not purely factual, but has some literary elements (e.g. diction,
  personification, erudition)
 illustrate some of the persuasive effects of text 4
 comment on the fact that both texts refer to history.


The best comparative commentaries may:

 comment more fully on the contrast in focus and purpose, noticing that text 3’s point of view is
  external and panoramic, whilst text 4 puts the emphasis on the experience of the cruise-ship
  passenger. Both texts, however, invite one to see the world “from a different vantage”
 comment more fully on less factual and rhetorical aspects of text 3 as well as the persuasive
  stylistic devices of text 4
 comment more fully on the similarities of tone
 comment on personification in both texts
 comment more fully on the way both texts refer to the past.
