N11/2/A2ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


  November / novembre / noviembre 2011

        ENGLISH / ANGLAIS / INGLÉS A2


                       Standard Level
                       Niveau Moyen
                        Nivel Medio


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2




6 pages/páginas
                           –2–        N11/2/A2ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive
use of examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate
and must not be reproduced or distributed to any other
person without the authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                               –3–           N11/2/A2ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Standard level, paper 2

These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking. They are not offered as
an exhaustive and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must rigidly adhere.
Good ideas or angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate.
Similarly, answers which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here should not be so
heavily penalized as to distort appreciation of individuality.

These questions invite the candidates to consider the Cultural Option “Language and culture”.

1.   A barely satisfactory answer will give only one or two examples of how different languages
     and cultures influence each other and deal superficially with the resulting benefits.

     A better answer will be more detailed and balanced in its choice of examples and will give a
     coherent account of the resulting benefits.

     The best answers will provide a good range of pertinent examples and convincingly
     demonstrate the resulting benefits.


2.   A barely satisfactory answer will offer one or two reasons for becoming familiar with another
     language and one or two examples.

     A better answer will offer more substantial reasons for the arguments put forward,
     will illustrate this with a range of examples and be convincing.

     The best answers will be tactful in addition to offering thoroughly convincing arguments
     supported by a range of pertinent and detailed examples.
                                                –4–            N11/2/A2ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


These questions invite the candidate to consider the Cultural Option “Media and culture”

3.   A barely satisfactory answer will give one or two examples of advertising and how it can
     encourage prejudice and discrimination and engage in a general discussion.

     A better answer will offer a range of more detailed examples and attempt to achieve a
     balanced discussion that shows knowledge of advertising.

     The best answers will offer balanced and sustained discussion of the statement, show good
     knowledge of the topic of advertising and illustrate arguments with a range of pertinent and
     detailed examples.


4.   A barely satisfactory answer will offer one or two examples of ways the Internet has been
     used for and against freedom.

     A better answer will offer a definition of freedom and provide more detailed examples with a
     view to making a balanced response.

     The best answers will support a balanced opinion on the question with arguments and a range
     of pertinent and detailed examples.



This question invites the candidates to consider the Cultural Option “Future issues.”

5.   A barely satisfactory answer will identify one or more ethical aspects of what has been
     studied for the option and provide some explanation of what the issue(s) is/are.

     A better answer will clearly identify some ethical questions and provide more detailed
     explanation of their relevance in the context of future issues.

     The best answers will provide a clear and detailed explanation of some of the ethical issues
     encountered in the context of future issues.
                                                –5–            N11/2/A2ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


This question invites the candidates to consider the Cultural Option “Global issues.”

6.   A barely satisfactory answer will offer one or two examples of global problems and give one
     or two examples of ways in which resolution of them is being compromised by some form
     of “selfishness”.

     A better answer will offer a convincing argument about the ways in which the resolution of
     global problems is being compromised by some form of “selfishness”. Knowledge of
     particular contexts will be shown.

     The best answers will offer a substantial and convincing argument about the ways in which
     the resolution of global problems is being compromised by some form of “selfishness”.
     Detailed knowledge of particular contexts will be shown.



This question invites the candidates to consider the Cultural Option “Social issues”.

7.   A barely satisfactory answer will identify some welfare priorities and give one or
     two examples.

     A better answer will give more detailed assessment of welfare priorities and give examples
     that show knowledge of particular social contexts.

     The best answers will give more detailed discussion of welfare priorities and give examples
     that show a thorough knowledge of particular social contexts.
                                                –6–            N11/2/A2ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


These questions invite the candidate to consider a Literary Option.

8.    A barely satisfactory answer will offer examples of forgiving and forgetting and the
      difficulties of doing so in one or more of the works studied and offer general discussion of the
      question statement.

      A better answer will offer more detailed examples of forgiving and forgetting and the
      difficulties of doing so in one or more of the works studied and offer more sustained
      discussion of the question statement.

      The best answers will provide detailed examples of forgiving and forgetting and the
      difficulties of doing so in one or more of the works studied and offer sustained and balanced
      discussion of the question statement.


9.    A barely satisfactory answer will identify one or more characters or other individuals
      encountered in the literary text studied. One or two examples of what candidates admire will
      be given and some attempt made to explain their admiration.

      A better answer will give more detailed examples of what candidates admire in the characters
      or other individuals and provide an explanation for their admiration.

      The best answers will give detailed and pertinent examples of what candidates admire in
      the characters or other individuals and provide thoroughly convincing explanations for
      their admiration.


10.   A barely satisfactory answer will offer a general discussion of the struggle between good and
      evil in the literary works studied. One or two examples of that struggle will be given.

      A better answer will draw on appropriate examples and offer a discussion of the struggle
      between good and evil in the literary works studied and arrive at a conclusion.

      The best answers will use detailed and pertinent examples and offer sustained discussion
      of the struggle between good and evil in the literary works studied before arriving at a
      balanced conclusion.
