M&N14/4/COMSC/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS




COMPUTER SCIENCE
CASE STUDY: NETWORK SECURITY


For use in May 2014 and November 2014




INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

 Case study booklet required for higher level paper 3.




                                                                                                  6 pages
                                                          © International Baccalaureate Organization 2013
                                                               –2–           M&N14/4/COMSC/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

Introduction

Information technology has changed both the way individuals lead their lives and how companies manage
their business. The use of networking has not only revolutionized businesses internally, but has given them
global access to both resources and customers through the internet.

These benefits to businesses come at a price; the networks can equally be used by individuals and
organizations to target company websites with a complex arsenal of malware designed to threaten their
day-to-day operations.

The threat landscape has changed dramatically over the last few years. Previously malware was principally
the province of the computer-savvy script kiddies attempting to wreak as much havoc as possible and in
doing so create a name for themselves in the hacking world. Viruses disrupted IT systems, overloaded
servers and deleted data, but the damage tended to be temporary and the costs incurred were mainly due
to loss of operational time. However, the threats have increasingly become driven by financial gain and
are now being run by criminal organizations with the consequence that companies are paying heavily
both in direct losses and in costs incurred in trying to protect their networks and the data stored on them.
The landscape has become further complicated by the involvement of state organizations in orchestrating
attacks for political or ideological reasons.

Reliable figures showing the losses due to cybercrime are notoriously difficult to come by as companies
are often reluctant to provide such data or even admit that they have been attacked. However Norton, in
its 2012 cybercrime report, has estimated the global cost of consumer cybercrime to be US $110 billion
annually1.

In spite of the vast amount of resources spent in combating cybercrime, the majority of the threats continue
to increase, as shown by statistics taken from the Symantec Internet Security Threat Report for 20112.

              Threat                                      2010                           2011
              Bot Zombies                                 3 065 030                      4 500 000
              Unique variants of malware                  286 million                    403 million
              Estimated global spam per day               62 billion                     42 billion
              Malicious web domains                       42 926                         55 294
              New mobile vulnerabilities                  163                            315
              Zero-day attacks                            14 new vulnerabilities         8 new vulnerabilities

The increase in cybercrime has been paralleled with an increase in the services of network security personnel,
either employed directly by the businesses themselves or hired from consulting agencies. This case study
looks at the work of Susan Woo, who works for the fictitious security consultants XXXSecurity.


1
    http://now-static.norton.com/now/en/pu/images/Promotions/2012/cybercrimeReport/
    2012_Norton_Cybercrime_Report _Master_FINAL_050912.pdf
2
    http://www.symantec.com/threatreport/topic.jsp?id=threatreport&aid=2011_in_numbers
                                                           –3–     M&N14/4/COMSC/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

XXXSecurity

In a recent interview Susan outlined some of the trends being witnessed in both malware creation and
detection and the work in which she is currently engaged.

Trends in malware creation

Susan talked of how malware often enters a system through browser-based attacks, but in contrast to the
instant chaos of previous years would often now lie hidden whilst silently gathering the organization’s data.
She explained:

“Professional criminal organizations try to make use of bots, which is code that can replicate itself similar
to the way that worms function. But the additional facility they have is that they can be controlled from
some central location anywhere in the world, ready to accept commands and be activated at any time.
There is a thriving underground industry in the production of custom-based malware using toolkits which
can be bought and put together in order to achieve specific aims. The Zeus Botnet 3 is a particularly good
example of this.

“The success of attacks such as Stuxnet, Duqu and Flame has led to the term Advanced Persistent Threats
(APTs) which defines more a style of attack than one particular method. These attacks use an array of
weapons, including social engineering, to specifically target certain organizations.”

She also highlighted the dangers of zero-day attacks in which cyber-criminals use previously unknown
vulnerabilities to breach security controls.

Methods of detection

The traditional antivirus packages which are signature-based and the use of packet-filtering firewalls
still play a major role in protecting systems, but as the malware increases in sophistication, so do the tools.
Susan continued by discussing the changes in detection techniques.

“Detection and prevention are moving from being solely signature-based to anomaly-based in which
network traffic is compared to what is considered to be “normal”. Whitelisting takes the opposite point of
view from the way traditional anti-malware works by producing a local fingerprint of acceptable applications.

“A large proportion of internet traffic now uses protocols such as HTTP, HTTPS, IM and P2P, and while
traditional firewalls are good at filtering, they are not particularly good at inspecting the contents of this type
of traffic. Next Generation Firewalls (NGFW), however, have this facility, and can perform inspections on
packets that go further than only looking at port and protocol values.”

When asked about the safety brought about by encryption in the transferring of data, she urged caution,
explaining that even the use of SSL/TLS protocols can be undermined by man-in-the-middle attacks.


3
    http://www.fortiguard.com/analysis/zeusanalysis.html




                                                                                                       Turn over
                                                             –4–           M&N14/4/COMSC/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

One of Susan’s main areas of study is Denial of Service (DoS) attacks. These work in a variety of ways but
their common goal is to overload a specific site to the point at which it can no longer function as normal.
The perpetrators often form Botnets which are created from computers infected by malware which then
become zombies. They then launch a concerted attack on a particular site, eg the attack on Amazon
in 20084. Although the use of Botnets usually has a criminal intent, there have however been occasions when
popular opinion has led to organized attacks on particular websites, such as the mass attack perpetrated on
the country of Estonia in 20075.

The basic configuration of a Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attack is shown by the diagram below.

                                            Architecture of a DDoS Attack

                                                       ATTACKER


                             Handler                                                 Handler



          Zombie        Zombie       Zombie       Zombie         Zombie       Zombie        Zombie          Zombie




                                                         VICTIM


XXXSecurity is currently producing a series of pages on its website dedicated to the various forms
of malware. The information will not go down to the level of code, but will describe in detail how each
piece of malware works together with methods of prevention.

Susan has been assigned DoS attacks as her subject and will be focusing on the following three forms
of attacks, together with possible countermeasures, using actual examples as an illustration:

• Stack-based Buffer Overflow
• SYN Flood
• Smurf Attacks


4
    Information Week Security:
    http://www.informationweek.com/security/management/amazoncom-ddos-attacker-busted-in-cyprus/240004073
5
    International Affairs Review: http://www.iar-gwu.org/node/65
                                                   –5–         M&N14/4/COMSC/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

Susan is also currently advising two highly contrasting organizations: one is Western Heights, a large
multinational pharmaceutical company, and the other is Guanjong HS, a city high school. The type and
level of threats and the desired security measures are, not surprisingly, quite different:

“Although some security elements may be common to both, eg the use of proxy servers, installed security
software etc, the location of the threats is quite different between the two organizations, and this dictates
the level of security required. Whilst the main threats to the pharmaceutical company come from outside,
the principal threat posed to the school comes from within – from the practices of its own students.
Although the school will hold data it considers private, the surfing activities of the student body and their
possible consequences will affect the choice of security measures.

“On the other hand, the actions of APTs will focus prominently in the minds of the security personnel at
the pharmaceutical company. The installation and the maintenance of appropriate IDS/IPS systems for
the inspection of traffic both entering and leaving the network, which feed into a Security Information and
Event Management (SIEM) system, will be a priority for them.”

When asked about the future and the sectors in which malware will increasingly pose problems,
Susan focused on the increasing use of mobile devices and the phenomenal rise of social networking:

“Cyber-criminals will always go for the weakest links, and they see the proliferation of mobile devices with
their inherent security weaknesses and the move by many companies towards a Bring Your Own Device
(BYOD) policy as a golden opportunity. The continual threat of zero-day attacks, APTs and the inherent
fallibility of personnel mean that organizations can no longer rely on just securing the perimeter.

“Social networking is also seen as a prime target thanks to its ability to move large amounts of data around
and its extensive use in the workplace.”

Challenges Faced

Susan’s challenges for the immediate future are:

• to prepare the section on the company’s website for Denial of Service (DoS) attacks;

• to discuss with the network administrator of Guanjong High School the appropriate network security
  set-up for their school;

• to advise Western Heights of measures they should take against the threat of APTs;

• to prepare a report for the board of XXXSecurity on the growing security threats posed by the move
  towards BYOD.




                                                                                                  Turn over
                                                   –6–         M&N14/4/COMSC/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

Additional Terminology to the Guide

APTs
Bots
Botnets
BYOD
DoS / DDoS attacks
Firewalls
IDS
IM
IPS
Malware
Man-in-the-middle
Packet-filtering
Proxy server
Script kiddies
SIEM
Smurf attacks
Spam
SSL
Stack-based buffer overflow
SYN flood
Threat landscape
Toolkits
TLS
Vulnerability
Whitelisting
Worm
Zero-day attack/vulnerability
Zombies/zombie computers



Companies, products, or individuals named in this case study are fictitious and any similarities with actual
entities are purely coincidental.
