Internal assessment criteria—SL and HL
There are four IA criteria for the scientific investigation. The marks and weightings are as follows.Internal assessment
63 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Criterion Maximum number of marks 
availableWeighting (%)
Research design 6 25
Data analysis 6 25
Conclusion 6 25
Evaluation 6 25
Total 24 100
Research design
This  criterion  assesses  the extent  to which  the student  effectively  communicates  the methodology 
(purpose and practice) used to address the research question.
Marks Level descriptor
0 The report does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.
1–2 • The research question is stated without context.
• Methodological considerations associated with collecting data relevant to the 
research question are stated.
• The description of the methodology for collecting or selecting data lacks the detail 
to allow for the investigation to be reproduced.
3–4 • The research question is outlined within a broad context.
• Methodological considerations associated with collecting relevant and sufficient 
data to answer the research question are described.
• The description of the methodology for collecting or selecting data allows for the 
investigation to be reproduced with few ambiguities or omissions.
5–6 • The research question is described within a specific and appropriate context.
• Methodological considerations associated with collecting relevant and sufficient 
data to answer the research question are explained.
• The description of the methodology for collecting or selecting data allows for the 
investigation to be reproduced.
Clarifications for research design
A research question with context should contain reference to the dependent and independent variables 
or two correlated variables, include a concise description of the system in which the research question is 
embedded, and include background theory of direct relevance.
Methodological considerations include:
• the selection of the methods for measuring the dependent and independent variables
• the selection of the databases or model and the sampling of data
• the decisions regarding the scope, quantity and quality of measurements (e.g. the range, interval or 
frequency of the independent variable, repetition and precision of measurements)
• the identification of control variables and the choice of method of their control
• the recognition of any safety, ethical or environmental issues that needed to be taken into account.
The description of the methodology refers to presenting sufficiently detailed information (such as specific 
materials used and precise procedural steps) while avoiding unnecessary or repetitive information, so that Internal assessment
64 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Clarifications for research design
the reader may readily understand how the methodology was implemented and could in principle repeat 
the investigation.
Data analysis
This  criterion  assesses  the extent  to which  the student’s  report  provides  evidence  that  the student  has 
recorded, processed and presented the data in ways that are relevant to the research question.
Marks Level descriptor
0 The report does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–2 • The recording and processing of the data is communicated but is neither clear nor 
precise.
• The recording and processing of data shows limited evidence of the consideration 
of uncertainties.
• Some processing of data relevant to addressing the research question is carried out 
but with major omissions, inaccuracies or inconsistencies.
3–4 • The communication of the recording and processing of the data is either clear or 
precise.
• The recording and processing of data shows evidence of a consideration of 
uncertainties but with some significant omissions or inaccuracies.
• The processing of data relevant to addressing the research question is carried out 
but with some significant omissions, inaccuracies or inconsistencies.
5–6 • The communication of the recording and processing of the data is both clear and 
precise.
• The recording and processing of data shows evidence of an appropriate 
consideration of uncertainties.
• The processing of data relevant to addressing the research question is carried out 
appropriately and accurately.
Clarifications for data analysis
Data refers to quantitative data or a combination of both quantitative and qualitative data.
Communication
• Clear communication means that the method of processing can be understood easily.
• Precise communication refers to following conventions correctly, such as those relating to the 
annotation of graphs and tables or the use of units, decimal places and significant figures.
Consideration of uncertainties is subject specific and further guidance is given in the SEHS teacher support 
material .
Major omissions, inaccuracies or inconsistencies impede the possibility of drawing a valid conclusion that 
addresses the research question.
Significant omissions, inaccuracies or inconsistencies allow the possibility of drawing a conclusion that 
addresses the research question but with some limit to its validity or detail.
Conclusion
This  criterion  assesses  the extent  to which  the student  successfully  answers  their  research  question  with 
regard to their analysis and the accepted scientific context.Internal assessment
65 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Marks Level descriptor
0 The report does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–2 • A conclusion is stated that is relevant to the research question but is not supported 
by the analysis presented.
• The conclusion makes superficial comparison to the accepted scientific context.
• Practical implications of the findings are stated.
3–4 • A conclusion is described that is relevant to the research question but is not fully 
consistent with the analysis presented.
• A conclusion is described that makes some relevant comparison to the accepted 
scientific context.
• Practical implications of the findings are outlined.
5–6 • A conclusion is justified that is relevant to the research question and fully consistent 
with the analysis presented.
• A conclusion is justified through relevant comparison to the accepted scientific 
context.
• Practical implications of the findings are explained.
Clarifications for conclusion
A conclusion that is fully consistent requires the interpretation of processed data including associated 
uncertainties.
Scientific context refers to information that could come from published material (paper or online), 
published values, course notes, textbooks or other outside sources. The citation of published materials 
must be sufficiently detailed to allow these sources to be traceable.
Practical implications refer to real-world applications related to health or performance.
Evaluation
This  criterion  assesses  the extent  to which  the student’s  report  provides  evidence  of evaluation  of the 
investigation methodology and has suggested improvements.
Marks Level descriptor
0 The report does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–2 • The report states generic methodological weaknesses or limitations.
• Realistic improvements to the investigation are stated.
3–4 • The report describes specific methodological weaknesses or limitations.
• Realistic improvements to the investigation that are relevant to the identified 
weaknesses or limitations are described.
5–6 • The report explains the relative impact of specific methodological weaknesses or 
limitations.
• Realistic improvements to the investigation that are relevant to the identified 
weaknesses or limitations are explained.
Clarifications for evaluation
“Generic” is general to many methodologies and not specifically relevant to the methodology of the 
investigation being evaluated.Internal assessment
66 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Clarifications for evaluation
“Methodological” refers to the overall approach to the investigation of the research question as well as 
procedural steps.
“Weaknesses” could relate to issues regarding the control of variables, the precision of measurement or 
the variation in the data.
“Limitations” could refer to how the conclusion is limited in scope by the range of the data collected, the 
confines of the system or the applicability of assumptions made.Internal assessment
67 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Command terms for SEHS
Students  must  be familiar  with  the following  key terms  and  phrases  used  in examination  questions,  which 
are to be understood  as described  in this section.  Although  these  terms  will be used  frequently  in 
examination  questions,  other  terms  may  be used  to direct  students  to present  an argument  in a specific 
way. These command terms indicate the depth of treatment required.
Assessment objective 1
Command term Definition
Label Add labels to a diagram.
List Give a sequence of brief answers with no explanation.
State Give a specific name, value or other brief answer without explanation or 
calculation.
Assessment objective 2
Command term Definition
Annotate Add brief notes to a diagram or graph.
Apply Use an idea, equation, principle, theory or law in relation to a given problem or 
issue.
Calculate Obtain a numerical answer showing the relevant stages in the working.
Describe Give a detailed account.
Distinguish Make clear the differences between two or more concepts or items.
Estimate Obtain an approximate value.
Outline Give a brief account or summary.
Assessment objective 3
Command term Definition
Analyse Break down in order to bring out the essential elements or structure.
Compare Give an account of the similarities between two (or more) items or situations, 
referring to both (all) of them throughout.
Contrast Give an account of the differences between two (or more) items or situations, 
referring to both (all) of them throughout.
Deduce Reach a conclusion from the information given.
Determine Obtain the only possible answer.
Appendices