Business management guide
First assessment 2024Business management guide
First assessment 2024
Published February 2022
Updated May 2022
Published on behalf of the International Baccalaureate Organization, a not-for-profit 
educational foundation of 15 Route des Morillons, 1218 Le Grand-Saconnex, Geneva, 
Switzerland by the
International Baccalaureate Organization (UK) Ltd  
Peterson House, Malthouse Avenue, Cardiff Gate  
Cardiff, Wales CF23 8GL  
United Kingdom  
Website: ibo.org
© International Baccalaureate Organization 2022
The International Baccalaureate Organization (known as the IB) offers four high-quality 
and challenging educational programmes for a worldwide community of schools, aiming 
to create a better, more peaceful world. This publication is one of a range of materials 
produced to support these programmes.
The IB may use a variety of sources in its work and check information to verify accuracy 
and authenticity, particularly when using community-based knowledge sources such as 
Wikipedia. The IB respects the principles of intellectual property and makes strenuous 
efforts to identify and obtain permission before publication from rights holders of all 
copyright material used. The IB is grateful for permissions received for material used 
in this publication and will be pleased to correct any errors or omissions at the earliest 
opportunity.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the IB’s prior written 
permission, or as expressly permitted by the Rules for use of IB Intellectual Property .
IB merchandise and publications can be purchased through the IB Store                                    
(email: sales@ibo.org ). Any commercial use of IB publications (whether fee-covered or 
commercial) by third parties acting in the IB’s ecosystem without a formal relationship 
with the IB (including but not limited to tutoring organizations, professional development 
providers, educational publishers and operators of curriculum mapping or teacher 
resource digital platforms, etc.) is prohibited and requires a subsequent written licence 
from the IB. Licence requests should be sent to copyright@ibo.org . More information can 
be obtained on the IB public website .
Diploma Programme
Business management guide
International Baccalaureate , Baccalauréat International , Bachillerato Internacional   
and IB logos are registered trademarks of the International Baccalaureate Organization.IB mission statement
The International Baccalaureate aims to develop inquiring, knowledgeable and caring young people who 
help to create a better and more peaceful world through intercultural understanding and respect.
To this end the organization works with schools, governments and international organizations to develop 
challenging programmes of international education and rigorous assessment.
These programmes encourage students across the world to become active, compassionate and lifelong 
learners who understand that other people, with their differences, can also be right.IB learner profile I
profile IB learner parner profile IB leaile IB learner profiIB learner profile Ier profile IB learne
© International Bac calaur eate Or ganiza tion 2017
International Bac calaur eate® | Bac calaur éat International® | Bachiller ato Internacional®
The IB learner pro/f_ile represents 10 attributes valued by IB World Schools. We believe these attributes, and others 
like them, can help individuals and groups become responsible members of local, national and global communities.We nurture our curiosity, developing skills for inquiry and 
research. We know how to learn independently and with others. 
We learn with enthusiasm and sustain our love of learning 
throughout life.
We develop and use conceptual understanding, exploring 
knowledge across a range of disciplines. We engage with issues 
and ideas that have local and global signi/f_icance. 
We use critical and creative thinking skills to analyse and take 
responsible action on complex problems. We exercise initiative in 
making reasoned, ethical decisions.
We express ourselves con/f_idently and creatively in more than one 
language and in many ways.  We collaborate eﬀectively, listening 
carefully to the perspectives of other individuals and groups.
We act with integrity and honesty, with a strong sense of 
fairness and justice, and with respect for the dignity and rights 
of people everywhere. We take responsibility for our actions 
and their consequences.We critically appreciate our own cultures and personal histories, 
as well as the values and traditions of others. We seek and evaluate 
a range of points of view, and we are willing to grow from the 
experience.
We show empathy, compassion and respect. We have a 
commitment to service, and we act to make a positive diﬀerence 
in the lives of others and in the world around us.
We understand the importance of balancing diﬀerent aspects of 
our lives /emdash.capintellectual, physical, and emotional/emdash.cap to achieve 
well-being for ourselves and others. We recognize our interde-
pendence with other people and with the world in which we live.
We thoughtfully consider the world and our own ideas and expe-
rience. We work to understand our strengths and weaknesses in order to support our learning and personal development.We approach uncertainty with forethought and determination; we work independently and cooperatively to explore new ideas and innovative strategies. We are resourceful and resilient in the face of challenges and change.IB learner profile
The aim of all IB programmes is to develop internationally minded people who, recognizing their common 
humanity and shared guardianship of the planet, help to create a better and more peaceful world.
As IB learners we strive to be:THE IB LEARNER PROFILEIntroduction 1
Purpose of this document 1
The Diploma Programme 2
Nature of the subject 6
Approaches to the teaching and learning in business management 11
Aims 17
Assessment objectives 18
Assessment objectives in practice 19
Syllabus 21
Syllabus outline 21
Syllabus content 23
Assessment 37
Assessment in the Diploma Programme and Career-related Programme 37
Assessment outline—SL 39
Assessment outline—HL 40
External assessment 41
Internal assessment 51
Appendices 59
Presentation of financial  statements 59
Formulae 64
Discount tables (HL only) 66
Glossary of command terms 67
Glossary of subject-specific  terms 69
Bibliography 70
Contents
Business management guide
This  publication  is intended  to guide  the planning,  teaching  and  assessment  of the subject  in schools. 
Subject teachers are the primary audience, although it is expected that teachers will use the guide to inform 
students and parents about the subject.
This  guide  can be found  on the subject  page  of the programme  resource  centre  at resources.ibo.org , a 
password-protected  IB website  designed  to support  IB teachers.  It can also  be purchased  from  the IB store 
at store.ibo.org .
Additional resources
Additional  publications  such  as specimen  papers  and  markschemes,  teacher  support  materials,  subject 
reports  and  grade  descriptors  can also  be found  on the programme  resource  centre.  Past  examination 
papers as well as markschemes can be purchased from the IB store.
Teachers are encouraged to check the programme resource centre for additional resources created or used 
by other  teachers.  Teachers  can provide  details  of useful  resources,  for example:  websites,  books,  videos, 
journals or teaching ideas.
Acknowledgment
The IB wishes  to thank  the educators  and  associated  schools  for generously  contributing  time  and 
resources to the production of this guide.
First assessment 2024
Introduction
Purpose of this document
1 Business management guide
The Diploma  Programme  (DP)  is a rigorous  pre-university  course  of study  designed  for students  in the 
16 to 19 age range.  It is a broad-based  two-year  course  that  aims  to encourage  students  to be 
knowledgeable  and  inquiring,  but also  caring  and  compassionate.  There  is a strong  emphasis  on 
encouraging  students  to develop  intercultural  understanding,  open-mindedness,  and  the attitudes 
necessary for them to respect and evaluate a range of points of view.
The Diploma Programme model
The course  is presented  as six academic  areas  enclosing  a central  core  (see  figure  1). It encourages  the 
concurrent  study  of a broad  range  of academic  areas.  Students  study  two  modern  languages  (or a modern 
language  and  a classical  language),  a humanities  or social  science  subject,  an experimental  science, 
mathematics and one of the creative arts. It is this comprehensive range of subjects that makes the Diploma 
Programme  a demanding  course  of study  designed  to prepare  students  effectively  for university  entrance. 
In each  of the academic  areas  students  have  flexibility  in making  their  choices,  which  means  they  can 
choose subjects that particularly interest them and that they may wish to study further at university.
Figure 1
Diploma Programme model
Introduction
The Diploma Programme
2 Business management guide
Choosing the right combination
Students are required to choose one subject from each of the six academic areas, although they can, 
instead  of an arts  subject,  choose  two  subjects  from  another  area.  Normally,  three  subjects  (and  not 
more  than  four)  are taken  at higher  level  (HL),  and  the others  are taken  at standard  level  (SL).  The IB 
recommends 240 teaching hours for HL subjects and 150 hours for SL. Subjects at HL are studied in greater 
depth and breadth than at SL.
At both levels, many skills are developed, especially those of critical thinking and analysis. At the end of the 
course,  students’  abilities  are measured  by means  of external  assessment.  Many  subjects  contain  some 
element of coursework assessed by teachers.
The core of the Diploma Programme model
All DP students participate in the three course elements that make up the core of the model.
The theory  of knowledge  (TOK)  course  engages  students  in reflection  on the nature  of knowledge  and  on 
how  we know  what  we claim  to know.  It encourages  students  to become  more  aware  of their  own 
perspectives, and to reflect critically on their own beliefs and assumptions.
In TOK, students explore the means of producing knowledge within the core theme of “knowledge and the 
knower”  as well  as within  various  optional  themes  (knowledge  and  technology,  knowledge  and  politics, 
knowledge  and  language,  knowledge  and  religion,  and  knowledge  and  indigenous  societies)  and  areas  of 
knowledge  (the  arts,  natural  sciences,  human  sciences,  history,  and  mathematics).  The course  also 
encourages  students  to make  comparisons  between  different  areas  of knowledge  and  reflect  on how 
knowledge is arrived at in the various disciplines, what the disciplines have in common, and the differences 
between them.
Creativity,  activity,  service  (CAS)  is at the heart  of the DP. The emphasis  in CAS  is on helping  students  to 
develop  their  own  identities,  in accordance  with  the ethical  principles  embodied  in the IB mission 
statement  and  the IB learner  profile.  It involves  students  in a range  of activities  alongside  their  academic 
studies  throughout  the DP. The three  strands  of CAS  are creativity  (arts,  and  other  experiences  that  involve 
creative  thinking),  activity  (physical  exertion  contributing  to a healthy  lifestyle)  and  service  (an unpaid  and 
voluntary  exchange  that  has a learning  benefit  for the student).  Possibly,  more  than  any other  component 
in the DP, CAS  contributes  to the IB’s mission  to create  a better  and  more  peaceful  world  through 
intercultural understanding and respect.
The extended essay  (EE), including the world studies EE, offers the opportunity for IB students to investigate 
a topic  of special  interest,  in the form  of a 4,000-word  piece  of independent  research.  The area  of research 
undertaken  is chosen  from  one  of the students’  six DP subjects,  or in the case  of the interdisciplinary  world 
studies  essay,  two  subjects.  The essay  also  acquaints  students  with  the independent  research  and  writing 
skills  expected  at university.  This  leads  to a major  piece  of formally  presented,  structured  writing,  in which 
ideas  and  findings  are communicated  in a reasoned  and  coherent  manner,  appropriate  to the subject  or 
subjects  chosen.  It is intended  to promote  high-level  research  and  writing  skills,  intellectual  discovery  and 
creativity. An authentic learning experience it provides students with an opportunity to engage in personal 
research on a topic of choice, under the guidance of a supervisor.
Approaches to teaching and approaches to 
learning
Approaches  to teaching  and  approaches  to learning  across  the DP refers  to deliberate  strategies,  skills  and 
attitudes which permeate the teaching and learning environment. These approaches and tools, intrinsically 
linked  with  the learner  profile  attributes,  enhance  student  learning  and  assist  student  preparation  for the 
Diploma  Programme  assessment  and  beyond.  The aims  of approaches  to teaching  and  learning  in the 
Diploma Programme are to:
• empower teachers as teachers of learners as well as teachers of contentThe Diploma Programme
3 Business management guide
• empower teachers to create clearer strategies for facilitating learning experiences in which students 
are more meaningfully engaged in structured inquiry and greater critical and creative thinking
• promote both the aims of individual subjects (making them more than course aspirations) and linking 
previously isolated knowledge (concurrency of learning)
• encourage students to develop an explicit variety of skills that will equip them to continue to be 
actively engaged in learning after they leave school, and to help them not only obtain university 
admission through better grades but also prepare for success during tertiary education and beyond
• enhance further the coherence and relevance of the students’ DP experience
• allow schools to identify the distinctive nature of an IB Diploma Programme education, with its blend 
of idealism and practicality.
The five approaches  to learning  (developing  thinking  skills,  social  skills,  communication  skills,  self-
management  skills  and  research  skills)  along  with  the six approaches  to teaching  (teaching  that  is inquiry-
based,  conceptually  focused,  contextualized,  collaborative,  differentiated  and  informed  by assessment) 
encompass the key values and principles that underpin IB pedagogy.
Further  details  can be found  on the DP Approaches  to teaching  and  learning  website  on the programme 
resource centre.
The IB mission statement and the IB learner profile
The DP aims  to develop  in students  the knowledge,  skills  and  attitudes  they  will need  to fulfill  the aims  of 
the IB, as expressed  in the organization’s  mission  statement  and  the learner  profile.  Teaching  and  learning 
in the DP represent the reality in daily practice of the organization’s educational philosophy.
Academic integrity
Academic  integrity  in the Diploma  Programme  is a set of values  and  behaviours  informed  by the attributes 
of the learner  profile.  In teaching,  learning  and  assessment,  academic  integrity  serves  to promote  personal 
integrity,  engender  respect  for the integrity  of others  and  their  work,  and  ensure  that  all students  have  an 
equal opportunity to demonstrate the knowledge and skills they acquire during their studies.
All coursework—including  work  submitted  for assessment—is  to be authentic,  based  on the student’s 
individual  and  original  ideas  with  the ideas  and  work  of others  fully  acknowledged.  Assessment  tasks  that 
require  teachers  to provide  guidance  to students  or that  require  students  to work  collaboratively  must  be 
completed in full compliance with the detailed guidelines provided by the IB for the relevant subjects.
For further  information  on academic  integrity  in the IB and  the DP, please  consult  the IB publications 
Academic  integrity , Effective  citing  and  referencing , Diploma  Programme:  From  principles  into  practice  and  the 
relevant  articles  in the “General  regulations:  Diploma  Programme”  section  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment  procedures . Specific  information  regarding  academic  integrity  as it pertains  to external  and 
internal assessment components of this DP subject can be found in this guide.
Acknowledging the ideas or work of another 
person
Coordinators  and  teachers  are reminded  that  candidates  must  acknowledge  all sources  used  in work 
submitted for assessment. The following is intended as a clarification of this requirement.
Diploma  Programme  candidates  submit  work  for assessment  in a variety  of media  that  may  include  audio-
visual material, text, graphs, images and/or data published in print or electronic sources. If a candidate uses 
the work  or ideas  of another  person,  the candidate  must  acknowledge  the source  using  a standard  style  of 
referencing  in a consistent  manner.  A candidate’s  failure  to acknowledge  a source  will be investigated  by 
the IB as a potential  breach  of regulations  that  may  result  in a penalty  imposed  by the IB final  award 
committee.The Diploma Programme
4 Business management guide
The IB does not prescribe which style(s) of referencing or in-text citation should be used by candidates; this 
is left to the discretion  of appropriate  faculty/staff  in the candidate’s  school.  The wide  range  of subjects, 
three  response  languages  and  the diversity  of referencing  styles  make  it impractical  and  restrictive  to insist 
on particular  styles.  In practice,  certain  styles  may  prove  most  commonly  used,  but schools  are free  to 
choose  a style  that  is appropriate  for the subject  concerned  and  the language  in which  candidates’  work  is 
written.  Regardless  of the reference  style  adopted  by the school  for a given  subject,  it is expected  that  the 
minimum  information  given  includes:  name  of author,  date  of publication,  title  of source,  and  page 
numbers as applicable.
Candidates  are expected  to use a standard  style  and  use it consistently  so that  credit  is given  to all sources 
used,  including  sources  that  have  been  paraphrased  or summarized.  When  writing  text  candidates  must 
clearly  distinguish  between  their  words  and  those  of others  by the use of quotation  marks  (or other 
method, such as indentation) followed by an appropriate citation that denotes an entry in the bibliography. 
If an electronic  source  is cited,  the date  of access  must  be indicated.  Candidates  are not expected  to show 
faultless  expertise  in referencing,  but are expected  to demonstrate  that  all sources  have  been 
acknowledged.  Candidates  must  be advised  that  audio-visual  material,  text,  graphs,  images  and/or  data 
published  in print  or in electronic  sources  that  is not their  own  must  also  attribute  the source.  Again,  an 
appropriate style of referencing/citation must be used.
Learning diversity and learning support 
requirements
Schools  must  ensure  that  equal  access  arrangements  and  reasonable  adjustments  are provided  to 
candidates  with  learning  support  requirements  that  are in line with  the IB documents  Access  and  inclusion 
policy  and Learning diversity and inclusion in IB programmes: Removing barriers to learning . 
The documents  Meeting  student  learning  diversity  in the classroom  and  The  IB guide  to inclusive  education:  a 
resource  for whole  school  development  are available  to support  schools  in the ongoing  process  of increasing 
access and engagement by removing barriers to learning.The Diploma Programme
5 Business management guide
Figure 2
Overview of the curriculum model
The business  management  course  is designed  to meet  the current  and  future  needs  of students  who  want 
to develop  their  knowledge  of business  content,  concepts  and  tools  to assist  with  business  decision-
making.  Future  employees,  business  leaders,  entrepreneurs  or social  entrepreneurs  need  to be confident, 
creative  and  compassionate  as change  agents  for business  in an increasingly  interconnected  global 
marketplace.  The business  management  course  is designed  to encourage  the development  of these 
attributes.
Through  the exploration  of four  interdisciplinary  concepts— creativity , change , ethics  and  sustainability
—this  course  empowers  students  to explore  these  concepts  from  a business  perspective.  Business 
management focuses on business functions, management processes and decision-making in contemporary 
contexts of strategic uncertainty.
Students  examine  how  business  decisions  are influenced  by factors  that  are internal  and  external  to an 
organization and how these decisions impact upon a range of internal and external stakeholders. Emphasis 
is placed  on strategic  decision-making  and  the operational  business  functions  of human  resource 
management, finance and accounts, marketing, and operations management.
Introduction
Nature of the subject
6 Business management guide
The business  management  course  encourages  the application  of local,  national  and  global  examples  to 
content  and  concepts;  the internal  assessment  (IA) for both  SL and  HL is an individual  business  research 
project  that  allows  greater  analysis  and  evaluation  of content,  concepts  and  context.  Students  can develop 
a deeper  understanding  of an organization  by studying  its processes  through  the lenses  of creativity, 
change, ethics  and sustainability .
For the external assessment (paper 1 SL and HL), students will be assessed on their knowledge of important 
contemporary  business  topics  through  their  analysis  of a fictitious  business.  Paper  2 (SL and  HL) has a 
greater  focus  on developing  students’  analytical  and  financial  quantitative  skills.  This  will allow  students  to 
combine  their  qualitative  writing  as business  communicators  with  deeper  financial  analysis.  In paper  3 (HL 
only)  students  apply  their  knowledge  of business  tools  and  content  through  an innovative  and  potentially 
disruptive  social  enterprise.  This  paper  will allow  business  students  to demonstrate  their  empathetic, 
creative,  analytical  and  evaluative  skills.  It will allow  students  to make  ethical  strategic  decisions  for their 
stakeholders on a disruptive good or service; in the process, changing the lives of their stakeholders for the 
better.
Business  management  is a challenging  and  dynamic  discipline  that  more  than  meets  the needs  of our 
students  growing  and  developing  in a complex  business  environment.  This  course  prepares  students  to be 
global  citizens  ready  to face  up to the challenges  and  opportunities  awaiting  them  in our ever-changing 
world.
Distinction between SL and HL
The SL course in business management differs from the HL course in terms of the:
• recommended hours devoted to teaching (150 hours for SL compared to 240 hours for HL)
• extra depth and breadth required (extension material for HL only)
• nature of the examination questions in papers 2 and 3.
◦ Paper 2 for both SL and HL focuses on developing quantitative skills; however, HL students will 
need to develop these further in greater depth.
◦ Paper 3 is an HL-only paper based on a social enterprise, where students identify and describe a 
human need and the potential organizational challenges facing the social entrepreneur. Further 
to this, students are required to write a decision-making document that includes a business 
recommendation.
Business management and the core
Business management and theory of knowledge
Theory  of knowledge  (TOK)  explores  questions  about  knowledge  and  the process  of knowing.  TOK 
emphasizes  comparisons  and  connections  between  areas  of knowledge  and  encourages  students  to 
become more aware of their perspectives and the perspectives of others.
There  are potential  TOK  connections  throughout  the business  management  syllabus.  For example,  there  is 
a particularly  strong  synergy  between  the business  management  topic  of management  information 
systems  and  the optional  TOK  theme  of “knowledge  and  technology”.  Both  consider  the impact  of today's 
“information age”, its scope and ethical considerations concerning innovations such as artificial intelligence 
and data mining.
In TOK,  students  study  a core  theme,  optional  themes  and  areas  of knowledge  using  a tool  called  the 
“knowledge framework”. This framework consists of four elements: scope, perspectives, methods and tools, 
and  ethics.  The links  between  business  management  and  the TOK  knowledge  framework  elements  are 
explored briefly under the following headings.Nature of the subject
7 Business management guide
Scope
How  do we decide  whether  a particular  discipline  should  be regarded  as a human  science?  Do the 
disciplines  in the human  sciences  diverge  from  each  other  more  fundamentally  than  disciplines  in other 
areas of knowledge? Are some types of knowledge more useful than others?
This  element  explores  how  the discipline  and  practice  of business  management  fits within  the totality  of 
human  knowledge.  It encourages  discussion  of how  business  management  relates to other  academic 
disciplines,  and  how  the human  sciences  compare  and  contrast  with  other  areas  of knowledge.  Students 
could  also  reflect  on how  business  organizations  support  almost  every  aspect  of human  endeavour  from 
public  universities  and  private  pharmaceutical  companies  working  together  to develop  new  vaccines,  to 
non-government  organizations  (NGOs)  providing  primary  education  to the rural  poor  in developing 
countries.  The scope  of business  organizations  to develop  knowledge  and  ideas  is only  limited  by 
entrepreneurs'  collective  imaginations.  Discussions  of scope  also  allow  students  to explore  the limitations 
and potential applications of new knowledge that is generated by business organizations.
Perspectives
Are some types of knowledge less open to interpretation than others? Why do facts sometimes not change 
our minds? How can we decide between the views of experts when they disagree with each other?
This  element  focuses  on the importance  of context  and  different  perspectives.  Perspectives  are a crucial 
aspect  of all IB courses—the  IB mission  statement  closes  with  the aim of developing  “… learners  who 
understand  that  other  people,  with  their  differences,  can also  be right”.  There  are many  ways  to make 
exciting and compelling links to perspectives in the business management course. For example, a recurring 
topic  throughout  the business  management  syllabus  is stakeholders,  their  differing  viewpoints,  conflicting 
objectives  and  how  they  are affected  by change.  Considering  the differing  perspectives  of stakeholder 
groups  allows  students  to gain  a greater  understanding  of issues  as diverse  as financial  accounts  and 
workforce  participation.  Linking  to TOK  discussions  about  perspectives  can help  students  to deepen 
understanding of their own perspectives as well as making them more aware of the perspectives of others.
Methods and tools
To what  extent  are the methods  used  in the human  sciences  “scientific”?  To what  extent  can human 
scientists use mathematical techniques to make accurate predictions? How can we judge when evidence is 
adequate?
This  element  focuses  on exploring  the methods,  tools  and  practices  that  we use to produce  knowledge. 
Woven  into  every  unit  is the business  management  toolkit.  This  suite  of decision-making  tools  is designed 
to help  business  leaders  assess  their  current  situation  and  implement  strategies  for the future.  To evaluate 
these  tools,  students  must  consider  the reliability  of the data  fed into  these  tools  and  the subjectivity  of 
their  outcomes.  This  evaluative  approach  also  fits with  the fourth  aim of the business  management  course, 
which helps students to engage with decision-making as a process and a skill.
Ethics
In what  ways  do ethical  judgments  differ  from  other  kinds  of decisions?  To what  extent  are the methods  of 
the human  sciences  limited  by the ethical  considerations  involved  in studying  human  beings?  Does  all 
knowledge impose moral obligations on those who know it?
Ethics is both part of the TOK knowledge framework and one of the concepts in business management. The 
first aim of this course  is “to develop  as confident,  creative  and  compassionate  business  leaders, 
entrepreneurs, social entrepreneurs, and as change agents”. Students can consider ethical decision-making 
within  every  unit,  whether  it be privacy  issues  relating  to big data  and  consumer  profiling  or the moral 
objectives  of social  enterprises.  When  making  links  to TOK  and  ethics,  the focus  should  be clearly  on ethics 
concerning  knowledge.  So, for example,  rather  than  merely  debating  whether  a controversial  issue  is right 
or wrong,  in TOK,  students  would  consider  what  criteria  we could  use to make  such  judgments,  who 
decides, or where our values and moral beliefs come from.Nature of the subject
8 Business management guide
The DP business  management  course  has multiple  opportunities  for teachers  and  students  to explore  TOK 
connections  and  the nature  of knowledge.  Sample  questions  in each  unit  are included  to ignite  classroom 
discussion and student interest.
Note : These  suggestions  are not prescriptive,  and  teachers  are encouraged  to follow  their  interests  and 
those of their class.
Business management and the extended essay
An extended  essay  (EE) in business  management  provides  students  with  an opportunity  to undertake  in-
depth research in a certain area or topic in the subject. The world of business management offers potential 
for creative EEs. Students have a diverse range of areas to conduct their independent research from human 
resource management, to finance, to operations, to marketing.
While undertaking the business management course, students develop essential skills that can enable them 
to produce  a well-balanced  EE. Although  students  are expected  to base  their  EE on secondary  resources, 
primary research can be used as well, where appropriate. Students may wish to use secondary material such 
as company data, which is often accessible due to the reporting requirements of businesses.
To develop  and  support  their  arguments,  students  should  apply  relevant  business  theory  and  conduct 
through analysis and evaluation in an effort to answer the research question.
The EE in business  management  is not an extension  of the internal  assessment  (IA) task  for the subject. 
Students must have a clear understanding of the distinction between the IA and the EE.
For more  information  refer  to the “Business  management:  Subject-specific  guidance”  section  of the EE 
website , found on the programme resource centre.
Business management and creativity, activity, service
In the business management course students explore interactions between humans and their environment 
in their  own  context  and  learn  to reflect  on their  own  identity,  and  potential  roles  in society.  They  are 
encouraged  to contribute  to positive  change  in their  communities.  Students  develop  awareness  and 
knowledge  of how  certain  businesses  work,  through  in-depth  research  of case  studies,  including  an IA 
component that deepens their understanding of the complexities in business.
This  knowledge  is extended  through  creativity,  activity,  service  (CAS),  where  students  are motivated  to act 
as responsible global citizens. By acquiring skills, they learn about strategic thinking and setting objectives, 
acquire planning skills and develop an appreciation for different cultural perspectives within organizations. 
These  skills  support  their  CAS  activities  and  help  the students  to choose  CAS  activities  with  significance  or 
meaning for their communities.
Business management and the IB learner profile
The business  management  course  helps  to meet  the demands  of the IB mission  statement  that  “aims  to 
develop inquiring, knowledgeable and caring young people who help to create a better and more peaceful 
world  through  intercultural  understanding  and  respect”  (IB mission  statement).  This  mission  is further 
delineated through the attributes of the IB learner profile, and the business management curriculum allows 
students  opportunities  to demonstrate  and  develop  these  attributes  through  the implicit  and  explicit 
content of the course.
IB learners are: Business management students will:
inquirers undertake independent and collaborative investigations into real-world business case 
studies, for example, through the IA research project where they develop overarching 
concept-driven questions and gather relevant data to address these.
knowledgeable utilize business concepts, theories and models with confidence to gain a more 
sophisticated understanding of current strategic decision-making even under 
conditions of uncertainty.Nature of the subject
9 Business management guide
IB learners are: Business management students will:
thinkers synthesize and evaluate business information and data to draw conclusions and 
develop balanced, well-supported arguments including recommending suitable 
courses of action.
communicators compose clear and concise analytical responses utilizing the terminology and tools of 
business, especially in the written assessments.
principled act with integrity, critically evaluating statistical data and evidence, understanding that 
the possession of knowledge carries with it an ethical responsibility.
open-minded understand that decision-making involves the consideration of different causes, effects 
and perspectives and therefore the need to offer a range of solutions to business 
problems/issues.
caring appreciate that business management is a social science that has a human impact, 
influencing the well-being of individuals and societies.
risk-takers utilize business knowledge and understanding to develop and present creative 
business conclusions/recommendations for real-world organizations in local, national 
and global contexts
balanced understand the importance of considering different perspectives when making 
business decisions, including evaluating their impact on various stakeholders
reflective acknowledge their own inherent bias when making decisions with an awareness of 
their own strengths and weaknesses; hence, seek out new further sources of 
information to ensure that solutions are as effective as they can be given prevailing 
strategic uncertainty.
Business management and international-
mindedness
Developing  international-mindedness  is essential  to the business  management  course.  Many  businesses 
operate  across  national  borders  and  even  seemingly  local  businesses  are influenced  by international 
competition. The business management course helps students to understand and evaluate the implications 
of business activity in an interconnected, global market.
The course  encourages  the use of inquiries,  contemporary  examples  and  case  studies  at a variety  of levels, 
from the local to the global, as well as from smaller scale businesses to multinational ones. Throughout the 
course,  teachers  can choose  case  studies  that  reflect  the context  that  they  are teaching  as well  as case 
studies that allow for comparisons across contexts. The four key concepts underpinning the course create a 
framework  for these  discussions.  The course  is designed  to give  students  an international  perspective  and 
to encourage  their  appreciation  of cultural  diversity  among  different  types  of business  organizations,  and 
individuals and groups within them.
The course  promotes  the ideals  of international  cooperation  and  responsible  citizenship.  Students  are 
encouraged  to make  sense  of the forces  and  circumstances  that  drive  and  restrain  change  in an 
interdependent and multicultural world.Nature of the subject
10 Business management guide
Conceptually  focused  and  contextualized  teaching  and  learning  is important  for business  management. 
Case studies and real-world examples help to keep the right focus within the course.
Figure 3
The relationship between inquiries, concepts, content and contexts in business management
As indicated  in figure  3, the three  components  of concepts , content  and  contexts  are of equal  relevance 
and  teachers  may  choose  any one  as a starting  point  for their  teaching.  Concepts  are anchored  in the 
content  of business  management—its  tools  and  theories—and  are given  context  through  the study  of 
case  studies  and  real-world  examples.  Together  these  components  help  students  to acquire  a holistic  and 
integrated understanding of business management as a discipline.
The business  management  course  is focused  on inquiry-based  teaching  and  learning,  where  students  are 
given  the opportunity  to explore  business  tools  and  theories  using  case  studies  and  create  their  own 
questions  and  formulate  their  own  solutions  to problems  or issues  facing  an organization.  This  inquiry 
approach can be used, for example, in paper 1 and the concept-based business research project IA for both 
SL and  HL. The teaching  of the business  management  content  should,  therefore,  be supported  by focusing 
on case studies and applying real-world examples. In some of the assessments, students will be expected to 
demonstrate their understanding of business management through the lens of a case study rather than the 
response  being  purely  theoretical.  In doing  this,  the students  will go beyond  their  comprehension  of just 
theory and clearly analyse or evaluate the situation highlighted in the different case studies.
While  inquiry  permeates  the whole  course,  the assessment  objective  3 (AO3)  topics  that  require  more 
depth are considered areas that lend themselves particularly well to this approach. However, it is important 
that  teachers  know  that  inquiry  as a teaching  and  learning  strategy  is not only  applicable  to AO3  topics. 
Introduction
Approaches to the teaching and learning in business 
management
11 Business management guide
Teachers  need  to see the value  of this approach  in terms  of allowing  students  to develop  and  demonstrate 
higher-order  thinking  skills.  It is important  to highlight  that  inquiry  needs  to be taking  place  to ensure 
students  are actively  involved  in researching  business  issues.  This  inquiry  approach  will aid students  in 
developing  critical  thinking  and  problem-solving  skills,  an appreciation  of different  viewpoints, 
collaboration and reflective discussion.
Business  skills  are important  to the study  of business  management  and  reflect  the subject’s  distinctive 
approach.  The teaching  and  learning  of these  skills  enriches  the students’  understanding  of business  and 
enables  them  to apply  these  to various  business  theories  and  tools.  It is essential  that  the skills  should  be 
covered  throughout  the course  and  that  they  are introduced  and integrated  where  appropriate  in relation 
to the concepts,  content  and  contexts  at both  SL and  HL. Students  are expected  to demonstrate 
competence in the use of business skills in both the external assessment and internal assessment.
Formative  assessment , as a central  part  of learning  and  teaching,  helps  students  to build  up the primary 
and secondary skills required to reach their learning objectives in the subject and beyond.
Primary  skills  refer  to those  key constructs  that  we want  to assess  and  are usually  stated  explicitly  in the 
learning  objectives  or the assessment  objectives  of the final  assessment  components.  For example, 
students’ abilities to apply business management tools and theories in case studies.
Secondary  skills , however,  are not explicit  in the key learning  objectives  or assessment  objectives  in that 
subject  but are necessary  skills  for the students  to perform  effectively  in the subject  and  beyond.  These  are 
usually  implicit  skills  that  are transdisciplinary  and  transferrable  to other subjects.  For example,  research 
skills, reading comprehension skills, summarizing and synthesis skills.
These skills are further explored in the Business management teacher support material  (TSM).
The four  concepts  that  underpin  the business  management  course  (change,  creativity,  ethics  and 
sustainability)  are integrated  into  the conceptual  understandings  of all the units  to ensure  that  a 
conceptual thread is woven throughout the course.
Conceptually focused teaching helps learners to:
• organize new information by categorizing groups of facts, ideas, theories and tools according to 
patterns of similarity or difference
• deepen their understanding of the complex and dynamic business world
• approach concepts and content in different ways through multiple perspectives
• make connections with other subjects to enhance interdisciplinary learning
• design overarching inquiry questions or statements that link concepts to content and to contexts.
Conceptual understanding  therefore enhances the student’s overall understanding of the course, making 
the subject  more  meaningful.  This  understanding  assists  students  in showing  clear  evidence  of synthesis 
and evaluation in their responses to questions asked in the external assessment (even though the questions 
may not be explicitly concept based). In the internal assessment, however, students must use a concept as a 
lens through which to analyse their research project.
The definition,  relative  importance  and  relationship  to the subject  of business  management  of each  of the 
four  key concepts  may  be the subject  of debate.  Teachers  should  explore  how  these  concepts  may  be 
understood and applied differently in different contexts. Figure 4 provides brief understandings of how the 
key concepts may be initially understood in relation to the course.
Figure 4
The relationship between the key concepts and the business management course
Key concept Understanding in relation to the course
Change This concept is explored from several perspectives since businesses operate in a 
dynamic world that is subject to constant change. Change may be a conversion, 
transformation, or movement from one form, state or value to another. Inquiry 
into the concept of change involves understanding and evaluating causes, 
processes and consequences. Due to increasing competition, new technologies 
and markets as well as changing trends in consumer behaviour, business Approaches to the teaching and learning in business management
12 Business management guide
Key concept Understanding in relation to the course
organizations need to adapt their objectives, strategies and operations if they are 
to succeed. This success emerges from their ability to research and respond to 
signals in both the internal and external environment.
Creativity Creativity is the process of generating new ideas and considering existing ideas 
from new perspectives. Creativity includes the ability to recognize the value of 
ideas when developing innovative responses to problems; it may be evident in 
the process as well as outcomes, products or solutions. The creation of ideas and 
solutions involves a process of synthesizing and evaluating in response to 
surrounding changes.
Ethics Ethics refers to moral principles, code or morals that govern the behaviour of a 
person or group of people. In understanding ethics, it is important to note that 
every business decision has moral implications. These decision-making processes 
are based on moral philosophies or guidelines that influence the way a business 
conducts itself. The consequences of these implications can be significant for 
internal and external stakeholders and the natural environment.
Sustainability Sustainability is “meeting the needs of the present without compromising the 
ability of future generations to meet their own needs” (United Nations 1987).
Sustainability can be enhanced by conserving resources or finding more efficient 
ways to produce or discover new resources. Business decisions should consider 
the impacts of their results on people, planet and profit (this is termed the “triple 
bottom line”).
• Cultural/social sustainability (people): businesses are encouraged to be 
aware of their cultural and community settings. Within this mindset 
businesses focus not only on the local community but also consider the 
cultural norms and values within the external environment.
• Environmental sustainability (planet): this demands that enterprises work 
on minimizing their negative environmental impact through different 
practices such as reusing, recycling or reducing waste.
• Economic sustainability (profit): businesses/entrepreneurs are risk-takers 
and strive to make a profit, which is part of their economic responsibility. 
However, this also translates into employment opportunities and tax 
revenue to allow for further development of the community.
Specific examples of how these key concepts can be integrated into the teaching and learning of the course 
can be found in the TSM.
Business management toolkit
The business  management  toolkit  is a set of situational,  planning  and  decision-making  tools.  These  tools 
should  be used  by students  to analyse  and  evaluate  the syllabus  content  and  can be applied  in different 
disciplinary  and  interdisciplinary  contexts;  teachers  should  integrate  the tools  while  teaching  the course. 
Suggestions  for usage  are included  in figure  5 and  in every  unit.  A visual  business  management  toolkit  is 
available in the TSM.
Note:  The suggested  areas  of tool  integration  are indicative  only  and  teachers  should  feel free  to integrate 
the tools  in other  unit  areas  where  appropriate.  All of these  tools  must  be taught  (at AO2  and  AO4  level) 
alongside the syllabus content.
Note : All tools are SL and HL unless otherwise stated. HL only tools are in bold.Approaches to the teaching and learning in business management
13 Business management guide
Figure 5
The business management toolkit
Business management tools Suggested unit areas for integration of tools (not 
exhaustive)
SWOT analysis 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
Ansoff matrix 1, 4
STEEPLE analysis 1, 2, 4
Boston Consulting Group (BCG) matrix 3, 4
Business plan 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
Decision trees 1, 5
Descriptive statistics
These include the following.
• Mean
• Mode
• Median
• Bar charts
• Pie charts
• Infographics
• Quartiles
• Standard deviation2, 3, 4, 5
Circular business models
These include the following.
• Circular supply models
• Resource recovery models
• Product life extension models
• Sharing models
• Product service system models1, 5
Force field analysis (HL only) 2, 5
Gantt chart (HL only) 4, 5
Hofstede’s cultural dimensions (HL only) 2, 4, 5
Porter's generic strategies (HL only) 1, 4
Contribution (HL only)
Includes the following. 
• Make or buy analysis
• Contribution costing
• Absorption costing3, 4, 5
Critical path analysis (HL only)
Includes the following.
• Completion and analyses of a critical 
path diagram (drawing of the 
diagram is not expected)
• Identification of the critical path4, 5
• Calculation of free and total float
Simple linear regression (HL only)
Includes the following.
• Scatter diagrams
• Line of best fit
• Correlation/Extrapolation1, 4, 5
The TSM  provides  further  guidance  on the application  of this toolkit  including  additional  support  on the 
approaches to teaching and learning in the course.
Engaging with sensitive topics
The study  of business  management  provides  students  with  an opportunity  to engage  with  exciting, 
stimulating and personally relevant business topics and issues. However, it should be noted that often such 
topics  and  issues  can also  be sensitive  and  personally  challenging.  Teachers  should  be aware  of this and 
provide guidance to students on how to approach and engage with such topics and issues in a responsible 
and inclusive manner, providing due consideration to questions and issues that may arise.
Prior learning
The business  management  course  requires  no specific  prior  learning  of business  management  or business 
studies.  No particular  background  in terms  of specific  subjects  for national  or international  qualifications  is 
expected  or required.  However,  a familiarity  with  business  concepts  and  theories  would  be an advantage, 
as would completing the individuals and societies course in the Middle Years Programme (MYP).
Links to the Middle Years Programme
The MYP  individuals  and  societies  subject  group  involves  inquiry  into  historical,  contemporary,  political, 
social, economic, cultural, technological and environmental contexts that impact on, and are influenced by, 
individuals  and  societies.  This  is a very  useful  foundation  for students  who  go on to study  the DP business 
management course.
Students  who  have  studied  through  the MYP  are familiar  with  a conceptual  approach  to learning.  For 
example,  the concepts  of change , creativity , ethics  and  sustainability  (within  MYP  individual  and 
societies courses) are further developed in the DP business management course. Conceptual analysis in the 
business  management  course  is expected  to have  an increasing  degree  of sophistication  and  disciplinary 
specificity.
The development  of certain  skills  in the MYP  individuals  and  societies  subject  group  is also  excellent 
preparation  for a DP course  in business  management,  which  requires  the student  to inquire,  demonstrate 
knowledge  and  understanding  of content  and  concepts,  and  exhibit  the capacity  to think  critically  in a 
given contextual setting. This learning process supports higher-level mastery of the approaches to teaching 
and learning skills.
Links to the Career-related Programme
In the Career-related  Programme  (CP),  students  study  at least  two  DP subjects,  a core  consisting  of four 
components and a career-related study, which is determined by the local context and aligned with student 
needs.  Courses  can be chosen  from  any group  of the DP, and  it is possible  to study  more  than one  course 
from the same group (for example, business management and economics).Approaches to the teaching and learning in business management
15 Business management guide
Business  management  develops  the student’s  creative,  critical  thinking  and  decision-making  skills,  which 
are highly  desired  across  a range  of career-related  pursuits.  Business  management  is an ideal  choice  for CP 
students considering careers in investment banking, chartered accounting, finance, corporate law, research, 
leisure and tourism, government and non-governmental organizations, project management, and so on.
The DP business  management  course  emphasizes  the development  of: strong  written,  verbal  and  visual 
communication  skills;  critical  thinking;  problem-solving  and  ethical  considerations  that  will assist  students 
in preparing  for the future  global  workplace.  This  in turn  fosters  the IB learner  profile  attributes  that  are 
transferable to the entire CP, providing relevance and support for the student’s learning.
For CP students,  DP courses  can be studied  at SL or HL. Schools  can explore  opportunities  to integrate  CP 
students with DP students.Approaches to the teaching and learning in business management
16 Business management guide
Individuals and societies aims
Individuals  and  societies  subjects  help  young  people  to develop  a connection  to our shared  planet, 
exploring  how  to live sustainably  and  promoting  the well-being  of all people  in our pursuit  of a more 
peaceful world.
The aims of all the individuals and societies subjects are to equip young people to:
1. explore and critically engage with multiple perspectives and ways of thinking
2. investigate and evaluate the interactions between individuals and societies
3. think and act as informed and principled individuals in societies
4. understand and value the variety and diversity of the human experience across time and place.
Business management aims
The aims of the business management course at SL and HL are to enable students to:
1. develop as confident, creative and compassionate business leaders, entrepreneurs, social 
entrepreneurs and as change agents
2. foster an informed understanding of ethical and sustainable business practices
3. explore the connections between individuals, businesses and society
4. engage with decision-making as a process and a skill.
Introduction
Assessment objectives
18 Business management guide
By the end of the business management course, students are expected to achieve the following assessment 
objectives.
AO1: Knowledge and understanding
Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of:
• business management tools and theories
• course topics and concepts
• business problems, issues and decisions
• HL extension topics ( HL only ).
AO2: Application and analysis
Apply and analyse:
• business management tools and theories
• course topics and concepts
• business problems, issues and decisions
• business decisions and issues through the selection and use of appropriate data
• HL extension topics ( HL only ).
AO3: Synthesis and evaluation
Synthesize and evaluate:
• business management tools and theories
• course topics and concepts
• business problems, issues and decisions
• stakeholder interests to reach informed business decisions
• recommendations for competing future strategic options ( HL only )
• HL extension topics ( HL only ).
AO4: Use and application of appropriate skills
• Select and apply relevant business management tools, theories and concepts to support research into 
a business issue or problem.
• Select, interpret and analyse business materials from a range of primary and secondary sources.
• Create well-structured materials using business management terminology.
• Communicate analysis, evaluation and conclusions of research effectively.
Introduction
Assessment objectives in practice
19 Business management guide
Assessment objective Key command term Depth
AO1 —knowledge and 
understandingDefine
Describe
Identify
List
Outline
StateThese terms require students to 
learn and comprehend the 
meaning of information.
AO2 —application and analysis Analyse
ApplyThese terms require students to 
use their knowledge and skills to 
Introduction
Assessment objectives in practice
20 Business management guide
Assessment objective Key command term Depth
Comment
Demonstrate
Distinguish
Explain
Suggestbreak down ideas into simpler 
parts and to see how the parts 
relate.
AO3 —synthesis and evaluation Compare
Compare and contrast
Contrast
Discuss
Evaluate
Examine
Justify
Recommend
To what extentThese terms require students to 
rearrange component ideas into a 
new whole and make judgments 
based on evidence or a set of 
criteria.
AO4 —use and application of 
appropriate skillsAnnotate
Calculate
Complete
Construct
Determine
Draw
Label
Plot
PrepareThese terms require students to 
demonstrate the selection and use 
of subject-specific skills and 
techniques.Assessment objectives in practice
20 Business management guide
Syllabus component Recommended teaching 
hours
SL HL
Unit 1: Introduction to business management
1.1 What is a business?
1.2 Types of business entities
1.3 Business objectives
1.4 Stakeholders
1.5 Growth and evolution
1.6 Multinational companies (MNCs)20 20
Unit 2: Human resource management
2.1 Introduction to human resource management
2.2 Organizational structure
2.3 Leadership and management
2.4 Motivation and demotivation
2.5 Organizational (corporate) culture ( HL only )
2.6 Communication
2.7 Industrial/employee relations ( HL only )20 35
Unit 3: Finance and accounts
3.1 Introduction to finance
3.2 Sources of finance
3.3 Costs and revenues
3.4 Final accounts
3.5 Profitability and liquidity ratio analysis
3.6 Efficiency ratio analysis ( HL only )
3.7 Cash flow
3.8 Investment appraisal
3.9 Budgets ( HL only)30 45
Unit 4: Marketing
4.1 Introduction to marketing
4.2 Marketing planning
4.3 Sales forecasting ( HL only )
4.4 Market research
4.5 The seven Ps of the marketing mix
4.6 International marketing ( HL only )30 35
Unit 5: Operations management
5.1 Introduction to operations management15 45
Syllabus
Syllabus outline
21 Business management guide
Syllabus component Recommended teaching 
hours
SL HL
5.2 Operations methods
5.3 Lean production and quality management ( HL only )
5.4 Location
5.5 Break-even analysis
5.6 Production planning ( HL only )
5.7 Crisis management and contingency planning ( HL only )
5.8 Research and development ( HL only )
5.9 Management information systems ( HL only )
Business management toolkit 10 35
Research time allocated for the pre-released statement in paper 1 5 5
Internal assessment 20 20
Total teaching hours 150 240Syllabus outline
22 Business management guide
Unit 1: Introduction to business management
Conceptual understandings
• Change  is essential for businesses to achieve their desired aims
• Creative  business planning can lead to organizational success
• Ethical  business behaviour improves a business’ image as well as customer loyalty
• Sustainable  business practices can enhance a business’ existence
Suggested business management tools to integrate (other tools may also be integrated)
SWOT analysis, Ansoff Matrix, STEEPLE analysis, business plan, decision trees, circular business models, 
Porter’s generic strategies (HL only), simple linear regression (HL only)
Note:  All content is SL and HL unless otherwise stated. HL only content is in  bold .
1.1 What is a business? Depth of teaching
The nature of business AO1
Primary, secondary, tertiary and quaternary sectors AO2
Entrepreneurship AO2
Challenges and opportunities for starting up a business AO2
1.2 Types of business entities Depth of teaching
Distinction between the private and the public sectors AO2
The main features of the following types of organizations.
• Sole traders
• Partnerships
• Privately held companies
• Publicly held companiesAO3
The main features of the following types of for-profit social enterprises.
• Private sector companies
• Public sector companies
• CooperativesAO3
The main features of the following type of non-profit social enterprise.
• Non-governmental organizations (NGOs)AO3
1.3 Business objectives Depth of teaching
Vision statement and mission statement AO2
Syllabus
Syllabus content
23 Business management guide
1.3 Business objectives Depth of teaching
Common business objectives including growth, profit, protecting shareholder value 
and ethical objectivesAO2
Strategic and tactical objectives AO3
Corporate social responsibility (CSR) AO3
1.4 Stakeholders Depth of teaching
Internal and external stakeholders AO2
Conflict between stakeholders AO2
1.5 Growth and evolution Depth of teaching
Internal and external economies and diseconomies of scale AO2
The difference between internal and external growth AO2
Reasons for businesses to grow AO3
Reasons for businesses to stay small AO3
External growth methods.
• Mergers and acquisitions (M&As)
• Takeovers
• Joint ventures
• Strategic alliances
• FranchisingAO3
1.6 Multinational companies (MNCs) Depth of teaching
The impact of MNCs on the host countries AO3
Suggested inquiry statements to explore
• How corporate social responsibility (CSR) could impact business creativity.
• Why business objectives might change over time.
• How ethical behaviour contributes to business sustainability.
• Why change could bring conflict among stakeholders.
• How businesses could benefit from adopting circular business models.
Suggested theory of knowledge questions
• Is the depiction of “business management” in this guide an accurate model of the contemporary 
academic discipline of business management and today’s business environment?
• If the effects of a mission statement cannot be easily measured, does this mean that they are 
worthless?
• Do CEOs have different ethical obligations and responsibilities compared to their employees?
• Does competition between companies help or hinder the production of knowledge?
• Is it possible to discover laws of business in the same way that the natural sciences discover laws of 
nature?Syllabus content
24 Business management guide
Unit 2: Human resource management
Conceptual understandings
• People play a major role in driving organizational change
• Creative  employees could be essential for business success
• Ethical  human resource systems may positively affect employee performance
• Sustainable  human behaviour can bring positive change in a business
Suggested business management tools to integrate (other tools may also be integrated)
Force field analysis (HL only) , descriptive statistics, SWOT analysis, STEEPLE analysis, Hofstede’s cultural 
dimensions (HL only)
Note:  All content is SL and HL unless otherwise stated. HL only content is in bold .
2.1 Introduction to human resource management Depth of teaching
Role of human resource management AO2
Internal and external factors that influence human resource planning (for example, 
demographic change, change in labour mobility, immigration, flexi-time, gig 
economy)AO2
Reasons for resistance to change in the workplace AO2
Human resource strategies for reducing the impact of change and resistance to 
changeAO3
2.2 Organizational structure Depth of teaching
The following terminology in relation to different types of organizational structures.
• Delegation
• Span of control
• Levels of the hierarchy
• Chain of command
• Bureaucracy
• Centralization
• Decentralization
• Delayering
• Matrix structureAO2
The following types of organization charts.
• Flat or horizontal
• Tall or vertical
• By product, by function or by regionAO2, AO4
Appropriateness of different organizational structures given a change in external 
factorsAO3
Changes in organizational structures (for example, project-based organization, 
Charles Handy’s “Shamrock Organization”) (HL only)AO3Syllabus content
25 Business management guide
2.3 Leadership and management Depth of teaching
Scientific and intuitive thinking/management (HL only) AO2
Management and leadership AO2
The following leadership styles.
• Autocratic
• Paternalistic
• Democratic
• Laissez-faire
• SituationalAO3
2.4 Motivation and demotivation Depth of teaching
The following motivation theories.
• Taylor
• Maslow
• Herzberg (motivation–hygiene theory)AO3
The following motivation theories.
• McClelland’s acquired needs theory (HL only)
• Deci and Ryan’s self-determination theory (HL only)
• Equity and expectancy theory (HL only)AO3
Labour turnover (HL only) AO2, AO4
The following types of appraisal (HL only).
• Formative
• Summative
• 360-degree feedback
• Self-appraisalAO2
Methods of recruitment (HL only) AO2
Internal and external recruitment (HL only) AO3
The following types of financial rewards.
• Salary
• Wages (time and piece rates)
• Commission
• Performance-related pay (PRP)
• Profit-related pay
• Employee share ownership schemes
• Fringe paymentsAO2
The following types of non-financial rewards.
• Job enrichment
• Job rotation
• Job enlargement
• Empowerment
• Purpose/the opportunity to make a differenceAO2Syllabus content
26 Business management guide
2.4 Motivation and demotivation Depth of teaching
• Teamwork
The following types of training.
• Induction
• On the job
• Off the jobAO2
2.5 Organizational (corporate) culture (HL only) Depth of teaching
Organizational culture (HL only) AO1
Types of organizational culture, for example, Charles Handy's “Gods of 
management” (HL only)AO2
Cultural clashes when organizations change, including but not limited to, when 
organizations grow and merge and when leadership styles change (HL only)AO3
2.6 Communication Depth of teaching
Formal and informal methods of communication for an organization in a given 
situationAO3
Barriers to communication AO2
2.7 Industrial/employee relations (HL only) Depth of teaching
Sources of conflict in the workplace AO2
Approaches to conflict in the workplace by:
• employees—collective bargaining, work-to-rule and strike action
• employers—collective bargaining, threats of redundancies, changes of 
contract, closure and lockouts.AO3
The following approaches to conflict resolution.
• Conciliation and arbitration
• Employee participation and industrial democracy
• No-strike agreement
• Single-union agreementAO3
Suggested inquiry statements to explore
• How technological advancement could help businesses manage their human resources department in 
a more efficient way.
• How creative organizational structures can be more suitable in the dynamic business world.
• Why a democratic style of leadership is one way of encouraging creativity in a business.
• The impact of financial motivation on employees’ sustainable behaviour.
• How effective communication could impact business success.
• Why ethical and sustainable organizations are more likely to recruit top talent and have higher 
employee retention.
Suggested theory of knowledge questions
• Is it inevitable that the implicit biases of the interviewer will influence the outcome of interviews?
• Is being knowledgeable an essential quality in a manager?Syllabus content
27 Business management guide
• How might emotive language and faulty reasoning be used in collective bargaining negotiations?
• In what ways can language be used to influence, persuade or manipulate employees?
• Should critical events in the historical development of the industrial/employee relations always be 
judged by the standards of their time?
• Can we ever really know what motivates an employee?
Unit 3: Finance and accounts
Conceptual understandings
• Change  in the business structure can impact a business’ financial resources
• Creativity  in financial reporting can have diverse impacts in a business
• Ethical  financial and accounting practices can be a form of sustainable  business behaviour
Suggested business management tools to integrate (other tools may also be integrated)
Boston Consulting Group (BCG) matrix, descriptive statistics, SWOT analysis, contribution (HL only)
Note:  All content is SL and HL unless otherwise stated. HL only content is in bold .
3.1 Introduction to finance Depth of teaching
Role of finance for businesses.
• Capital expenditure
• Revenue expenditureAO2
3.2 Sources of finance Depth of teaching
The following internal sources of finance.
• Personal funds (for sole traders)
• Retained profit
• Sale of assetsAO2
The following external sources of finance.
• Share capital
• Loan capital
• Overdrafts
• Trade credit
• Crowdfunding
• Leasing
• Microfinance providers
• Business angelsAO2
Appropriateness of short- or long-term sources of finance for a given situation AO3
3.3 Costs and revenues Depth of teaching
The following types of cost, using examples.
• Fixed
• Variable
• DirectAO2Syllabus content
28 Business management guide
3.3 Costs and revenues Depth of teaching
• Indirect/overhead
Total revenue and revenue streams, using examples AO2
3.4 Final accounts Depth of teaching
The purpose of accounts to different stakeholders AO2
Final accounts
• Profit and loss account
• Balance sheetAO2, AO4
Different types of intangible assets AO2
Depreciation using the following methods (HL only).
• Straight line method
• Units of production methodAO2, AO4
Appropriateness of each depreciation method (HL only) AO3
3.5 Profitability and liquidity ratio analysis Depth of teaching
The following profitability ratios.
• Gross profit margin
• Profit margin
• Return on capital employed (ROCE)AO2, AO4
Possible strategies to improve these ratios AO3
The following liquidity ratios.
• Current ratio
• Acid test (quick) ratioAO2, AO4
Possible strategies to improve these ratios AO3
3.6 Efficiency ratio analysis (HL only) Depth of teaching
The following efficiency ratios.
• Stock turnover
• Debtor days
• Creditor days
• Gearing ratioAO2, AO4
Possible strategies to improve these ratios AO3
Insolvency versus bankruptcy AO2
3.7 Cash flow Depth of teaching
The difference between profit and cash flow AO2
Working capital AO2, AO4
Liquidity position AO2
Cash flow forecasts AO2, AO4
The relationship between investment, profit and cash flow AO2Syllabus content
29 Business management guide
3.7 Cash flow Depth of teaching
Strategies for dealing with cash flow problems AO3
3.8 Investment appraisal Depth of teaching
Investment opportunities using payback period, average rate of return (ARR) and 
NPV (HL only)AO3, AO4
3.9 Budgets (HL only) Depth of teaching
The difference between cost and profit centres AO2
The roles of cost and profit centres AO2
Constructing a budget AO2, AO4
Variances AO2, AO4
The importance of budgets and variances in decision-making AO2
Suggested inquiry statements to explore
• How cost and revenue management could ensure sustainability.
• Why final accounts analysis could be essential in changing stakeholder perspectives.
• Why profitable businesses may face insolvency.
• How time value of money affects future consumer choice.
• How triple bottom line accounting can support the shift towards more ethical business practices.
Suggested theory of knowledge questions
• Are objective facts or appeals to emotion more effective when applying for an external source of 
finance?
• How do our expectations and assumptions have an impact on how we read company accounts?
• What roles do reason and emotion play when analysing financial performance?
• Are the results of some types of ratio analysis less open to interpretation than others?
• To what extent are the methods used to gain knowledge in investment appraisal “scientific”?
• What assumptions underlie the techniques used when budgeting?
Unit 4: Marketing
Conceptual understandings
• Social, cultural and technological change  can impact the language and medium of marketing
• Creative  ways of informing stakeholders can lead to positive business outcomes
• Ethical marketing practices can enhance a business’ brand image
• Sustainable  marketing practices can be effective for business success
Suggested business management tools to integrate (other tools may also be integrated)
Ansoff matrix, SWOT analysis, STEEPLE analysis, Boston Consulting Group (BCG) matrix, descriptive 
statistics, Gantt chart (HL only), simple linear regression (HL only), critical path analysis (HL only), 
contribution (HL only), Hofstede’s cultural dimensions (HL only)
Note:  All content is SL and HL unless otherwise stated. HL only content is in bold .Syllabus content
30 Business management guide
4.1 Introduction to marketing Depth of teaching
Market orientation versus product orientation AO2
Market share AO2, AO4
Market growth AO2, AO4
The importance of market share and market leadership (HL only) AO3
4.2 Marketing planning Depth of teaching
The role of marketing planning AO2
Segmentation, targeting (target market) and positioning (position maps) AO2, AO4
The difference between niche market and mass market AO2
The importance of having a unique selling point/proposition (USP) AO2
How organizations can differentiate themselves and their products from competitors AO3
4.3 Sales forecasting (HL only) Depth of teaching
The benefits and limitations of sales forecasting AO3
4.4 Market research Depth of teaching
Why and how organizations carry out market research AO3
The following methods/techniques of primary market research.
• Surveys
• Interviews
• Focus groups
• ObservationsAO2
The following methods/techniques of secondary market research.
• Market analyses
• Academic journals
• Government publications
• Media articles
• Online contentAO2
The difference between qualitative and quantitative research AO2
The following methods of sampling.
• Quota
• Random
• ConvenienceAO2
4.5 The seven Ps of the marketing mix Depth of teaching
Product
The relationship between the product life cycle, product portfolio and the marketing 
mixAO2
Extension strategies AO3
The relationship between the product life cycle, investment, profit and cash flow AO2Syllabus content
31 Business management guide
4.5 The seven Ps of the marketing mix Depth of teaching
The following aspects of branding.
• Awareness
• Development
• Loyalty
• ValueAO2
The importance of branding AO2
Price
The appropriateness of the following pricing methods.
• Cost-plus (mark-up) pricing
• Penetration pricing
• Loss leader
• Predatory pricing
• Premium pricing
• Dynamic pricing (HL only)
• Competitive pricing (HL only)
• Contribution pricing (HL only)
• Price elasticity of demand (HL only)AO3
Promotion
The following aspects of promotion.
• Above the line promotion
• Below the line promotion
• Through the line promotionAO2
Social media marketing as a promotional strategy AO3
Place
The importance of different types of distribution channels AO3
People
The importance of employee–customer relationships in marketing a service and 
cultural variation in these relationshipsAO3
Processes
The importance of delivery processes in marketing a service and changes in these 
processesAO3
Physical evidence
The importance of tangible physical evidence in marketing a service AO3
Appropriate marketing mixes
Appropriate marketing mixes for particular products or businesses AO3
4.6 International marketing (HL only) Depth of teaching
The opportunities and threats posed by entering and operating internationally AO3Syllabus content
32 Business management guide
Suggested inquiry statements to explore
• How marketing strategies may evolve in response to changeable customer preferences.
• Why effective market research may bring about creative business practice.
• How social media development could change an organization’s marketing strategies.
• Why globalization can bring many changes to business activity.
• Why successful marketing campaigns are increasingly being built around the ethical and sustainable 
practices of a business.
Suggested theory of knowledge questions
• Can companies know us better than we know ourselves?
• How might a company protect against sample error and bias when designing primary market 
research?
• Are there different criteria for ethical standards for online services compared to physical products?
• Are consumers rational?
• Are predictions in the human sciences inevitably unreliable?
• How might the language used in focus groups influence the conclusions that are reached?
• Are consumers too unpredictable to study scientifically?
• Is it possible to eliminate the effect of researcher bias when conducting market research?
• What impact has social media had on how consumers acquire and share knowledge of products?
Unit 5: Operations management
Conceptual understandings
• Change  in operations impacts other business activities
• Creative  production process can disrupt the market
• Operational business changes may affect its ethical  stance
• Sustainability  ensures efficiency in business operations
Suggested business management tools to integrate (other tools may also be integrated)
Decision trees, descriptive statistics, circular business models, Gantt chart (HL only), critical path 
analysis (HL only), contribution (HL only), simple linear regression (HL only), Hofstede’s cultural 
dimensions (HL only)
Note:  All content is SL and HL unless otherwise stated. HL only content is in bold .
5.1 Introduction to operations management Depth of teaching
The role of operations management AO2
5.2 Operations methods Depth of teaching
The following operations methods.
• Job production
• Batch production
• Mass/flow production
• Mass customizationAO3
5.3 Lean production and quality management (HL only) Depth of teaching
The following features of lean production.
• Less waste
• Greater efficiencyAO1
The following methods of lean production.
• Continuous improvement (kaizen)
• Just-in-time (JIT)AO2
Features of cradle to cradle design and manufacturing AO2
Features of quality control and quality assurance AO2
The following methods of managing quality.
• Quality circle
• Benchmarking
• Total quality management (TQM)AO2
The impact of lean production and TQM on an organization AO3
The importance of national and international quality standards AO2
5.4 Location Depth of teaching
The reasons for a specific location of production AO2
The following ways of reorganizing production, both nationally and internationally.
• Outsourcing/subcontracting
• Offshoring
• Insourcing
• ReshoringAO3
5.5 Break-even analysis Depth of teaching
Total contribution versus contribution per unit AO2
A break-even chart and the following aspects of break-even analysis.
• Break-even quantity/point
• Profit or loss
• Margin of safety
• Target profit output
• Target profit
• Target priceAO2, AO4
The effects of changes in price or cost on the break-even quantity, profit and margin 
of safety, using graphical and quantitative methodsAO2, AO4
Limitations of break-even as a decision-making tool AO3
5.6 Production planning (HL only) Depth of teaching
The local and global supply chain process AO2
The difference between JIT and just-in-case (JIC) AO3
Stock control charts based on the following. AO2, AO4
• Lead time
• Buffer stock
• Reorder level
• Reorder quantity
Capacity utilization rate AO2, AO4
Defect rate AO2, AO4
Labour productivity, capital productivity, productivity rate, operating leverage AO2, AO4
Cost to buy (CTB) AO3, AO4
Cost to make (CTM) AO3, AO4
5.7 Crisis management and contingency planning (HL only) Depth of teaching
The difference between crisis management and contingency planning AO2
The factors that affect effective crisis management.
• Transparency
• Communication
• Speed
• ControlAO2
The impact of contingency planning for a given organization or situation in 
terms of:
• cost
• time
• risks
• safety.AO3
5.8 Research and development (HL only) Depth of teaching
The importance of research and development for a business AO3
The importance of developing goods and services that address customers’ 
unmet needs (of which the customers may or may not be aware)AO2
Intellectual property protection; copyrights, patents, trademarks AO2
Innovation: incremental and disruptive AO2
5.9 Management information systems (HL only) Depth of teaching
Data analytics AO1
Database AO1
Cybersecurity and cybercrime AO1
Critical infrastructures, including artificial neural networks, data centres, and 
cloud computingAO2
Virtual reality AO2
The internet of things AO2
Artificial intelligence AO2Syllabus content
36 Business management guide
The benefits, risks and ethical implications of advanced computer technologies 
(collectively referred to here as “management information systems”) and 
technological innovation on business decision-making and stakeholdersAO3
Suggested inquiry statements to explore
• How high standards in operations management could make a business more sustainable.
• Why outsourcing could result in lower quality.
• Why research and development (R&D) could enhance creativity in a business.
• How technology may improve business productivity.
• How digital technology enables new business models to flourish.
• How circular business models can lead to greater resource efficiency.
Suggested theory of knowledge questions
• To what extent are our ideas dependent on our interactions with other people?
• To what extent can the human sciences provide accurate predictions?
• How might the methods used in R&D be limited by ethical considerations?
• Should we hold companies responsible for the applications of products they create?
• Are there new ethical challenges emerging from the increased use of data analytics in business 
decision-making?
• To what extent do the classification systems we use in data analytics affect the conclusions that we 
reach?
• How might personal prejudices, biases and inequality become “coded into” customer loyalty 
programmes?
• To what extent is big data changing what it means to know your customers?
• Does artificial intelligence allow knowledge to reside outside of human knowers?
• What are the moral implications of possessing large amounts of information about consumer 
behaviour?Syllabus content
37 Business management guide
General
Assessment  is an integral  part  of teaching  and  learning.  The most  important  aims  of assessment  are that  it 
should  support  curricular  goals  and  encourage  appropriate  student  learning.  Both  external  and  internal 
assessments  are used  in the Diploma  Programme  and  Career-related  Programme.  IB examiners  mark  work 
produced  for external  assessment,  while  work  produced  for internal  assessment  is marked  by teachers  and 
externally moderated by the IB.
There are two main types of assessment identified by the IB.
• Formative assessment informs both teaching and learning. It is concerned with providing accurate and 
helpful feedback to students and teachers on the kind of learning taking place and the nature of 
students’ strengths and weaknesses in order to help develop students’ understanding and capabilities. 
Formative assessment can also help to improve teaching quality, as it can provide information to 
monitor progress towards meeting the course aims and objectives.
• Summative assessment gives an overview of previous learning and is concerned with measuring 
student achievement at, or towards the end, of the course of study.
A comprehensive  assessment  plan  is viewed  as being  integral  with  teaching,  learning  and  course 
organization. For further information, see the IB Programme standards and practices  document.
The approach  to assessment  used  by the IB is criterion-related,  not norm-referenced.  This  approach  to 
assessment  judges  students’  work  by their  performance  in relation  to identified  levels  of attainment,  and 
not in relation  to the work  of other  students.  For further  information  on assessment  within  the Diploma 
Programme  please  refer  to the publication  Assessment:  principles  and  practice—Quality  assessments  in a 
digital age .
To support teachers in the planning, delivery and assessment of the DP or CP courses, a variety of resources 
can be found  on the programme  resource  centre  or purchased  from  the IB store  (store.ibo.org ). Additional 
publications  such  as specimen  papers  and  markschemes,  teacher  support  materials,  subject  reports  and 
grade descriptors can also be found on the programme resource centre. Past examination papers as well as 
markschemes can be purchased from the IB store.
Methods of assessment
The IB uses several methods to assess work produced by students.
Assessment criteria
Assessment  criteria  are used  when  the assessment  task  is open-ended.  Each  criterion  concentrates  on a 
particular  skill that  students  are expected  to demonstrate.  An assessment  objective  describes  what 
students should be able to do, and assessment criteria describe how well they should be able to do it. Using 
assessment criteria allows discrimination between different answers and encourages a variety of responses. 
Each  criterion  comprises  a set of hierarchically  ordered  level  descriptors.  Each  level  descriptor  is worth  one 
or more marks. Each criterion is applied independently using a best-fit model. The maximum marks for each 
criterion may differ according to the criterion’s importance. The marks awarded for each criterion are added 
together to give the total mark for the piece of work.
Markbands
Markbands  are a comprehensive  statement  of expected  performance  against  which  responses  are judged. 
They represent a single holistic criterion divided into level descriptors. Each level descriptor corresponds to 
a range  of marks  to differentiate  student  performance.  A best-fit  approach  is used  to ascertain  which 
particular mark to use from the possible range for each level descriptor.
Analytic markschemes
Analytic  markschemes  are prepared  for those  examination  questions  that  expect  a particular  kind  of 
response and/or a given final answer from students. They give detailed instructions to examiners on how to 
break down the total mark for each question for different parts of the response.
Marking notes
For some  assessment  components  marked  using  assessment  criteria,  marking  notes  are provided.  Marking 
notes give guidance on how to apply assessment criteria to the particular requirements of a question.
Inclusive access arrangements
Inclusive  access  arrangements  are available  for candidates  with  access  requirements.  Standard  assessment 
conditions may put candidates with assessment access requirements at a disadvantage by preventing them 
from  demonstrating  their  attainment  level.  Inclusive  access  arrangements  enable  candidates  to 
demonstrate their ability under assessment conditions that are as fair as possible.
The IB publication  Access  and  inclusion  policy  provides  details  on all the inclusive  access  arrangements 
available  to candidates.  The IB publication  Learning  diversity  and  inclusion  in IB programmes:  Removing 
barriers  to learning  outlines  the position  of the IB with  regard  to candidates  with  diverse  learning  needs  in 
the IB programmes.  For candidates  affected  by adverse  circumstances,  the IB publication  Diploma 
Programme  Assessment  procedures  (updated  annually),  which  includes  the general  regulations,  provides 
details on access consideration.
Responsibilities of the school
The school  is required  to ensure  that  equal  access  arrangements  and  reasonable  adjustments  are provided 
to candidates  with  learning  support  requirements  that  are in line with  the IB documents  Access  and 
inclusion policy  and Learning diversity and inclusion in IB programmes: Removing barriers to learning .Assessment in the Diploma Programme and Career-related Programme
38 Business management guide
First assessment 2024
Assessment component Weighting
External assessment (3 hours)
Paper 1: (1 hour and 30 minutes)
Based on a pre-released statement that specifies the context and  background for the unseen 
case study
Assessment objectives: AO1, AO2, AO3, AO4 (30 marks)
Section A
Syllabus content: Units 1–5 excluding HL extension topics
Students answer all structured questions in this section based on the case study (20 marks)
Section B
Syllabus content: Units 1–5 excluding HL extension topics
Students answer one out of two extended response questions based on the case study (10 
marks)70%
35%
Paper 2: (1 hour and 30 minutes)
Based on unseen stimulus material with a quantitative focus
Assessment objectives: AO1, AO2, AO3, AO4 (40 marks )
Section A
Syllabus content: Units 1–5 excluding HL extension topics
Students answer all structured questions in this section based on the unseen stimulus 
material (20 marks)
Section B
Syllabus content: Units 1–5 excluding HL extension topics
Students answer one out of two questions comprised of some structured questions and an 
extended response question based on the unseen stimulus material (20 marks)35%
Internal assessment (20 hours)
This component is internally assessed by the teacher and externally moderated by the IB at 
the end of the course.
Business research project
Students produce a research project about a real business issue or problem facing a 
particular organization using a conceptual lens. Maximum 1,800 words. (25 marks)30%
Assessment
Assessment outline—SL
39 Business management guide
First assessment 2024
Assessment component Weighting
External assessment (4 hours and 30 minutes)
Paper 1 (1 hour and 30 minutes)
Based on a pre-released statement that specifies the context and  background for the unseen 
case study
Assessment objectives: AO1, AO2, AO3, AO4 (30 marks)
Section A
Syllabus content: Units 1–5 excluding HL extension topics
Students answer all structured questions in this section based on the case study (20 marks)
Section B
Syllabus content: Units 1–5 excluding HL extension topics
Students answer one out of two extended response questions based on the case study (10 
marks)80%
25%
Paper 2 (1 hour and 45 minutes)
Based on the unseen stimulus material with a quantitative focus
Assessment objectives: AO1, AO2, AO3, AO4 (50 marks)
Section A
Syllabus content: Units 1–5 including HL extension topics
Students answer all structured questions in this section based on the unseen stimulus 
material (30 marks)
Section B
Syllabus content: Units 1–5 including HL extension topics
Students answer one out of two questions comprised of some structured questions and an 
extended response question based on the unseen stimulus material (20 marks)30%
Paper 3 (1 hour and 15 minutes)
Based on unseen stimulus material about a social enterprise
Syllabus content: Unit 1–5 including HL extension topics
Assessment objectives: AO1, AO2, AO3, AO4 (25 marks)
Students answer one compulsory question based on the unseen stimulus material (25 marks)25%
Internal assessment (20 hours)
This component is internally assessed by the teacher and externally moderated by the IB at 
the end of the course.
Business research project
Students produce a research project about a real business issue or problem facing a 
particular organization using a conceptual lens. Maximum 1,800 words. (25 marks)20%
Assessment
Assessment outline—HL
40 Business management guide
Three different methods are used to assess students.
• Analytic markschemes specific to each examination paper
• Markbands
• Assessment criteria
The markbands and assessment criteria are published in this guide.
• For paper 1, there are markbands and markschemes.
• For paper 2, there are markbands and markschemes.
• For paper 3, there are assessment criteria and markschemes
The markbands  and  assessment  criteria  are related  to the assessment  objectives  established  for the 
business  management  course  and  the individuals  and  societies  grade  descriptors.  The markschemes  are 
specific to each examination.
Written papers
The external assessment of the business management course consists of two examination papers at SL and 
three  examination  papers  at HL that  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  They  are designed  to allow 
students  to demonstrate  their  competencies  in relation  to the business  management  assessment 
objectives. All questions on the examination papers are based on specifications in this guide.
The external  components  contribute  70%  to the final  assessment  at SL and  80%  to the final  assessment  at 
HL.
In common  with  all DP examination  papers,  students  at SL and  HL are given  five minutes  of reading  time 
before they begin answering the papers.
Paper 1 overview
Paper  1 is the same  for SL and  HL students.  Three  months  prior  to the examination  the IB will release  a 
statement with two elements. The first element will be a small number of topics that provide context to the 
case study. These topics will not be topics that are in the guide but ones that students are asked to research 
for approximately  five hours.  Topics  in the pre-released  statement  will build  on topics  contained  in the 
syllabus.  The aim is to assess  students’  knowledge  around  important  contemporary  business  topics  that 
could not have been anticipated when the guide was written.
The second  element  will be the first 200 words,  approximately,  of the case  study  itself.  The release  of this 
portion  of the case  study  will provide  additional  context  and  will reduce  the number  of words  to be read 
during  the examination  period.  The aim of the paper  is to assess  students’  knowledge  of the business 
management  syllabus.  The examination  is based  upon  one  case  study,  of approximately  800 to 1,000 
words,  that  students  do not see before  the examination.  Most  questions  will be qualitative,  although  some 
minor calculations could be part of the assessment.
Paper 2 overview
Paper 2 will be based on stimulus material. SL and HL students will sit different examinations, but these will 
be similar  in intent  and  form.  The aim of the examination  is to assess  students’  knowledge  of the business 
management  syllabus.  Most  questions  will be quantitative,  though  some  questions  may  not have  a 
quantitative  element.  Students  will receive  an examination  booklet  with  questions  based  on the stimulus 
material  seen  for the first  time  during  the examination.  The stimulus  material  will be presented  in parts. 
Each part has a question; students will read each part and answer the question before reading the next part 
and  answering  the question,  and  so on. The stimulus  material  will be a combination  of written  and 
diagrammatic stimulus such as charts and infographics. For SL only, one of the stimulus options in section B 
of the examination  may  be on a social  enterprise.  HL students  will be assessed  on a social  enterprise  in 
paper  3. Section  A will be assessed  against  AO1,  AO2  and  AO4  levels  whereas  Section  B will be assessed 
against all four levels including AO3.
Paper 3 overview
Paper  3 will be about  a social  enterprise  and  requires  students  to identify  and  describe  a human  need  and 
the potential  organizational  challenges  facing  the social  entrepreneur  wanting  to meet  this need.  Further 
to this,  students  are required  to write  a decision-making  document  that  includes  a business 
recommendation.  Only  HL students  will sit this examination.  The paper  will consist  of stimulus  followed  by 
questions.  The stimulus  material  will consist  of a short  introduction  to an organization,  supported  by a 
visual  representation  of a product,  and  five or six excerpts  from  various  documents  (such  as emails,  Twitter 
feeds, newspaper articles, and so on).
The paper will have the following three tiers of questions.
• AO1 questions—assesses students’ ability to describe the human need in the stimulus material.
• AO2 questions—assesses students’ ability to explain the key challenges facing the social entrepreneur 
or social enterprise in the setting of the stimulus material.
• AO3/AO4 questions—assesses students’ ability to recommend a plan for the organization in meeting 
the identified human need. In doing so, students will be required to demonstrate knowledge and 
understanding, and their ability to explain, synthesize and evaluate evidence, and formulate a 
recommendation.
Please refer to the Business management teacher support material for further guidance on how to prepare for 
the external assessments.
Command terms
Teachers  and  students  must  be familiar  with  the command  terms  used  at each  assessment  objective  level 
to understand  the depth  of treatment  required  in examination  questions.  Cognitive  demands  progress 
from AO1 to AO3, while AO4 terms are specific to particular skills.
Examination  questions  may  use any command  term  from  the assessment  objective  level  specified  in the 
“Syllabus  content ” section,  or a less demanding  command  term  from  a lower  level.  For example,  if the 
assessment  objective  level  for a topic  is AO2,  an examination  question  could contain  any of the command 
terms  for AO2,  such  as “explain”,  “distinguish”,  and  so on. Alternatively,  the examination  question  could 
contain a command term from AO1, such as “describe”. However, a more demanding command term, such 
as “evaluate”, from a higher level (AO3 in this case) cannot be used.
The command  terms  used  in each  question,  or part  thereof,  indicate  the depth  required.  The command 
terms  are organized  by assessment  objective  level  in the “Assessment  objectives ” section  earlier  in the 
guide and defined in the “ Glossary of command terms ” in the appendices.
Use of examples and case studies
In order  to be awarded  marks  in the higher  markbands  and  levels  of assessment  criteria,  students  are 
expected,  where  appropriate,  to refer  to the stimulus  material  provided  in examinations,  use case  studies 
explored  in class  and  illustrate  their  answers  with  examples.  In this way,  students  highlight  their 
understanding  of how  business  management  tools  and  theories  operate  in practice.  Where  the stimulus 
material,  case  studies  and  examples  are referred  to, students  should  not simply  state  the information,  but 
rather offer some explanation of how it relates to the question asked.
Use of business management terms
Students  are expected  to demonstrate  the ability  to appropriately  define,  use and  apply  the business 
management terms included in the “ Syllabus ” section.External assessment
42 Business management guide
Use of calculators
While all questions requiring a calculator can be answered fully using a four-function (plus, minus, multiply, 
divide) calculator, graphic display calculators (GDCs) are allowed during the examination.
Teachers  and  schools  must  adhere  to the regulations  regarding  the use of electronic  calculators  in 
examinations,  and  students  must  be made  aware  of these.  This  information  can be found  in the annually 
revised version of Calculators guidance for examinations booklet .
External assessment details—SL
Paper 1
Duration: 1 hour 30 minutes
Weighting: 35%
This  paper  is the same  for both  SL and  HL. It is divided  into  two  sections  with  questions  based  on the pre-
released  statement  issued  to students  three  months  before  the examination  and  the unseen  case  study 
issued  during  the examination.  Section  A has structured  questions  while  section  B has extended  response 
questions.
Students are expected to demonstrate the following assessment objectives.
Assessment objective Section A Section B
AO1—knowledge and understanding √ √
AO2—application and analysis √ √
AO3—synthesis and evaluation √
AO4—use and application of 
appropriate skills√ √
Marks (maximum per section) 20 10
Maximum marks for paper 1 30 
Questions in this paper are drawn from units 1 to 5 of the syllabus excluding  the HL extension material and 
topics studied at HL only.
Section A
• Students answer all structured questions in this section.
• The command terms used in each part indicate the depth required.
• The marks available for each part are indicated on the examination paper.
• Marks are allocated using an analytic markscheme.
• This section is worth a total of 20 marks.
Section B
• Students answer one question from a choice of two.
• The command terms used in each part indicate the depth required.
• The marks available for each part are indicated on the examination paper.
• Each question is worth a total of 10 marks.
• Marks are allocated using a combination of an analytic markscheme and markbands.
• This section is worth a total of 10 marks.
Paper 2
Duration: 1 hour 30 minutes
Weighting: 35%
The structure  of this paper  is the same  as HL paper  2. However,  questions  may  be the same  as, or different 
from, the HL paper 2 questions. SL students answer fewer questions.
Students are expected to demonstrate the following assessment objectives.
Assessment objective Section A Section B
AO1—knowledge and understanding √ √
AO2—application and analysis √ √
AO3—synthesis and evaluation √
AO4—use and application of 
appropriate skills√ √
Marks (maximum per section) 20 20
Maximum marks for paper 2 40
Questions in this paper are drawn from units 1 to 5 of the syllabus excluding  the HL extension material and 
topics studied at HL only.
Section A
• The questions have a quantitative focus.
• Students answer all structured questions in this section.
• The questions are subdivided into parts.
• The command terms used in each part indicate the depth required.
• The marks available for each part are indicated on the examination paper.
• Marks are allocated using an analytic markscheme.
• This section is worth a total of 20 marks.
Section B
• Students answer one question from a choice of two.
• The question is subdivided into parts; structured questions and an extended response question.
• The command terms used in each part indicate the depth required.
• The structured questions are worth a total of 10 marks.
• Each extended response question is worth 10 marks.
• The marks available for each part are indicated on the examination paper.
• Marks are allocated using a combination of an analytic markscheme and markbands.
• This section is worth a total of 20 marks.
External assessment markbands—SL
Papers 1 and 2
In addition  to an analytic  markscheme  specific  to the question  papers,  markbands  are used  to allocate 
marks in section B in papers 1 and 2 for the 10-mark extended response question.
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptor.
1–2 • Little understanding of the demands of the question.
• Little use of business management tools and theories; any tools and theories that are 
used are irrelevant or used inaccurately.
• Little or no reference to the stimulus material.
• No arguments are made.
3–4 • Some understanding of the demands of the question.
• Some use of business management tools and theories, but these are mostly lacking 
in accuracy and relevance.
• Superficial use of information from the stimulus material, often not going beyond the 
name of the person(s) or name of the organization.
• Any arguments made are mostly unsubstantiated.
5–6 • The response indicates an understanding of the demands of the question, but these 
demands are only partially addressed.
• Some relevant and accurate use of business management tools and theories.
• Some relevant use of information from the stimulus material that goes beyond the 
name of the person(s) or name of the organization but does not effectively support 
the argument.
• Arguments are substantiated but are mostly one-sided.
7–8 • Mostly addresses the demands of the question.
• Mostly relevant and accurate use of business management tools and theories.
• Information from the stimulus material is generally used to support the argument, 
although there is some lack of clarity or relevance in some places.
• Arguments are substantiated and have some balance.
9–10 • Clear focus on addressing the demands of the question.
• Relevant and accurate use of business management tools and theories.
• Relevant information from the stimulus material is integrated effectively to support 
the argument.
• Arguments are substantiated and balanced, with an explanation of the limitations of 
the case study or stimulus material.
External assessment details—HL
Paper 1
Duration: 1 hour 30 minutes
Weighting: 25%
This  paper  is the same  for both  SL and  HL. It is divided  into  two  sections  with  questions  based  on the pre-
released  statement  issued  to students  three  months  before  the examination  and  the unseen  case  study 
issued  during  the examination.  Section  A has structured  questions  while  section  B has extended  response 
questions.
Students are expected to demonstrate the following assessment objectives.
Assessment objective Section A Section B
AO1—knowledge and understanding √ √
AO2—application and analysis √ √
AO3—synthesis and evaluation √
AO4—use and application of 
appropriate skills√ √
Marks (maximum per section) 20 10
Maximum marks for paper 1 30
Questions in this paper are drawn from units 1 to 5 of the syllabus excluding the HL extension material and 
topics studied at HL only.
Section A
• Students answer all structured questions in this section.
• The command terms used in each part indicate the depth required.
• The marks available for each part are indicated on the examination paper.
• Marks are allocated using an analytic markscheme.
• This section is worth a total of 20 marks.
Section B
• Students answer one question from a choice of two.
• The command terms used in each part indicate the depth required.
• The marks available for each part are indicated on the examination paper.
• Each question is worth a total of 10 marks.
• Marks are allocated using a combination of an analytic markscheme and markbands.
• This section is worth a total of 10 marks.
Paper 2
Duration: 1 hour 45 minutes
Weighting: 30%
The structure  of this paper  is the same  as SL paper  2. However,  questions  may  be the same  as, or different 
from, the SL paper 2 questions. HL students answer more questions.
Students are expected to demonstrate the following assessment objectives.
Assessment objective Section A Section B
AO1—knowledge and understanding √ √
AO2—application and analysis √ √
AO3—synthesis and evaluation √
AO4—use and application of 
appropriate skills√ √
Marks (maximum per section) 30 20
Maximum marks for paper 2 50 
Questions in this paper are drawn from units 1 to 5 of the syllabus including the HL extension material and 
topics studied at HL only.
Section A
• The questions have a quantitative focus.
• Students answer all structured questions in this section.
• The questions are subdivided into parts.
• The command terms used in each part indicate the depth required.
• The marks available for each part are indicated on the examination paper.
• Marks are allocated using an analytic markscheme.
• This section is worth a total of 30 marks.
Section B
• Students answer one question from a choice of two.
• The question is subdivided into parts; structured questions and an extended response question.
• The command terms used in each part indicate the depth required.
• The structured questions are worth a total of 10 marks.
• Each extended response question is worth 10 marks.
• The marks available for each part are indicated on the examination paper.
• Marks are allocated using a combination of an analytic markscheme and markbands.
• This section is worth a total of 20 marks.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour 15 minutes
Weighting: 25%
This is an HL only paper.
Students are expected to demonstrate the following assessment objectives.
Assessment objective Question 1 Question 2 Question 3
AO1—knowledge and understanding √ √ √
AO2—application and analysis √ √
AO3—synthesis and evaluation √
AO4—use and application of 
appropriate skills√
Marks (maximum per question) 2 6 17
Maximum marks for paper 3 25
The question in this paper is drawn from units 1 to 5 of the syllabus including the HL extension material and 
topics studied at HL only.
• Students answer the three compulsory questions given based on the stimulus material.
• The command terms used in each question indicate the depth required.
• The marks available for each question are indicated on the examination paper.
• Marks are allocated using a combination of an analytic markscheme and the assessment criteria.
External assessment markbands—HL
Papers 1 and 2
In addition  to an analytic  markscheme  specific  to the question  papers,  markbands  are used  to allocate 
marks in section B in papers 1 and 2 for the 10-mark extended response question.
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptor.
1–2 • Little understanding of the demands of the question.
• Little use of business management tools and theories; any tools and theories that are 
used are irrelevant or used inaccurately.
• Little or no reference to the stimulus material.
• No arguments are made.
3–4 • Some understanding of the demands of the question.
• Some use of business management tools and theories, but these are mostly lacking 
in accuracy and relevance.
• Superficial use of information from the stimulus material, often not going beyond the 
name of the person(s) or name of the organization.
• Any arguments made are mostly unsubstantiated.
5–6 • The response indicates an understanding of the demands of the question, but these 
demands are only partially addressed.
• Some relevant and accurate use of business management tools and theories.
• Some relevant use of information from the stimulus material that goes beyond the 
name of the person(s) or name of the organization but does not effectively support 
the argument.
• Arguments are substantiated but are mostly one-sided.
7–8 • Mostly addresses the demands of the question.
• Mostly relevant and accurate use of business management tools and theories.
• Information from the stimulus material is generally used to support the argument, 
although there is some lack of clarity or relevance in some places.
• Arguments are substantiated and have some balance.
9–10 • Clear focus on addressing the demands of the question.
• Relevant and accurate use of business management tools and theories.
• Relevant information from the stimulus material is integrated effectively to support 
the argument.
• Arguments are substantiated and balanced, with an explanation of the limitations of 
the case study or stimulus material.
External assessment criteria—HL
Paper 3
For question  1 and  question  2 an analytic  markscheme  will be used.  For question  3 the following 
assessment criteria will be used.
Criterion A: Use of resource materials
To what  extent  does  the student  use the resource  materials  provided  to effectively  support  the 
recommended plan of action?
Marks Level descriptor
0 The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1 The response makes limited reference to the resource materials provided or the resources 
identified have been used ineffectively to support the recommended plan of action.
2 The response makes some reference to the resource materials provided or the resources 
identified have been used in a superficial way to support the recommended plan of action.
3 The response makes reference to most of the resource materials provided to support the 
recommended plan of action.
4 The response makes reference to all resource materials provided to effectively support the 
recommended plan of action.
Criterion B: Business management tools and theories
To what  extent  does  the student’s  plan  of action  effectively  apply  appropriate  business  management  tools 
and theories?
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1 The response demonstrates limited application of appropriate business management 
tools and theories.
2 The response superficially applies appropriate business management tools and theories.
3 The response satisfactorily applies appropriate business management tools and theories.
4 The response effectively applies appropriate business management tools and theories.
Criterion C: Evaluation
To what  extent  does  the student  effectively  evaluate  the expected  impact  of their  plan  of action  on the 
relevant areas of the business?
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–2 The response is largely descriptive with limited analysis or evaluation of the expected 
impact of their plan of action. There is limited reference to the relevant areas of the business.
3–4 The response analyses the expected impact of their plan of action with some reference to 
the relevant areas of the business. There is some evidence of evaluation but it is not 
sustained.
5–6 The student effectively evaluates the expected impact of their plan of action on the 
relevant areas of the business and considers the trade-offs between those areas.
Criterion D: Sequencing of ideas and plan of action
To what extent are the student’s ideas and plan of action sequenced in a clear and coherent manner?
Marks Level descriptor
0 The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1 The response is limited in its sequencing of ideas and plan of action.
2 The response consists of ideas and a plan of action but these are not always sequenced in 
a clear manner.
3 The response effectively sequences appropriate ideas and a plan of action in a clear and 
coherent manner.External assessment
49 Business management guide
Internal assessment criteria
The business research project is assessed against seven criteria that are related to the assessment objectives for the business management course.

Criterion A: Integration of a key concept
To what  extent  does  the student  effectively  integrate  the analysis  of the connection  between  the key 
concept and the organization under study throughout the internal assessment?
Marks Level descriptor
0 Either the work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below or the key 
concept identified is neither change, creativity, ethics nor sustainability.
1 The student demonstrates knowledge of the key concept.
2 The student describes the connection between the key concept and the organization 
under study.
3 The student analyses the connection between the key concept and the organization 
under study.
4 The student partially integrates the analysis of the connection between the key concept 
and the organization under study in the internal assessment.
5 The student effectively integrates the analysis of the connection between the key concept 
and the organization under study throughout the internal assessment.
Criterion B: Supporting documents
To what  extent  does  the student  select  three  to five relevant  supporting  documents  that  address  the 
research question in appropriate depth and breadth?
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1 There are only one or two, or more than five, supporting documents or they are of 
marginal relevance.
2 There are three to five supporting documents that are generally relevant but some lack 
depth.
3 There are three to five supporting documents that are relevant and sufficiently in-depth.
4 There are three to five supporting documents that are relevant, sufficiently in-depth and 
provide a range of ideas and views.
Criterion C: Selection and application of tools and theories
To what  extent  does  the student  effectively  select  and  apply  business  management  tools  and  theories  that 
are relevant to the research question?
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1 There is a limited selection and application of business management tools and theories or 
these business management tools and theories are not relevant to the research question.
2 There are some business management tools and theories selected and applied to the 
research question. Their relevance to the research question is superficial.
3 The business management tools and theories are adequately selected and applied to the 
research question. Their relevance to the research question is not always clear.
4 The business management tools and theories are effectively selected and applied with 
clear relevance to the research question.
Criterion D: Analysis and evaluation
To what  extent  does  the student  effectively  select  and use data  from  the supporting documents  in their 
analysis and evaluation of the research question?
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1 There is limited selection and use of data from the supporting documents with no analysis 
and evaluation of the research question.
2 The selection and use of data from the supporting documents is superficial, leading to 
limited analysis and evaluation of the research question.
3 The selection and use of data from the supporting documents is adequate with some 
analysis and evaluation of the research question.
4 The selection and use of data from the supporting documents is sufficient, leading to a 
mostly effective analysis and evaluation of the research question with some integration of 
ideas.
5 The selection and use of data from the supporting documents is effective, leading to a 
thorough analysis and evaluation of the research question. There is a sustained 
integration of ideas with consideration of the assumptions underpinning the arguments 
and implications.
Criterion E: Conclusions
To what  extent  is the student’s  conclusion  consistent  with  the evidence  presented  and  explicitly  answers 
the research question?
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1 Conclusions are inconsistent with the evidence presented, or conclusions are superficial.
2 Some conclusions are consistent with the evidence presented.
3 Conclusions are consistent with the evidence presented and explicitly answer the research 
question.
Criterion F: Structure
To what extent is the student’s research project organized using an appropriate structure?
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1 Limited structure.
2 Appropriate structure.
Criterion G: Presentation
To what  extent  is the student’s  business  research  project  effectively  presented  with  the use of required 
elements including a title page, an accurate table of contents, appropriate headings and sub-headings, and 
numbered pages?
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1 One or more of the required elements of a well-presented research project is missing.
2 All of the required elements of a well-presented research project are included.
Where profit and loss accounts, balance sheets, cash flow forecasts and budgets are given in case studies or
