Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
First assessment 2021Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
First assessment 2021
Published February 2019
Published on behalf of the International Baccalaureate Organization, a not-for-profit 
educational foundation of 15 Route des Morillons, 1218 Le Grand-Saconnex, Geneva, 
Switzerland by the
International Baccalaureate Organization (UK) Ltd  
Peterson House, Malthouse Avenue, Cardiff Gate  
Cardiff, Wales CF23 8GL  
United Kingdom  
Website: ibo.org
© International Baccalaureate Organization 2019
The International Baccalaureate Organization (known as the IB) offers four high-quality 
and challenging educational programmes for a worldwide community of schools, aiming 
to create a better, more peaceful world. This publication is one of a range of materials 
produced to support these programmes.
The IB may use a variety of sources in its work and checks information to verify accuracy 
and authenticity, particularly when using community-based knowledge sources such as 
Wikipedia. The IB respects the principles of intellectual property and makes strenuous 
efforts to identify and obtain permission before publication from rights holders of all 
copyright material used. The IB is grateful for permissions received for material used 
in this publication and will be pleased to correct any errors or omissions at the earliest 
opportunity.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the IB’s prior written 
permission, or as expressly permitted by the Rules for use of IB Intellectual Property .
IB merchandise and publications can be purchased through the IB Store  (email: sales@
ibo.org ). Any commercial use of IB publications (whether fee-covered or commercial) 
by third parties acting in the IB’s ecosystem without a formal relationship with the IB 
(including but not limited to tutoring organizations, professional development providers, 
educational publishers and operators of curriculum mapping or teacher resource digital 
platforms etc) is prohibited and requires a subsequent written license from the IB. License 
requests should be sent to copyright@ibo.org . More information can be obtained on the 
IB public website .
Diploma Programme
Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
International Baccalaureate , Baccalauréat International , Bachillerato Internacional   
and IB logos are registered trademarks of the International Baccalaureate Organization.IB learner profile I
profile IB learner p
arner profile IB lea
ile IB learner profi
IB learner profile I
er profile IB learne
© International Bac calaur eate Or ganiza tion 2017
International Bac calaur eate® | Bac calaur éat International® | Bachiller ato Internacional®
The IB learner pro/f_ile represents 10 attributes valued by IB World Schools. We believe these attributes, and others 
like them, can help individuals and groups become responsible members of local, national and global communities.We nurture our curiosity, developing skills for inquiry and 
research. We know how to learn independently and with others. 
We learn with enthusiasm and sustain our love of learning 
throughout life.
We develop and use conceptual understanding, exploring 
knowledge across a range of disciplines. We engage with issues 
and ideas that have local and global signi/f_icance. 
We use critical and creative thinking skills to analyse and take 
responsible action on complex problems. We exercise initiative in 
making reasoned, ethical decisions.
We express ourselves con/f_idently and creatively in more than one 
language and in many ways.  We collaborate eﬀectively, listening 
carefully to the perspectives of other individuals and groups.
We act with integrity and honesty, with a strong sense of 
fairness and justice, and with respect for the dignity and rights 
of people everywhere. We take responsibility for our actions 
and their consequences.We critically appreciate our own cultures and personal histories, 
as well as the values and traditions of others. We seek and evaluate 
a range of points of view, and we are willing to grow from the 
experience.
We show empathy, compassion and respect. We have a 
commitment to service, and we act to make a positive diﬀerence 
in the lives of others and in the world around us.
We understand the importance of balancing diﬀerent aspects of 
our lives /emdash.capintellectual, physical, and emotional/emdash.cap to achieve 
well-being for ourselves and others. We recognize our interde-
pendence with other people and with the world in which we live.
We thoughtfully consider the world and our own ideas and expe-
rience. We work to understand our strengths and weaknesses in 
order to support our learning and personal development.We approach uncertainty with forethought and determination; 
we work independently and cooperatively to explore new ideas 
and innovative strategies. We are resourceful and resilient in the 
face of challenges and change.IB learner profile
The aim of all IB programmes is to develop internationally minded people who, recognizing their common 
humanity and shared guardianship of the planet, help to create a better and more peaceful world.
As IB learners we strive to be:THE IB LEARNER PROFILEIB mission statement
The International Baccalaureate aims to develop inquiring, knowledgeable and caring young people who 
help to create a better and more peaceful world through intercultural understanding and respect.
To this end the organization works with schools, governments and international organizations to develop 
challenging programmes of international education and rigorous assessment.
These programmes encourage students across the world to become active, compassionate and lifelong 
learners who understand that other people, with their differences, can also be right.IB learner profile I
profile IB learner parner profile IB leaile IB learner profiIB learner profile Ier profile IB learne
© International Bac calaur eate Or ganiza tion 2017
International Bac calaur eate® | Bac calaur éat International® | Bachiller ato Internacional®
The IB learner pro/f_ile represents 10 attributes valued by IB World Schools. We believe these attributes, and others 
like them, can help individuals and groups become responsible members of local, national and global communities.We nurture our curiosity, developing skills for inquiry and 
research. We know how to learn independently and with others. 
We learn with enthusiasm and sustain our love of learning 
throughout life.
We develop and use conceptual understanding, exploring 
knowledge across a range of disciplines. We engage with issues 
and ideas that have local and global signi/f_icance. 
We use critical and creative thinking skills to analyse and take 
responsible action on complex problems. We exercise initiative in 
making reasoned, ethical decisions.
We express ourselves con/f_idently and creatively in more than one 
language and in many ways.  We collaborate eﬀectively, listening 
carefully to the perspectives of other individuals and groups.
We act with integrity and honesty, with a strong sense of 
fairness and justice, and with respect for the dignity and rights 
of people everywhere. We take responsibility for our actions 
and their consequences.We critically appreciate our own cultures and personal histories, 
as well as the values and traditions of others. We seek and evaluate 
a range of points of view, and we are willing to grow from the 
experience.
We show empathy, compassion and respect. We have a 
commitment to service, and we act to make a positive diﬀerence 
in the lives of others and in the world around us.
We understand the importance of balancing diﬀerent aspects of 
our lives /emdash.capintellectual, physical, and emotional/emdash.cap to achieve 
well-being for ourselves and others. We recognize our interde-
pendence with other people and with the world in which we live.
We thoughtfully consider the world and our own ideas and expe-
rience. We work to understand our strengths and weaknesses in order to support our learning and personal development.We approach uncertainty with forethought and determination; we work independently and cooperatively to explore new ideas and innovative strategies. We are resourceful and resilient in the face of challenges and change.IB learner profile
The aim of all IB programmes is to develop internationally minded people who, recognizing their common 
humanity and shared guardianship of the planet, help to create a better and more peaceful world.
As IB learners we strive to be:THE IB LEARNER PROFILEIntroduction 1
Purpose of this document 1
The Diploma Programme 2
Nature of Mathematics 6
Approaches to the teaching and learning of mathematics: analysis and approaches 13
Aims 20
Assessment objectives 21
Assessment objectives in practice 22
Syllabus 23
Syllabus outline 23
Prior learning topics 24
Syllabus content 26
Assessment 68
Assessment in the Diploma Programme 68
Assessment outline—SL 70
Assessment outline—HL 71
External assessment 72
Internal assessment 78
Appendices 87
Glossary of command terms 87
Notation list 89
Contents
Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
This  publication  is intended  to guide  the planning,  teaching  and  assessment  of the subject  in schools. 
Subject teachers are the primary audience, although it is expected that teachers will use the guide to inform 
students and parents about the subject.
This  guide  can be found  on the subject  page  of the programme  resource  centre  at resources.ibo.org , a 
password-protected  IB website  designed  to support  IB teachers.  It can also  be purchased  from  the IB store 
at store.ibo.org
Additional resources
Additional  publications  such  as specimen  papers  and  markschemes,  teacher  support  materials,  subject 
reports  and  grade  descriptors  can also  be found  on the programme  resource  centre.  Past  examination 
papers as well as markschemes can be purchased from the IB store.
Teachers are encouraged to check the programme resource centre for additional resources created or used 
by other  teachers.  Teachers  can provide  details  of useful  resources,  for example  websites,  books,  videos, 
journals or teaching ideas.
Acknowledgment
The IB wishes  to thank  the educators  and  associated  schools  for generously  contributing  time  and 
resources to the production of this guide.
First assessment 2021
Introduction
Purpose of this document
1 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
The Diploma Programme is a rigorous pre-university course of study designed for students in the 16-19 age 
range.  It is a broad-based  two-year  course  that  aims  to encourage  students  to be knowledgable  and 
inquiring,  but also  caring  and  compassionate.  There  is a strong  emphasis  on encouraging  students  to 
develop  intercultural  understanding,  open-mindedness,  and  the attitudes  necessary  for them  to respect 
and evaluate a range of points of view.
The Diploma Programme model
The course  is presented  as six academic  areas  enclosing  a central  core  (see  figure  1). It encourages  the 
concurrent  study  of a broad  range  of academic  areas.  Students  study  two  modern  languages  (or a modern 
language  and  a classical  language),  a humanities  or social  science  subject,  an experimental  science, 
mathematics and one of the creative arts. It is this comprehensive range of subjects that makes the Diploma 
Programme  a demanding  course  of study  designed  to prepare  students  effectively  for university  entrance. 
In each  of the academic  areas  students  have  flexibility  in making  their  choices,  which  means  they  can 
choose subjects that particularly interest them and that they may wish to study further at university.
Figure 1
The Diploma Programme model
Introduction
The Diploma Programme
2 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Choosing the right combination
Students  are required  to choose  one  subject  from  each  of the six academic  areas,  although  they  can, 
instead  of an arts subject,  choose  two  subjects  from  another  area.  Normally,  three  subjects  (and  not more 
than four) are taken at higher level (HL), and the others are taken at standard level (SL). The IB recommends 
240 teaching  hours  for HL subjects  and  150 hours  for SL. Subjects  at HL are studied  in greater  depth  and 
breadth than at SL.
At both  levels  many  skills  are developed,  especially  those  of critical  thinking  and  analysis.  At the end  of the 
course,  students’  abilities  are measured  by means  of external  assessment.  Many  subjects  contain  some 
element of coursework assessed by teachers.
The core of the Diploma Programme model
All Diploma Programme (DP) students participate in the three course elements that make up the core of the 
model.
Theory  of knowledge  (TOK)  is a course  that  is fundamentally  about  critical  thinking  and  inquiry  into  the 
process of knowing rather than about learning a specific body of knowledge. The TOK course examines the 
nature  of knowledge  and  how  we know  what  we claim  to know.  It does  this by encouraging  students  to 
analyse  knowledge  claims  and  explore  questions  about  the construction  of knowledge.  The task  of TOK  is 
to emphasize  connections  between  areas  of shared  knowledge  and  link them  to personal  knowledge  in 
such  a way  that  an individual  becomes  more  aware  of his or her own  perspectives  and  how  they  might 
differ from others.
Creativity,  activity,  service  (CAS)  is at the heart  of the Diploma  Programme.  The emphasis  in CAS  is on 
helping students to develop their own identities, in accordance with the ethical principles embodied in the 
IB mission  statement  and  the IB learner  profile.  It involves  students  in a range  of activities  alongside  their 
academic  studies  throughout  the Diploma  Programme.  The three  strands  of CAS  are creativity  (arts,  and 
other  experiences  that  involve  creative  thinking),  activity  (physical  exertion  contributing  to a healthy 
lifestyle)  and  service  (an unpaid  and  voluntary  exchange  that  has a learning  benefit  for the student). 
Possibly,  more  than  any other  component  in the Diploma  Programme,  CAS  contributes  to the IB’s mission 
to create a better and more peaceful world through intercultural understanding and respect.
The extended  essay,  including  the world  studies  extended  essay,  offers  the opportunity  for IB students  to 
investigate  a topic  of special  interest,  in the form  of a 4,000-word  piece  of independent  research.  The area 
of research undertaken is chosen from one of the students’ six Diploma Programme subjects, or in the case 
of the inter-disciplinary  World  Studies  essay,  two  subjects,  and  acquaints  them  with  the independent 
research  and  writing  skills  expected  at university.  This  leads  to a major  piece  of formally-presented, 
structured  writing,  in which  ideas  and  findings  are communicated  in a reasoned  and  coherent  manner, 
appropriate  to the subject  or subjects  chosen.  It is intended  to promote  high-level  research  and  writing 
skills,  intellectual  discovery  and  creativity.  An authentic  learning  experience,  it provides  students  with  an 
opportunity to engage in personal research on a topic of choice, under the guidance of a supervisor.
Approaches to teaching and approaches to 
learning
Approaches  to teaching  and  learning  across  the Diploma  Programme  refers  to deliberate  strategies,  skills 
and  attitudes  which  permeate  the teaching  and  learning  environment.  These  approaches and tools, 
intrinsically  linked  with  the learner  profile  attributes,  enhance  student  learning  and  assist  student 
preparation  for the Diploma  Programme  assessment  and  beyond.  The aims  of approaches  to teaching  and 
learning in the Diploma Programme are to:
• empower teachers as teachers of learners as well as teachers of content
• empower teachers to create clearer strategies for facilitating learning experiences in which students 
are more meaningfully engaged in structured inquiry and greater critical and creative thinkingThe Diploma Programme
3 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
• promote both the aims of individual subjects (making them more than course aspirations) and linking 
previously isolated knowledge (concurrency of learning)
• encourage students to develop an explicit variety of skills that will equip them to continue to be 
actively engaged in learning after they leave school, and to help them not only obtain university 
admission through better grades but also prepare for success during tertiary education and beyond
• enhance further the coherence and relevance of the students’ Diploma Programme experience
• allow schools to identify the distinctive nature of an IB Diploma Programme education, with its blend 
of idealism and practicality.
The five approaches  to learning  (developing  thinking  skills,  social  skills,  communication  skills,  self-
management  skills  and  research  skills)  along  with  the six approaches  to teaching  (teaching  that  is inquiry-
based,  conceptually-focused,  contextualized,  collaborative,  differentiated  and  informed  by assessment) 
encompass the key values and principles that underpin IB pedagogy.
The IB mission statement and the IB learner profile
The Diploma  Programme  aims  to develop  in students  the knowledge,  skills  and  attitudes  they  will need  to 
fulfill  the aims  of the IB, as expressed  in the organization’s  mission  statement  and  the learner  profile. 
Teaching  and  learning  in the Diploma  Programme  represent  the reality  in daily  practice  of the 
organization’s educational philosophy.
Academic honesty
Academic  honesty  in the Diploma  Programme  is a set of values  and  behaviours  informed  by the attributes 
of the learner  profile.  In teaching,  learning  and  assessment,  academic  honesty  serves  to promote  personal 
integrity,  engender  respect  for the integrity  of others  and  their  work,  and  ensure  that  all students  have  an 
equal opportunity to demonstrate the knowledge and skills they acquire during their studies.
All coursework—including  work  submitted  for assessment—is  to be authentic,  based  on the student’s 
individual  and  original  ideas  with  the ideas  and  work  of others  fully  acknowledged.  Assessment  tasks  that 
require  teachers  to provide  guidance  to students  or that  require  students  to work  collaboratively  must  be 
completed in full compliance with the detailed guidelines provided by the IB for the relevant subjects.
For further  information  on academic  honesty  in the IB and  the Diploma  Programme,  please  consult  the IB 
publications  Academic  honesty  in the IB educational  context,  Effective  citing  and  referencing,  The  Diploma 
Programme:  From  principles  into  practice  and  General  regulations:  Diploma  Programme . Specific  information 
regarding academic honesty as it pertains to external and internal assessment components of this Diploma 
Programme subject can be found in this guide.
Acknowledging the ideas or work of another 
person
Coordinators  and  teachers  are reminded  that  candidates  must  acknowledge  all sources  used  in work 
submitted for assessment. The following is intended as a clarification of this requirement.
Diploma  Programme  candidates  submit  work  for assessment  in a variety  of media  that  may  include  audio-
visual material, text, graphs, images and/or data published in print or electronic sources. If a candidate uses 
the work  or ideas  of another  person,  the candidate  must  acknowledge  the source  using  a standard  style  of 
referencing  in a consistent  manner.  A candidate’s  failure  to acknowledge  a source  will be investigated  by 
the IB as a potential  breach  of regulations  that  may  result  in a penalty  imposed  by the IB final  award 
committee.
The IB does not prescribe which style(s) of referencing or in-text citation should be used by candidates; this 
is left to the discretion  of appropriate  faculty/staff  in the candidate’s  school.  The wide  range  of subjects, 
three  response  languages  and  the diversity  of referencing  styles  make  it impractical  and  restrictive  to insist 
on particular  styles.  In practice,  certain  styles  may  prove  most  commonly  used,  but schools  are free  to The Diploma Programme
4 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
choose  a style  that  is appropriate  for the subject  concerned  and  the language  in which  candidates’  work  is 
written.  Regardless  of the reference  style  adopted  by the school  for a given  subject,  it is expected  that  the 
minimum  information  given  includes:  name  of author,  date  of publication,  title  of source,  and  page 
numbers as applicable.
Candidates  are expected  to use a standard  style  and  use it consistently  so that  credit  is given  to all sources 
used,  including  sources  that  have  been  paraphrased  or summarized.  When  writing  text,  candidates  must 
clearly  distinguish  between  their  words  and  those  of others  by the use of quotation  marks  (or other 
method, such as indentation) followed by an appropriate citation that denotes an entry in the bibliography. 
If an electronic  source  is cited,  the date  of access  must  be indicated.  Candidates  are not expected  to show 
faultless  expertise  in referencing,  but are expected  to demonstrate  that  all sources  have  been 
acknowledged.  Candidates  must  be advised  that  audio-visual  material,  text,  graphs,  images  and/or  data 
published  in print  or in electronic  sources  that  is not their  own  must  also  attribute  the source.  Again,  an 
appropriate style of referencing/citation must be used.
Learning diversity and learning support 
requirements
Schools  must  ensure  that  equal  access  arrangements  and  reasonable  adjustments  are provided  to 
candidates  with  learning  support  requirements  that  are in line with  the IB documents  Access  and  inclusion 
policy  and Learning diversity and inclusion in IB programmes.
The documents  Meeting  student  learning  diversity  in the classroom  and  The  IB guide  to inclusive  education:  a 
resource  for whole  school  development  are available  to support  schools  in the ongoing  process  of increasing 
access and engagement by removing barriers to learning.The Diploma Programme
5 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Introduction
Mathematics  has been  described  as the study  of structure,  order  and  relation  that  has evolved  from  the 
practices  of counting,  measuring  and  describing  objects.  Mathematics  provides  a unique  language  to 
describe, explore and communicate the nature of the world we live in as well as being a constantly building 
body of knowledge and truth in itself that is distinctive in its certainty. These two aspects of mathematics, a 
discipline  that  is studied  for its intrinsic  pleasure  and  a means  to explore  and  understand  the world  we live 
in, are both separate yet closely linked.
Mathematics is driven by abstract concepts and generalization. This mathematics is drawn out of ideas, and 
develops  through  linking  these  ideas  and  developing  new  ones.  These  mathematical  ideas  may  have  no 
immediate  practical  application.  Doing  such  mathematics  is about  digging  deeper  to increase 
mathematical  knowledge  and  truth.  The new  knowledge  is presented  in the form  of theorems  that  have 
been built from axioms and logical mathematical arguments and a theorem is only accepted as true when it 
has been  proven.  The body  of knowledge  that  makes  up mathematics  is not fixed;  it has grown  during 
human history and is growing at an increasing rate.
The side  of mathematics  that  is based  on describing  our world  and  solving  practical  problems  is often 
carried  out in the context  of another  area  of study.  Mathematics  is used  in a diverse  range  of disciplines  as 
both a language and a tool to explore the universe; alongside this its applications include analyzing trends, 
making predictions, quantifying risk, exploring relationships and interdependence.
While  these  two  different  facets  of mathematics  may  seem  separate,  they  are often  deeply  connected. 
When  mathematics  is developed,  history  has taught  us that  a seemingly  obscure,  abstract  mathematical 
theorem  or fact may  in time  be highly  significant.  On the other  hand,  much  mathematics  is developed  in 
response to the needs of other disciplines.
The two  mathematics  courses  available  to Diploma  Programme  (DP)  students  express  both  the differences 
that  exist  in mathematics  described  above  and  the connections  between  them.  These  two  courses  might 
approach  mathematics  from  different  perspectives,  but they  are connected  by the same  mathematical 
body  of knowledge,  ways  of thinking  and  approaches  to problems.  The differences  in the courses  may  also 
be related  to the types  of tools,  for instance  technology,  that  are used  to solve  abstract  or practical 
problems. The next section will describe in more detail the two available courses.
Summary of courses available
Individual  students  have  different  needs,  aspirations,  interests  and  abilities.  For this reason  there  are two 
different  subjects  in mathematics,  each  available  at SL and  HL These  courses  are designed  for different 
types  of students:  those  who  wish  to study  mathematics  as a subject  in its own  right  or to pursue  their 
interests  in areas  related  to mathematics,  and  those  who  wish  to gain  understanding  and  competence  in 
how mathematics relates to the real world and to other subjects. Each course is designed to meet the needs 
of a particular group of students. Mathematics: analysis and approaches and Mathematics: applications and 
interpretation are both offered at SL and HL. Therefore, great care should be taken to select the course and 
level that is most appropriate for an individual student.
In making this selection, individual students should be advised to take into account the following factors:
• their own abilities in mathematics and the type of mathematics in which they can be successful
• their own interest in mathematics and those particular areas of the subject that may hold the most 
interest for them
• their other choices of subjects within the framework of the DP or Career-related Programme (CP)
Introduction
Nature of Mathematics
6 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
• their academic plans, in particular the subjects they wish to study in the future
• their choice of career.
Teachers are expected to assist with the selection process and to offer advice to students.
The nature of IB mathematics courses
Figure 2
The mathematics model
The structure  of IB DP mathematics  courses,  with  two  different  routes  to choose  from,  recognizes  the two 
different aspects of mathematics discussed in the introduction.
Mathematics:  analysis  and  approaches  is for students  who  enjoy  developing  their  mathematics  to become 
fluent  in the construction  of mathematical  arguments  and  develop  strong  skills  in mathematical  thinking. 
They  will also  be fascinated  by exploring  real and  abstract  applications  of these  ideas,  with  and  without 
technology.  Students  who  take  Mathematics:  analysis  and  approaches  will be those  who  enjoy  the thrill  of 
mathematical problem solving and generalization.
Mathematics:  applications  and  interpretation  is for students  who  are interested  in developing  their 
mathematics  for describing  our world  and  solving  practical  problems.  They  will also  be interested  in 
harnessing  the power  of technology  alongside  exploring  mathematical  models.  Students  who  take 
Mathematics:  applications  and  interpretation  will be those  who  enjoy  mathematics  best  when  seen  in a 
practical context.
Both  subjects  are offered  at HL and  SL. There  are many  elements  common  to both  subjects  although  the 
approaches may be different. Both subjects will prepare students with the mathematics needed for a range 
of further educational courses corresponding to the two approaches to mathematics set out above.Nature of Mathematics
7 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Mathematics: analysis and approaches
This  course  recognizes  the need  for analytical  expertise  in a world  where  innovation  is increasingly 
dependent on a deep understanding of mathematics. This course includes topics that are both traditionally 
part of a pre-university mathematics course (for example, functions, trigonometry, calculus) as well as topics 
that  are amenable  to investigation,  conjecture  and  proof,  for instance  the study  of sequences  and  series  at 
both SL and HL, and proof by induction at HL.
The course  allows  the use of technology,  as fluency  in relevant  mathematical  software  and  hand-held 
technology  is important  regardless  of choice  of course.  However,  Mathematics:  analysis  and  approaches 
has a strong  emphasis  on the ability  to construct,  communicate  and  justify  correct  mathematical 
arguments.
Mathematics: analysis and approaches: Distinction between SL and 
HL
Students  who  choose  Mathematics:  analysis  and  approaches  at SL or HL should  be comfortable  in the 
manipulation  of algebraic  expressions  and  enjoy  the recognition  of patterns  and  understand  the 
mathematical  generalization  of these  patterns.  Students  who  wish  to take  Mathematics:  analysis  and 
approaches at higher level will have strong algebraic skills and the ability to understand simple proof. They 
will be students  who  enjoy  spending  time  with  problems  and  get pleasure  and  satisfaction  from  solving 
challenging problems.
Mathematics: applications and interpretation
This course recognizes the increasing role that mathematics and technology play in a diverse range of fields 
in a data-rich  world.  As such,  it emphasizes  the meaning  of mathematics  in context  by focusing  on topics 
that  are often  used  as applications  or in mathematical  modelling.  To give  this understanding  a firm  base, 
this course  also  includes  topics  that  are traditionally  part  of a pre-university  mathematics  course  such  as 
calculus and statistics.
The course  makes  extensive  use of technology  to allow  students  to explore  and  construct  mathematical 
models.  Mathematics:  applications  and  interpretation  will develop  mathematical  thinking,  often  in the 
context of a practical problem and using technology to justify conjectures.
Mathematics: applications and interpretation: Distinction between 
SL and HL
Students  who  choose  Mathematics:  applications  and  interpretation  at SL or HL should  enjoy  seeing 
mathematics  used  in real-world  contexts  and  to solve  real-world  problems.  Students  who  wish  to take 
Mathematics:  applications  and  interpretation  at higher  level  will have  good  algebraic  skills  and  experience 
of solving  real-world  problems.  They  will be students  who  get pleasure  and  satisfaction  when  exploring 
challenging problems and who are comfortable to undertake this exploration using technology.
Mathematics and theory of knowledge
The relationship between each subject and theory of knowledge (TOK) is important and fundamental to the 
DP. The theory  of knowledge  course  provides  an opportunity  for students  to reflect  on questions  about 
how knowledge is produced and shared, both in mathematics and also across different areas of knowledge. 
It encourages  students  to reflect  on their  assumptions  and  biases,  helping  them  to become  more  aware  of 
their  own  perspective  and  the perspectives  of others  and  to become  “inquiring,  knowledgeable  and  caring 
young people” (IB mission statement).
As part  of their  theory  of knowledge  course,  students  are encouraged  to explore  tensions  relating  to 
knowledge  in mathematics.  As an area  of knowledge,  mathematics  seems  to supply  a certainty  perhaps 
impossible  in other  disciplines  and  in many  instances  provides  us with  tools  to debate  these  certainties. 
This  may  be related  to the “purity”  of the subject,  something  that  can sometimes  make  it seem  divorced Nature of Mathematics
8 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
from  reality.  Yet mathematics  has also  provided  important  knowledge  about  the world  and  the use of 
mathematics in science and technology has been one of the driving forces for scientific advances.
Despite  all its undoubted  power  for understanding  and  change,  mathematics  is in the end  a puzzling 
phenomenon.  A fundamental  question  for all knowers  is whether  mathematical  knowledge  really  exists 
independently  of our thinking  about  it. Is it there,  “waiting  to be discovered”,  or is it a human  creation? 
Indeed, the philosophy of mathematics is an area of study in its own right.
Students’  attention  should  be drawn  to questions  relating  theory  of knowledge  (TOK)  and  mathematics, 
and they should also be encouraged to raise such questions themselves in both their mathematics and TOK 
classes.  Examples  of issues  relating  to TOK  are given  in the “Connections”  sections  of the syllabus.  Further 
suggestions  for making  links  to TOK  can also  be found  in the mathematics  section  of the Theory  of 
knowledge guide .
Mathematics and international-mindedness
International-mindedness  is a complex  and  multi-faceted  concept  that  refers  to a way  of thinking,  being 
and acting characterized by an openness to the world and a recognition of our deep interconnectedness to 
others.
Despite  recent  advances  in the development  of information  and  communication  technologies,  the global 
exchange  of mathematical  information  and  ideas  is not a new  phenomenon  and  has been  essential  to the 
progress  of mathematics.  Indeed,  many  of the foundations  of modern  mathematics  were  laid many 
centuries ago by diverse civilisations – Arabic, Greek, Indian and Chinese among others.
Mathematics  can in some  ways  be seen  as an international  language  and,  apart  from  slightly  differing 
notation,  mathematicians  from  around  the world  can communicate  effectively  within  their  field. 
Mathematics can transcend politics, religion and nationality, and throughout history great civilizations have 
owed  their  success  in part  to their  mathematicians  being  able  to create  and  maintain  complex  social  and 
architectural  structures.  Politics  has dominated  the development  of mathematics,  to develop  ballistics, 
navigation  and  trade,  and  land  ownership,  often  influenced  by governments  and  leaders.  Many  early 
mathematicians  were  political  and  military  advisers  and  today  mathematicians  are integral  members  of 
teams who advise governments on where money and resources should be allocated.
Science  and  technology  are of significant  importance  in today’s  world.  As the language  of science, 
mathematics  is an essential  component  of most  technological  innovation  and  underpins  developments  in 
science  and  technology,  although  the contribution  of mathematics  may  not always  be visible.  Examples  of 
this include the role of the binary number system, matrix algebra, network theory and probability theory in 
the digital  revolution,  or the use of mathematical  simulations  to predict  future  climate  change  or spread  of 
disease. These examples highlight the key role mathematics can play in transforming the world around us.
One  way  of fostering  international-mindedness  is to provide  opportunities  for inquiry  into  a range  of local 
and  global  issues  and  ideas.  Many  international  organisations  and  bodies  now  exist  to promote 
mathematics,  and  students  are encouraged  to access  the resources  and  often-extensive  websites  of such 
mathematical  organisations.  This  can enhance  their  appreciation  of the international  dimension  of 
mathematics, as well as providing opportunities to engage with global issues surrounding the subject.
Examples  of links  relating  to international-mindedness  are given  in the “Connections”  sections  of the 
syllabus.
Mathematics and creativity, activity, service (CAS)
CAS experiences can be associated with each of the subject groups of the DP.
CAS and mathematics can complement each other in a number of ways. Mathematical knowledge provides 
an important  key to understanding  the world  in which  we live,  and  the mathematical  skills  and  techniques 
students  learn  in the mathematics  courses  will allow  them  to evaluate  the world  around  them  which  will 
help them to develop, plan and deliver CAS experiences or projects.
An important  aspect  of the mathematics  courses  is that  students  develop  the ability  to systematically 
analyse  situations  and  can recognize  the impact  that  mathematics  can have  on the world  around  them.  An Nature of Mathematics
9 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
awareness  of how  mathematics  can be used  to represent  the truth  enables  students  to reflect  critically  on 
the information  that  societies  are given  or generate,  and  how  this influences  the allocation  of resources  or 
the choices that people make. This systematic analysis and critical reflection when problem solving may be 
inspiring springboards for CAS projects.
Students  may  also  draw  on their  CAS  experiences  to enrich  their  involvement  in mathematics  both  within 
and  outside  the classroom,  and  mathematics  teachers  can assist  students  in making  links  between  their 
subjects  and  students’  CAS  experiences  where  appropriate.  Purposeful  discussion  about  real CAS 
experiences and projects will help students to make these links.
The challenge  and  enjoyment  of CAS  can often  have  a profound  effect  on mathematics  students,  who 
might choose, for example, to engage with CAS in the following ways:
• plan, write and implement a “mathematics scavenger hunt” where younger students tour the school 
answering interesting mathematics questions as part of their introduction to a new school
• as a CAS project students could plan and carry out a survey, create a database and analyse the results, 
and make suggestions to resolve a problem in the students’ local area. This might be, for example, 
surveying the availability of fresh fruit and vegetables within a community, preparing an action plan 
with suggestions of how to increase availability or access, and presenting this to a local charity or 
community group
• taking an element of world culture that interests students and designing a miniature Earth (if the 
world were 100 people) to express the trend(s) numerically.
It is important  to note  that  a CAS  experience  can be a single  event  or may  be an extended  series  of events. 
However,  CAS  experiences  must  be distinct  from,  and  may  not be included  or used  in, the student’s 
Diploma course requirements.
Additional  suggestions  on the links  between  DP subjects  and  CAS  can be found  in the Creativity,  activity, 
service teacher support material .
Prior learning
It is expected that most students embarking on a DP mathematics course will have studied mathematics for 
at least  10 years.  There will be a great  variety  of topics  studied,  and  differing  approaches  to teaching  and 
learning.  Thus,  students  will have  a wide  variety  of skills  and  knowledge  when  they  start  their  mathematics 
course.  Most  will have  some  background  in arithmetic,  algebra,  geometry,  trigonometry,  probability  and 
statistics. Some will be familiar with an inquiry approach, and may have had an opportunity to complete an 
extended piece of work in mathematics.
At the beginning  of the syllabus  section  there  is a list of topics  that  are considered  to be prior  learning  for 
the mathematics courses. It is recognized that this may contain topics that are unfamiliar to some students, 
but it is anticipated  that  there  may  be other  topics  in the syllabus  itself  which  these  students  have  already 
encountered. Teachers should be informed by their assessment of students’ prior learning to help plan their 
teaching so that topics mentioned that are unfamiliar to their students can be incorporated.
Links to the Middle Years Programme
The MYP mathematics framework is designed to prepare students for the study of DP mathematics courses. 
As students  progress  from  the MYP  to the DP or the Career-related  Programme  (CP)  they  continue  to 
develop their mathematics skills and knowledge, which will then allow them to go on to study a wide range 
of topics.  Inquiry-based  learning  is central  to mathematics  courses  in both  MYP  and  the DP, providing 
students  with  opportunities  to independently  and  collaboratively  investigate,  problem  solve  and 
communicate their mathematics with an increasing level of sophistication.
MYP  mathematics  courses  are concept-driven,  aimed  at helping  the learner  to construct  meaning  through 
improved critical thinking and the transfer of knowledge. The MYP courses use a framework of key concepts 
with which the concepts in the DP mathematics courses are aligned. These concepts are broad, organizing, 
powerful  ideas  that  have  relevance  within  the subject  but also  transcend  it, having  relevance  in other Nature of Mathematics
10 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
subject  groups.  The fundamental  concepts  of MYP  mathematics  provide  a very  useful  foundation  for 
students following DP mathematics courses.
The aims of the MYP mathematics courses align very closely with those of the DP mathematics courses. The 
prior  learning  topics  for the DP mathematics  courses  have  been  written  in conjunction  with  the MYP 
mathematics guide.
The MYP  mathematics  assessment  objectives  and  criteria  have  been  developed  with  both  the internal  and 
external  assessment  requirements  of the DP in mind.  MYP  mathematics  students  are required  to practise 
and  develop  their  investigation  skills,  one  of the MYP  four  assessment  objectives,  giving  an important 
foundation  for the internal  assessment  component  of the DP mathematics  courses.  The MYP  assessment 
objective  of thinking  critically  also  corresponds  to the higher-order  assessment  objectives  of 
communication and interpretation, and of reasoning that are expected from a DP mathematics student.
MYP  and  DP mathematics  courses  emphasized  the use of technology  as a powerful  tool  for learning, 
applying and communicating mathematics.
Where  students  in the MYP  may  select  either  standard  or extended  mathematics,  at DP there  are two 
mathematics  subjects  both  available  at SL and  HL. MYP  students  enrolled  in extended  mathematics 
generally  elect  to take  one  of the HL mathematics  courses  in the DP. Students  in MYP  standard 
mathematics  should  seek  the recommendation  of their  teacher  when  deciding  which  SL or HL course  they 
are best suited to pursue.
Figure 3
The IB continuum pathways to DP courses in mathematics
Links to the Career-related Programme
In the IB Career-related  Programme  (CP)  students  study  at least  two  DP subjects,  a core  consisting  of four 
components and a career-related study, which is determined by the local context and aligned with student 
needs.  The CP has been  designed  to add  value  to the student’s  career-related  studies.  This provides the 
context for the choice of DP courses. Courses can be chosen from any group of the DP. It is also possible to 
study more than one course from the same group (for example, visual arts and film).Nature of Mathematics
11 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Mathematics  may  be a beneficial  choice  for CP students  considering  careers  in, for example,  finance, 
planning,  healthcare  systems  or coding,  tourism  industries,  the technology  industry,  social  informatics,  or 
urban  planning.  Mathematics  helps  students  to understand  the value  of systematic  approaches,  how  to 
analyse complex real-world contexts, how to communicate this concisely and precisely and understand the 
implications of conclusions.
Mathematics  encourages  the development  of strong  written,  verbal,  and  graphical  communication  skills; 
critical  and  complex  thinking;  and  moral  and  ethical  considerations  influenced  by mathematics  that  will 
assist  students  in preparing  for the future  global  workplace.  This  in turn  fosters  the IB learner  profile 
attributes that are transferable to the entire CP, providing relevance and support for the student’s learning.
For the CP students,  DP courses  can be studied  at SL or HL. Schools  can explore  opportunities  to integrate 
CP students with DP students.Nature of Mathematics
12 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Conceptual understanding
Concepts  are broad,  powerful,  organizing  ideas,  the significance  of which  goes  beyond  particular  origins, 
subject matter or place in time. Concepts represent the vehicle for students’ inquiry into issues and ideas of 
personal,  local  and  global  significance,  providing  the means  by which  they  can explore  the essence  of 
mathematics.
Concepts  play  an important  role  in mathematics,  helping  students  and  teachers  to think  with  increasing 
complexity  as they  organize  and  relate  facts  and  topics.  Students  use conceptual  understandings  as they 
solve  problems,  analyse  issues  and  evaluate  decisions  that  can have  an impact  on themselves,  their 
communities and the wider world.
In DP mathematics  courses,  conceptual  understandings  are key to promoting  deep  learning.  The course 
identifies  twelve  fundamental  concepts  which  relate  with  varying  emphasis  to each  of the five topics. 
Teachers  may  identify  and  develop  additional  concepts  to meet  local  circumstances  and  national  or state 
curriculum  requirements.  Teachers  can use these  concepts  to develop  connections  throughout  the 
curriculum.
Each  topic  in this guide  begins  by stating  the essential  understandings  of the topic  and  highlighting 
relevant  concepts  fundamental  to the topic.  This  is followed  by suggested  conceptual  understandings 
relevant to the content within the topic, although this list is not intended to be prescriptive or exhaustive.
The concepts
Concepts  promote  the development  of a broad,  balanced,  conceptual  and  connected  curriculum.  They 
represent big ideas that are relevant and facilitate connections within topics, across topics and also to other 
subjects within the DP.
The twelve concepts identified below support conceptual understanding, can inform units of work and can 
help  to organize  teaching  and  learning.  Explanations  of each  of these  concepts  in a mathematical  context 
have also been provided.
Approximation This concept refers to a quantity or a representation which is nearly but not exactly 
correct.
Change This concept refers to a variation in size, amount or behaviour.
Equivalence This concept refers to the state of being identically equal or interchangeable, applied 
to statements, quantities or expressions.
Generalization This concept refers to a general statement made on the basis of specific examples.
Modelling This concept refers to the way in which mathematics can be used to represent the real 
world.
Patterns This concept refers to the underlying order, regularity or predictability of the elements 
of a mathematical system.
Quantity This concept refers to an amount or number.
Relationships This concept refers to the connection between quantities, properties or concepts; 
these connections may be expressed as models, rules or statements. Relationships 
provide opportunities for students to explore patterns in the world around them.
Introduction
Approaches to the teaching and learning of 
mathematics: analysis and approaches
13 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Representation This concept refers to using words, formulae, diagrams, tables, charts, graphs and 
models to represent mathematical information.
Space This concept refers to the frame of geometrical dimensions describing an entity.
Systems This concept refers to groups of interrelated elements.
Validity This concept refers to using well-founded, logical mathematics to come to a true and 
accurate conclusion or a reasonable interpretation of results.
Mathematical inquiry
Approaches  to teaching  and  learning  in the DP refer  to deliberate  strategies,  skills  and  attitudes  that 
permeate the teaching and learning environment. These approaches and tools are intrinsically linked to the 
IB learner profile, which encourages learning by experimentation, questioning and discovery.
In the IB classroom,  students  should  regularly  learn  mathematics  by being  active  participants  in learning 
activities.  Teachers  should  therefore  provide  students  with  regular  opportunities  to learn  through 
mathematical  inquiry,  by making  frequent  use of strategies  which  stimulate  students’  critical  thinking  and 
problem-solving skills.
Figure 4
The cycle of mathematical inquiry
Approaches to the teaching and learning of mathematics: analysis and approaches
14 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Mathematical modelling
Mathematical  modelling  is an important  technique  used  in problem  solving,  to make  sense  of the real 
world.  It is often  used  to help  us better  understand  a situation,  to check  the effects of change  or to inform 
decision-making.  Engaging  students  in the mathematical  modelling  process  provides  them  with  such 
opportunities.  It is one  of the most  useful  mathematical  skills  that  students  will need  to be successful  in 
many non-mathematical as well as mathematical courses and careers.
The mathematical  modelling  process  begins  with  consideration  of a situation  that  exists  in the real world 
and  is not usually  artificially  created.  At this stage  assumptions  sometimes  have to be made  in order  to 
simplify  the situation  to allow  modelling  to take  place.  There  is often  a fine balance  needed  between  the 
simplicity and the accuracy of the model.
The first stage  involves  choosing  or fitting  a suitable  mathematical  representation  to the context.  This 
representation  is tested  to evaluate  whether  or not it returns  expected  results.  The testing  stage  allows  the 
results  returned  by the model  to be reflected  upon  and  adaptations  to be made  to the model  if necessary. 
Once a satisfactory model is established it can be applied or used to explain a situation, check the effects of 
change or to inform decision-making.
The process of mathematical modelling requires critical reflection throughout the process.
More  advice  and  guidance  on the process  of mathematical  modelling  is given  in the teacher  support 
material . The cycle of mathematical modelling is illustrated below.
Figure 5
The cycle of mathematical modelling
Approaches to the teaching and learning of mathematics: analysis and approaches
15 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Proof
Proof  in mathematics  is an essential  element  in developing  critical  thinking.  Engaging  students  in the 
process  of proving  a statement  enables  a deeper  understanding  of mathematical  concepts.  At standard 
level  students  will be exposed  to simple  deductive  proofs.  In the additional  higher  level  (AHL)  content 
students will also focus on proof by contradiction and proof by induction as well as using counterexamples 
to show that a statement is not true.
The value of proving a statement is multifaceted as it helps students to develop the following skills:
• groupwork
• interpersonal skills
• reasoning
• research
• oral and written communication
• creative thinking
• organization.
Writing  proofs  enables  students  to appreciate  proof  techniques  and  mathematical  thought  processes. 
Students  will learn  the vocabulary  and  layout  for proving  mathematical  statements.  When  faced  with  a 
mathematical  statement,  HL students  will also  be challenged  to think  about  the best  method  to show  that 
the statement  is true.  Proofs  encourage  students  to reflect  on mathematical  rigour,  efficiency  and  the 
elegance of showing that a statement is true.
Within  the guide  the term  “informal”  or “elementary”  refers  to approaches  which  do not require  proof,  can 
be justified with examples and do not make formal use of axioms.
Use of technology
The use of technology  is an integral  part  of DP mathematics  courses.  Developing  an appreciation  of how 
developments in technology and mathematics have influenced each other is one of the aims of the courses 
and  using  technology  accurately,  appropriately  and  efficiently  both  to explore  new  ideas  and  to solve 
problems  is one  of the assessment  objectives.  Learning  how  to use different  forms  of technology  is an 
important  skill in mathematics  and  time  has been  allowed  in each  topic  of the syllabus  and  through  the 
“toolkit” in order to do this.
Technology  is a powerful  tool  in mathematics  and  in recent  years  increased  student  and  teacher  access  to 
this technology  has supported  and  advanced  the teaching  and  learning  of mathematics.  Discerning  use of 
technology can make more mathematics accessible and motivating to a greater number of students.
Teachers can use technology to support and enhance student understanding in many ways including:
• to bring out teaching points
• to address misconceptions
• to aid visualization
• to enhance understanding of concepts that would otherwise be restricted by lengthy numerical 
calculations or algebraic manipulation
• to support students in making conjectures and checking generalizations
• to explicitly make the links between different mathematical representations or approaches.
Students  can also  use technology  to engage  with  the learning  process  in many  ways  including  the 
following:
• to develop and enhance their own personal conceptual understanding
• to search for patterns
• to test conjectures or generalizations
• to justify interpretationsApproaches to the teaching and learning of mathematics: analysis and approaches
16 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
• to collaborate on project based work
• to help organize and analyse data.
In the classroom  teachers  and  students  can use technology,  working  individually  or collaboratively,  to 
explore  mathematical  concepts.  The key to successful  learning  of mathematics  with  technology  is the fine 
balance  between  the teacher  and  student  use of technology,  with  carefully  chosen  use of technology  to 
support the understanding and the communication of the mathematics itself.
Many  topics  within  the DP mathematics  courses  lend  themselves  to the use of technology.  Graphical 
calculators,  dynamic  graphing  software,  spreadsheets,  simulations,  apps,  dynamic  geometry  software  and 
interactive  whiteboard  software  are just a few of the many  kinds  of technology  available  to support  the 
teaching and learning of mathematics.
Within the guide the term “technology” is used for any form of calculator, hardware or software that may be 
available  in the classroom.  The terms  “analysis”  and  “analytic  approach”  are generally  used  in the guide  to 
indicate an algebraic approach that may not require the use of technology. It is important to note there will 
be restrictions  on which  technology  may  be used  in examinations,  which  will be detailed  in relevant 
documents.
As teachers  tie together  the unifying  themes  of mathematical  inquiry,  mathematical  modelling  and  the 
use  of technology , they  should  begin  by providing  substantial  guidance  and  then  gradually  encourage 
students  to become  more  independent  as inquirers  and  thinkers.  DP students  should  learn  to become 
strong  communicators  through  the language  of mathematics.  Teachers  should  create  a learning 
environment  in which  students  are comfortable  as risk takers  and  inquiry,  conceptual  understanding, 
collaboration and use of technology feature prominently.
For further  information  on “Approaches  to teaching  and  learning  in the Diploma  Programme”,  please  refer 
to the publication  The  Diploma  Programme:  From  principles  into  practice . To support  teachers,  a variety  of 
resources  can be found  on the programme  resource  centre,  and  details  of workshops  for professional 
development are available on the public website.
Format of the syllabus
The format  of the syllabus  section  of the mathematics  guides  is the same  for each  subject  and  each  level. 
This  structure  gives  prominence  and  focus  to the aspects  of teaching  and  learning,  including  conceptual 
understandings, content and enrichment.
There are five topics and within these topics there are sub-topics. The five topics are:
• number and algebra
• functions
• geometry and trigonometry
• probability and statistics
• calculus
Each topic begins with a section on conceptual understandings. Details are given of which of the twelve key 
concepts  could  be used  to relate  to the topic.  Essential  understandings  give  details  of the overall  aims  of 
the topic  and  then  content-specific  conceptual  understandings  give  specific  details  of the aims  and 
purpose of the topic and sub-topics.
Each  topic  begins  with  SL content  which  is common  to both  Mathematics:  analysis  and  approaches  and  to 
Mathematics: applications and interpretation.
Each  topic  has SL content  followed  by AHL  content.  Teachers  should  ensure  that  they  cover  all SL content 
with SL students, and all SL and AHL content with HL students. The topics are structured so that an informal 
introduction in the common content may be formalized in the SL content and then extended further in the 
AHL  content.  For example  the extension  of the set of numbers  for which  something  is defined  could  be 
integers in the common content, positive real numbers in the SL content and all real and complex numbers 
in the AHL content.
The content  of all five topics  at the appropriate  level  must  be taught,  however  not necessarily  in the order 
in which  they  appear  in the guide.  Teachers  are expected  to construct  a course  of study  that  addresses  the 
needs  of their  students  and  includes,  where  necessary,  the topics  noted  in prior  learning.  Guidance  on 
structuring a course is given in the teacher support material.
Each topic has three sections:
Content : The column on the left contains details of the sub-topics to be covered.
Guidance,  clarification  and  syllabus  links : The column  on the right  contains  more  detailed  information 
on specific  sub-topics  listed  in the content  column.  This  clarifies  the content  for the examination  and 
highlights where sub-topics relate to other sub-topics within the syllabus.
Connections : Each  topic  also  contains  a short  section  that  provides  suggestions  for further  discussion, 
including real-life examples and ideas for further investigation.
These suggestions are only a guide and are not exhaustive. A downloadable version of these sections is also 
available,  so that  additional  connections  can be added  to the ones  already  suggested  by the IB. Potential 
areas for connections include:
• Other contexts:  Real-life examples
• Links to other subjects:  Suggested connections to other subjects within the DP. Note that these are 
correct for the current (2019) published versions of the guides
• Aim:  Links to the aims of the course
• International-mindedness:  Suggestions for discussions
• TOK : Suggestions for discussions
• Links to TSM:  Links to the teacher support materials (TSM) in the “in practice” section of the website
• Link to specimen paper:  Links to specific questions exemplifying how topics might be examined
• Use of technology:  Suggestions as to how technology can be used in the classroom to enhance 
understanding
• Links to websites:  Suggested websites for use in teaching or learning activities
• Enrichment:  Suggestions for further discussions that may reinforce understanding.
Planning your course
The syllabus  as provided  in the subject  guide  is not intended  to be a teaching  order.  Instead  it provides 
detail  of what  must  be covered  by the end  of the course.  A school  should  develop  a scheme  of work  that 
best  works  for its own  students.  For example,  the scheme  of work  could  be developed  to match  available 
resources,  to take  into  account  prior  learning  and  experience,  or in conjunction  with  other  local 
requirements.
HL teachers may choose to teach the SL content and AHL content at the same time or teach them in a spiral 
fashion,  by teaching  the SL content  first and  revisiting  these  topics  through  the delivery  of the AHL  topics 
after this.
However  the course  is planned,  adequate  time  must  be provided  for examination  revision.  Time  must  also 
be given to students to reflect on their learning experience and their growth as learners.
Time allocation
The recommended  teaching  time  for HL courses  is 240 hours  and  for SL courses  is 150 hours.  For 
mathematics  courses  at both  SL and  HL, it is expected  that  30 hours  will be spent  on developing  inquiry, 
modelling and investigation skills. This includes up to 15 hours for work on the internal assessment which is 
called  the exploration.  The time  allocations  given  in this guide  are approximate,  and  are intended  to 
suggest  how  the remaining  210 hours  for HL and  120 hours  for SL allowed  for the teaching  of the syllabus 
might  be allocated.  The exact  time  spent  on each  topic  depends  on a number  of factors,  including  the 
background  knowledge  and  level  of preparedness  of each  student.  Teachers  should  therefore  adjust  these 
timings to correspond to the needs of their students.Approaches to the teaching and learning of mathematics: analysis and approaches
18 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
The Toolkit
Time  has been  allocated  within  the teaching  hours  for students  to undertake  the types  of activities  that 
mathematicians in the real world undertake and to allow students time to develop the skill of thinking like a 
mathematician–in  other  words  providing  students  with  a mathematical  toolkit  which  will allow  them  to 
approach  any type  of mathematical  problem.  Underpinning  this are the six pedagogical  approaches  to 
teaching  and  the five approaches  to learning  which  support  all IB programmes.  This  time gives  students 
opportunities  in the classroom  for undertaking  an inquiry-based  approach  and  focusing  on conceptual 
understanding  of the content,  developing  their  awareness  of mathematics  in local  and  global  contexts, 
gives them opportunities for teamwork and collaboration as well as time to reflect upon their own learning 
of mathematics.
Students should be encouraged to actively identify skills that they might add to their personal mathematics 
toolkit.  Teachers  are encouraged  to make  explicit  where  these  skills  might  transfer  across  areas  of 
mathematics  content  and  allow  students  to reflect  upon  where  these  skills  transfer  to other  subjects  the 
student is studying.
The teacher support material (TSM) contains a section referred to as the “toolkit”. This section contains ideas 
and  resources  that  teachers  can use with  their  students  to encourage  the development  of mathematical 
thinking  skills.  These  resources  have  been  developed  by teachers  for use in their  own  classrooms  and  are 
not exhaustive.
Formulae and the formula booklet
Formulae  are only  included  in this guide  document  where  there may  be some  ambiguity.  All formulae 
required for the course are in the mathematics formula booklet.
From  the beginning  of the course  it is recommended  that  teachers  ensure  students  are familiar  with  the 
contents  of the formula  booklet  by either  giving  students  a printed  copy  or making  an electronic  copy 
available to them.
Each  student  is required  to have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  For 
each examination, it is the responsibility of the school to download a copy of the formula booklet from IBIS 
or the programme  resource  centre,  check  that  there  are no printing  errors,  and  ensure  that  there are 
sufficient copies available for all students.
Command terms and notation list
Teachers and students need to be familiar with the IB notation list and the command terms, as these will be 
used  without  explanation  in the examination  papers.  The “Glossary  of command  terms”  and  “Notation  list” 
appear as appendices in this guide.
The aims of all DP mathematics courses are to enable students to:
1. develop a curiosity and enjoyment of mathematics, and appreciate its elegance and power
2. develop an understanding of the concepts, principles and nature of mathematics
3. communicate mathematics clearly, concisely and confidently in a variety of contexts
4. develop logical and creative thinking, and patience and persistence in problem solving to instil 
confidence in using mathematics
5. employ and refine their powers of abstraction and generalization
6. take action to apply and transfer skills to alternative situations, to other areas of knowledge and to 
future developments in their local and global communities
7. appreciate how developments in technology and mathematics influence each other
8. appreciate the moral, social and ethical questions arising from the work of mathematicians and the 
applications of mathematics
9. appreciate the universality of mathematics and its multicultural, international and historical 
perspectives
10. appreciate the contribution of mathematics to other disciplines, and as a particular “area of 
knowledge” in the TOK course
11. develop the ability to reflect critically upon their own work and the work of others
12. independently and collaboratively extend their understanding of mathematics.
Introduction
Aims
20 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Problem  solving  is central  to learning  mathematics  and  involves  the acquisition  of mathematical  skills  and 
concepts in a wide range of situations, including non-routine, open-ended and real-world problems. Having 
followed a DP mathematics course, students will be expected to demonstrate the following:
1. Knowledge and understanding : Recall, select and use their knowledge of mathematical facts, 
concepts and techniques in a variety of familiar and unfamiliar contexts.
2. Problem solving:  Recall, select and use their knowledge of mathematical skills, results and models in 
both abstract and real-world contexts to solve problems.
3. Communication and interpretation : Transform common realistic contexts into mathematics; 
comment on the context; sketch or draw mathematical diagrams, graphs or constructions both on 
paper and using technology; record methods, solutions and conclusions using standardized notation; 
use appropriate notation and terminology.
4. Technology : Use technology accurately, appropriately and efficiently both to explore new ideas and 
to solve problems.
5. Reasoning:  Construct mathematical arguments through use of precise statements, logical deduction 
and inference and by the manipulation of mathematical expressions.
6. Inquiry approaches:  Investigate unfamiliar situations, both abstract and from the real world, 
involving organizing and analyzing information, making conjectures, drawing conclusions, and testing 
their validity.
Introduction
Assessment objectives
21 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Assessment objectives Paper 1
%Paper 2
%Paper 3
%
HL onlyExploration
%
Knowledge and understanding 20-30 15-25 10-20 5-15
Problem solving 20-30 15-25 20-30 5-20
Communication and interpretation 20-30 15-25 15-25 15-25
Technology 0 25-35 10-30 10-20
Reasoning 5-15 5-10 10-20 5-25
Inquiry approaches 10-20 5-10 15-30 25-35
Introduction
Assessment objectives in practice
22 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Syllabus component Suggested teaching hours
SL HL
Topic 1—Number and algebra 19 39
Topic 2—Functions 21 32
Topic 3— Geometry and trigonometry 25 51
Topic 4—Statistics and probability 27 33
Topic 5 —Calculus 28 55
The toolkit and the mathematical exploration
Investigative, problem-solving and modelling skills 
development leading to an individual exploration. The 
exploration is a piece of written work that involves 
investigating an area of mathematics.30 30
Total teaching hours 150 240
All topics  are compulsory.  Students  must  study  all the sub-topics  in each  of the topics  in the syllabus  as 
listed in this guide. Students are also required to be familiar with the topics listed as prior learning.
Syllabus
Syllabus outline
23 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Prior  to starting  a DP mathematics  course  students  have  extensive  previous  mathematical  experiences,  but 
these  will vary.  It is expected  that  mathematics  students  will be familiar  with  the following  topics  before 
they take the examinations because questions assume knowledge of them. Teachers must therefore ensure 
that  any topics  listed  here  that  are unknown  to their  students  at the start  of the course  are included  at an 
early  stage.  Teachers  should  also  take  into  account  the existing  mathematical  knowledge  of their  students 
to design an appropriate course of study for mathematics. This table lists the knowledge, together with the 
syllabus content, that is essential for successful completion of the mathematics course.
Number and algebra
• Number systems: natural numbers ℕ; integers, ℤ; rationals, ℚ, and irrationals; real numbers, ℝ
• SI (Système International) units for mass, time, length, area and volume and their derived units, eg. 
speed
• Rounding, decimal approximations and significant figures, including appreciation of errors
• Definition and elementary treatment of absolute value (modulus), a
• Use of addition, subtraction, multiplication and division using integers, decimals and fractions, 
including order of operations
• Prime numbers, factors (divisors) and multiples
• Greatest common factor (divisor) and least common multiples (HL only)
• Simple applications of ratio, percentage and proportion
• Manipulation of algebraic expressions, including factorization and expansion
• Rearranging formulae
• Calculating the numerical value of expressions by substitution
• Evaluating exponential expressions with simple positive exponents
• Evaluating exponential expressions with rational exponents (HL only)
• Use of inequalities, < , ≤ , > , ≥ , intervals on the real number line
• Simplification of simple expressions involving roots (surds or radicals)
• Rationalising the denominator (HL only)
• Expression of numbers in the form a× 10k, 1 ≤a< 10 , k∈ℤ
• Familiarity with commonly accepted world currencies
• Solution of linear equations and inequalities
• Solution of quadratic equations and inequalities with rational coefficients (HL only)
• Solving systems of linear equations in two variables
• Concept and basic notation of sets. Operations on sets: union and intersection
• Addition and subtraction of algebraic fractions (HL only).
Functions
• Graphing linear and quadratic functions using technology
• Mappings of the elements of one set to another. Illustration by means of sets of ordered pairs, tables, 
diagrams and graphs.
Syllabus
Prior learning topics
24 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Geometry and trigonometry
• Pythagoras’ theorem and its converse
• Mid-point of a line segment and the distance between two points in the Cartesian plane
• Geometric concepts: point, line, plane, angle
• Angle measurement in degrees, compass directions
• The triangle sum theorem
• Right-angle trigonometry, including simple applications for solving triangles
• Three-figure bearings
• Simple geometric transformations: translation, reflection, rotation, enlargement
• The circle, its centre and radius, area and circumference. The terms diameter, arc, sector, chord, 
tangent and segment
• Perimeter and area of plane figures. Properties of triangles and quadrilaterals, including 
parallelograms, rhombuses, rectangles, squares, kites and trapezoids; compound shapes
• Familiarity with three-dimensional shapes (prisms, pyramids, spheres, cylinders and cones)
• Volumes and surface areas of cuboids, prisms, cylinders, and compound three-dimensional shapes
Statistics and probability
• The collection of data and its representation in bar charts, pie charts, pictograms, and line graphs
• Obtaining simple statistics from discrete data, including mean, median, mode, range
• Calculating probabilities of simple events
• Venn diagrams for sorting data
• Tree diagrams
Calculus
Speed  =  distance
timePrior learning topics
25 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Topic 1: Number and algebra
Concepts
Essential understandings:
Number  and  algebra  allow  us to represent  patterns,  show  equivalencies  and  make  generalizations  which 
enable  us to model  real-world  situations.  Algebra  is an abstraction  of numerical  concepts  and  employs 
variables which allow us to solve mathematical problems.  
Suggested concepts embedded in this topic:
Generalization, representation, modelling, equivalence, patterns, quantity
AHL:  Validity, systems.
Content-specific conceptual understandings:
• Modelling real-life situations with the structure of arithmetic and geometric sequences and series 
allows for prediction, analysis and interpretation.
• Different representations of numbers enable equivalent quantities to be compared and used in 
calculations with ease to an appropriate degree of accuracy.
• Numbers and formulae can appear in different, but equivalent, forms, or representations, which can 
help us to establish identities.
• Formulae are a generalization made on the basis of specific examples, which can then be extended to 
new examples.
• Logarithm laws provide the means to find inverses of exponential functions which model real-life 
situations.
• Patterns in numbers inform the development of algebraic tools that can be applied to find unknowns.
• The binomial theorem is a generalization which provides an efficient method for expanding binomial 
expressions.
AHL
• Proof serves to validate mathematical formulae and the equivalence of identities.
• Representing partial fractions and complex numbers in different forms allows us to easily carry out 
seemingly difficult calculations.
• The solution for systems of equations can be carried out by a variety of equivalent algebraic and 
graphical methods.
SL content
Recommended teaching hours: 19
The aim of the SL content  of the number  and  algebra  topic  is to introduce  students  to numerical  concepts 
and  techniques  which,  combined  with  an introduction  to arithmetic  and  geometric  sequences  and  series, 
can be used  for financial  and  other  applications.  Students  will also  be introduced  to the formal  concept  of 
proof.
Sections  SL1.1  to SL1.5  are content  common  to Mathematics:  analysis  and  approaches  and  Mathematics: 
applications and interpretation.
Syllabus content
26 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
SL 1.1
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Operations with numbers in the form a× 10k where 
1 ≤a< 10  and k is an integer.Calculator or computer notation is not acceptable. 
For example, 5.2E30 is not acceptable and should be 
written as 5.2 × 1030.
Connections
Other  contexts : Very  large  and  very  small  numbers,  for example  astronomical  distances,  sub-atomic 
particles in physics, global financial figures
Links  to other  subjects : Chemistry  (Avogadro’s  number);  physics  (order  of magnitude);  biology 
(microscopic measurements); sciences group subjects (uncertainty and precision of measurement)
International-mindedness:  The history  of number  from  Sumerians  and  its development  to the present 
Arabic system
TOK : Do the names  that  we give  things  impact  how  we understand  them?  For instance,  what  is the impact 
of the fact that  some  large  numbers  are named,  such  as the googol  and  the googolplex,  while  others  are 
represented in this form?
Download connections template
SL 1.2
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Arithmetic sequences and series.
Use of the formulae for the nth term and the sum of 
the first n terms of the sequence.
Use of sigma notation for sums of arithmetic 
sequences.Spreadsheets, GDCs and graphing software may be 
used to generate and display sequences in several 
ways.
If technology is used in examinations, students will 
be expected to identify the first term and the 
common difference.
Applications. Examples include simple interest over a number of 
years.
Analysis, interpretation and prediction where a 
model is not perfectly arithmetic in real life.Students will need to approximate common 
differences.
Connections
International-mindedness : The chess  legend  (Sissa  ibn Dahir);  Aryabhatta  is sometimes  considered  the 
“father  of algebra”–compare  with  alKhawarizmi;  the use of several  alphabets  in mathematical  notation  (for 
example the use of capital sigma for the sum).
TOK : Is all knowledge  concerned  with  identification  and  use of patterns?  Consider  Fibonacci  numbers  and 
connections with the golden ratio.
Download connections template
SL 1.3
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Geometric sequences and series.
Use of the formulae for the n th term and the sum of 
the first n terms of the sequence.Spreadsheets, GDCs and graphing software may be 
used to generate and display sequences in several 
ways.
Use of sigma notation for the sums of geometric 
sequences.If technology is used in examinations, students will 
be expected to identify the first term and the ratio.
Link to:  models/functions in topic 2 and regression 
in topic 4.
Applications. Examples include the spread of disease, salary 
increase and decrease and population growth.
Connections
Links to other subjects:  Radioactive decay, nuclear physics, charging and discharging capacitors (physics).
TOK : How do mathematicians reconcile the fact that some conclusions seem to conflict with our intuitions? 
Consider for instance that a finite area can be bounded by an infinite perimeter.
Download connections template
SL 1.4
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Financial applications of geometric sequences and 
series:
• compound interest
• annual depreciation.Examination questions may require the use of 
technology, including built-in financial packages.
The concept of simple interest may be used as an 
introduction to compound interest.
Calculate the real value of an investment with an 
interest rate and an inflation rate.
In examinations, questions that ask students to 
derive the formula will not be set.
Compound interest can be calculated yearly, half-
yearly, quarterly or monthly.
Link to : exponential models/functions in topic 2.
Connections
Other contexts : Loans.
Links to other subjects : Loans and repayments (economics and business management).
Aim 8 : Ethical perceptions of borrowing and lending money.
International-mindedness:  Do all societies view investment and interest in the same way?
TOK:  How have technological advances affected the nature and practice of mathematics? Consider the use 
of financial packages for instance.
Enrichment:  The concept  of e can be introduced  through  continuous  compounding,  (1 +1
n)n
→ e , as 
n→ ∞ , however this will not be examined.
Download connections template
SL 1.5
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Laws of exponents with integer exponents. Examples:Syllabus content
28 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
53× 5−6= 5−3, 64÷ 63= 6, (23)−4= 2−12, 
(2x)4= 16 x4, 2x−3=2
x3.
Introduction to logarithms with base 10 and e.
Numerical evaluation of logarithms using 
technology.Awareness that ax=b is equivalent to logab=x, 
that b> 0, and logex= lnx.
Connections
Other contexts:  Richter scale and decibel scale.
Links to other subjects:  Calculation of pH and buffer solutions (chemistry)
TOK : Is mathematics  invented  or discovered?  For instance,  consider  the number  e or logarithms–did  they 
already  exist  before  man  defined  them?  (This  topic  is an opportunity  for teachers  to generate  reflection  on 
“the nature of mathematics”).
Download connections template
SL 1.6
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Simple deductive proof, numerical and algebraic; 
how to lay out a left-hand side to right-hand side 
(LHS to RHS) proof.
The symbols and notation for equality and identity.Example:  Show that 1
4+1
12=1
3. Show that the 
algebraic generalisation of this is 
1
m+ 1+1
m2+m≡1
m
LHS to RHS proofs require students to begin with 
the left-hand side expression and transform this 
using known algebraic steps into the expression on 
the right-hand side (or vice versa).
Example:  Show that (x− 3)2+ 5 ≡ x2− 6x+ 14 .
Students will be expected to show how they can 
check a result including a check of their own results.
Connections
TOK:  Is mathematical  reasoning  different  from  scientific  reasoning,  or reasoning  in other  Areas  of 
Knowledge?
Download connections template
SL 1.7
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Laws of exponents with rational exponents.a1
m=am, if m is even this refers to the positive root. 
For example: 163
4= 8.
Laws of logarithms.
logaxy= log ax+ log ay
logax
y= log ax− log ayy=ax⇔x= log ay; loga1 = 0 ,
a, y ∈  ℕ, x ∈  ℤ
Link to:  introduction to logarithms (SL1.5)Syllabus content
29 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
logaxm=mlogax
for a, x, y> 0Examples:  3
4= log 168, log32 = 5log2
log24 = log8 + log3
log310
4= log 310 − log 34
log435= 5log43
Link to:  logarithmic and exponential graphs (SL2.9)
Change of base of a logarithm.
logax=logbx
logba, for a, b, x> 0Examples:  log47 =ln7
ln4
log25125 =log5125
log525 ( =3
2)
Solving exponential equations, including using 
logarithms.Examples: (1
3)x
= 9x+ 1, 2x− 1= 10 .
Link to:  using logarithmic and exponential graphs 
(SL2.9).
Connections
Links  to other  subjects:  pH, buffer  calculations  and  finding  activation  energy  from  experimental  data 
(chemistry).
TOK:  How  have  seminal  advances,  such  as the development  of logarithms,  changed  the way  in which 
mathematicians understand the world and the nature of mathematics?
Download connections template
SL 1.8
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Sum of infinite convergent geometric sequences. Use of |r| < 1  and modulus notation.
Link to : geometric sequences and series (SL1.3).
Connections
TOK:  Is it possible to know about things of which we can have no experience, such as infinity?
Download connections template
SL 1.9
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The binomial theorem:
expansion of (a+b)n,n∈ℕ.Counting principles may be used in the 
development of the theorem.
Use of Pascal’s triangle and Cn
r. Crn should be found using both  the formula and 
technology.
Example:  Find r when Cr6= 20 , using a table of values generated with technology.Syllabus content
30 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Connections
Aim  8: Ethics  in mathematics–Pascal’s  triangle.  Attributing  the origin  of a mathematical  discovery  to the 
wrong mathematician.
International-mindedness:  The properties of “Pascal’s triangle” have been known in a number of different 
cultures long before Pascal. (for example the Chinese mathematician Yang Hui).
TOK:  How  have  notable  individuals  shaped  the development  of mathematics  as an area  of knowledge? 
Consider Pascal and “his” triangle.
Download connections template
AHL content
Recommended teaching hours: 20
The aim of the AHL content in the number and algebra topic is to extend and build upon the aims, concepts 
and  skills  from  the SL content.  It introduces  students  to some  important  techniques  for expansion, 
simplification  and  solution  of equations.  Complex  numbers  are introduced  and  students  will extend  their 
knowledge  of formal  proof  to proof  by mathematical  induction,  proof  by contradiction  and  proof  by 
counterexample.
AHL 1.10
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Counting principles, including permutations and 
combinations.Not required:  Permutations where some objects are 
identical. Circular arrangements.
Extension of the binomial theorem to fractional and 
negative indices, ie (a+b)n, n∈ℚ.(a+b)n= ( a(1 +b
a))n
=an(1 +b
a)n
, n∈ℚ
Link to : power series expansions (AHL5.19)
Not required:  Proof of binomial theorem.
Connections
Other contexts:  Finding approximations to 2
Aim 8:  How many different tickets are possible in a lottery? What does this tell us about the ethics of selling 
lottery tickets to those who do not understand the implications of these large numbers?
International-mindedness : The properties of “Pascal’s triangle” have been known in a number of different 
cultures long before Pascal (for example the Chinese mathematician Yang Hui).
TOK : What counts as understanding in mathematics? Is it more than just getting the right answer?
Download connections template
AHL 1.11
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Partial fractions. Maximum of two distinct linear terms in the 
denominator, with degree of numerator less than 
the degree of the denominator.
Example: 2x+ 1
x2+x− 2≡1
(x− 1)+1
(x+ 2).
Link to:  use of partial fractions to rearrange the 
integrand (AHL5.15).Syllabus content
31 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Connections
Download connections template
AHL 1.12
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Complex numbers: the number i, where i2= − 1 .
Cartesian form z=a+bi; the terms real part, 
imaginary part, conjugate, modulus and argument.
The complex plane. The complex plane is also known as the Argand 
diagram.
Link to:  vectors (AHL3.12).
Connections
Other  contexts:  Concepts  in electrical  engineering —impedance  as a combination  of resistance  and 
reactance,  also  apparent  power  as a combination  of real and  reactive  powers.  These  combinations  take  the 
form a+bi.
TOK : How  does  language  shape  knowledge?  For example,  do the words  “imaginary”  and  “complex”  make 
the concepts more difficult than if they had different names?
Download connections template
AHL 1.13
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Modulus–argument (polar) form:
z=r(cosθ+ isin θ) =rcisθ.
Euler form:
z=reiθ
Sums, products and quotients in Cartesian, polar or Euler forms and their geometric interpretation.The ability to convert between Cartesian, modulus-
argument (polar) and Euler form is expected.
Connections
Other contexts : Concepts in electrical engineering–phase angle/shift, power factor and apparent power as 
a complex quantity in polar form.
TOK : Why  might  it be said  that  eiπ+ 1 = 0  is beautiful?  What  is the place  of beauty  and  elegance  in 
mathematics? What about the place of creativity?
Download connections template
AHL 1.14
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Complex conjugate roots of quadratic and 
polynomial equations with real coefficients.Complex roots occur in conjugate pairs.
De Moivre’s theorem and its extension to rational 
exponents.Includes proof by induction for the case where 
n∈ℤ+; awareness that it is true for n∈ℝ.Syllabus content
32 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Powers and roots of complex numbers. Link to:  sum and product of roots of polynomial 
equations (AHL 2.12), compound angle identities 
(AHL 3.10).
Connections
TOK:  Could  we ever  reach  a point  where  everything  important  in a mathematical  sense  is known?  Reflect 
on the creation of complex numbers before their applications were known.
Enrichment:  Can De Moivre’s theorem be extended to all n?
Download connections template
AHL 1.15
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Proof by mathematical induction. Proof should be incorporated throughout the course 
where appropriate.
Mathematical induction links specifically to a wide 
variety of topics, for example complex numbers, 
differentiation, sums of sequences and divisibility.
Proof by contradiction. Examples:  Irrationality of 3; irrationality of the cube root of 5; Euclid’s proof of an infinite number of 
prime numbers; if a is a rational number and b is an irrational number, then a+b is an irrational number.
Use of a counterexample to show that a statement is not always true.Example:  Consider the set P of numbers of the form 
n2+ 41 n+ 41, n∈ℕ, show that not all elements of 
P are prime.
Example:  Show that the following statement is not 
always true: there are no positive integer solutions 
to the equation x2+y2= 10 .
It is not sufficient to state the counterexample alone. 
Students must explain why their example is a counterexample.
Connections
Other contexts:  The Four-colour theorem
International-mindedness : How did the Pythagoreans find out that 2 is irrational?
TOK : What is the role of the mathematical community in determining the validity of a mathematical proof? 
Do proofs  provide  us with  completely  certain  knowledge?  What  is the difference  between  the inductive 
method in science and proof by induction in mathematics?
Download connections template
AHL 1.16
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Solutions of systems of linear equations (a 
maximum of three equations in three unknowns), These systems should be solved using both 
algebraic and technological methods, for example 
row reduction or matrices.Syllabus content
33 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
including cases where there is a unique solution, an 
infinite number of solutions or no solution.Systems which have no solution(s) are inconsistent.
Finding a general solution for a system with an 
infinite number of solutions.
Link to:  intersection of lines and planes (AHL 3.18).
Connections
TOK:  Mathematics,  Sense,  Perception  and  Reason:  If we can find  solutions  in higher  dimensions  can we 
reason that these spaces exist beyond our sense perception?
Download connections template
Topic 2: Functions
Concepts
Essential understandings
Models  are depictions  of real-life  events  using  expressions,  equations  or graphs  while  a function  is defined 
as a relation  or expression  involving  one  or more  variables.  Creating  different  representations  of functions 
to model  the relationships  between  variables,  visually  and  symbolically  as graphs,  equations  and  tables 
represents different ways to communicate mathematical ideas.
Suggested concepts embedded in this topic:
Representation, relationships, space, quantity, equivalence.
AHL:  Systems, patterns.
Content-specific conceptual understandings:
• Different representations of functions, symbolically and visually as graphs, equations and tables 
provide different ways to communicate mathematical relationships.
• The parameters in a function or equation correspond to geometrical features of a graph and can 
represent physical quantities in spatial dimensions.
• Moving between different forms to represent functions allows for deeper understanding and provides 
different approaches to problem solving.
• Our spatial frame of reference affects the visible part of a function and by changing this “window” can 
show more or less of the function to best suit our needs.
• Equivalent representations of quadratic functions can reveal different characteristics of the same 
relationship.
• Functions represent mappings that assign to each value of the independent variable (input) one and 
only one dependent variable (output).
AHL
• Extending results from a specific case to a general form can allow us to apply them to a larger system.
• Patterns can be identified in behaviours which can give us insight into appropriate strategies to model 
or solve them.
• The intersection of a system of equations may be represented graphically and algebraically and 
represents the solution that satisfies the equations.
SL content
Recommended teaching hours: 21
The aim of the SL content in the functions topic is to introduce students to the important unifying theme of 
a function in mathematics and to apply functional methods to a variety of mathematical situations.
Throughout  this topic  students  should  be given  the opportunity  to use technology,  such  as graphing 
packages  and  graphing  calculators  to develop  and  apply  their  knowledge  of functions,  rather  than  using 
elaborate analytic techniques.
On examination papers:
• questions may be set requiring the graphing of functions that do not explicitly appear on the syllabus
• the domain will be the largest possible domain for which a function is defined unless otherwise stated; 
this will usually be the real numbers
Sections  SL2.1  to SL2.4  are content  common  to both  Mathematics:  analysis  and  approaches  and 
Mathematics: applications and interpretation.
SL 2.1
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Different forms of the equation of a straight line.
Gradient; intercepts.
Lines with gradients m1 and m2
Parallel lines m1=m2.
Perpendicular lines m1×m2= − 1 .y=mx+c (gradient-intercept form).
ax+by+d= 0 (general form).
y−y1=m(x−x1) (point-gradient form).
Calculate gradients of inclines such as mountain 
roads, bridges, etc.
Connections
Other contexts:  Gradients of mountain roads, gradients of access ramps.
Links  to other  subjects:  Exchange  rates  and  price  and  income  elasticity,  demand  and  supply  curves 
(economics); graphical analysis in experimental work (sciences group subjects).
TOK : Descartes  showed  that  geometric  problems  could  be solved  algebraically  and  vice versa.  What  does 
this tell us about mathematical representation and mathematical knowledge?
Download connections template
SL 2.2
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Concept of a function, domain, range and graph.
Function notation, for example f(x), v(t), C(n).
The concept of a function as a mathematical model.Example: f(x) = 2 −x, the domain is x≤ 2, 
range is f(x) ≥ 0 .
A graph is helpful in visualizing the range.
Informal concept that an inverse function reverses 
or undoes the effect of a function.
Inverse function as a reflection in the line y=x, and 
the notation f−1(x).Example:  Solving f(x) = 10  is equivalent to finding 
f−1(10) .
Students should be aware that inverse functions 
exist for one to one functions; the domain of f−1(x)is 
equal to the range of f(x).
Connections
Other contexts:  Temperature and currency conversions .
Links  to other  subjects:  Currency  conversions  and  cost  functions  (economics  and  business  management); 
projectile motion (physics).
Aim 8:  What is the relationship between real-world problems and mathematical models?Syllabus content
35 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
International-mindedness : The development  of functions  by Rene  Descartes  (France),  Gottfried  Wilhelm 
Leibnitz  (Germany)  and  Leonhard  Euler  (Switzerland);  the notation  for functions  was  developed  by a 
number  of different  mathematicians  in the 17th  and  18th centuries–how did the notation we use today 
become internationally accepted?
TOK : Do you think mathematics or logic should be classified as a language?
Download connections template
SL 2.3
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The graph of a function; its equation y=f(x). Students should be aware of the difference between 
the command terms “draw” and “sketch”.
Creating a sketch from information given or a 
context, including transferring a graph from screen 
to paper.
Using technology to graph functions including their 
sums and differences.All axes and key features should be labelled.
This may include functions not specifically 
mentioned in topic 2.
Connections
Links  to other  subjects:  Sketching  and  interpreting  graphs  (sciences  group  subjects,  geography, 
economics).
TOK : Does  studying  the graph  of a function  contain  the same  level  of mathematical  rigour  as studying  the 
function algebraically? What are the advantages and disadvantages of having different forms and symbolic 
language in mathematics?
Download connections template
SL 2.4
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Determine key features of graphs. Maximum and minimum values; intercepts; 
symmetry; vertex; zeros of functions or roots of 
equations; vertical and horizontal asymptotes using 
graphing technology.
Finding the point of intersection of two curves or 
lines using technology.
Connections
Links  to other  subjects:  Identification  and  interpretation  of key features  of graphs  (sciences  group 
subjects, geography, economics); production possibilities curve model, market equilibrium (economics).
International-mindedness : Bourbaki group analytical approach versus the Mandlebrot visual approach.
Use  of technology:  Graphing  technology  with  sliders  to determine  the effects  of altering  parameters  and 
variables.
Download connections template
SL 2.5
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Composite functions. (f∘g)(x) =f(g(x))
Identity function. Finding the inverse function 
f−1(x).(f∘f−1)(x) = ( f−1∘f)(x) =x
The existence of an inverse for one-to-one functions.
Link to : concept of inverse function as a reflection in 
the line y=x (SL 2.2).
Connections
TOK : Do you think mathematics or logic should be classified as a language?
Download connections template
SL 2.6
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The quadratic function f(x) =ax2+bx+c: its 
graph,  y -intercept (0,c). Axis of symmetry.
The form f(x) =a(x−p)(x−q), x- 
intercepts (p, 0) and (q, 0).
The form f(x) =a(x−h)2+k, vertex (h,k).A quadratic graph is also called a parabola.
Link to : transformations (SL 2.11).
Candidates are expected to be able to change from 
one form to another.
Connections
Links to other subjects:  Kinematics, projectile motion and simple harmonic motion (physics).
TOK : Are there  fundamental  differences  between  mathematics  and  other  areas  of knowledge?  If so, are 
these differences more than just methodological differences?
Download connections template
SL 2.7
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Solution of quadratic equations and inequalities.
The quadratic formula.Using factorization, completing the square (vertex 
form), and the quadratic formula.
Solutions may be referred to as roots or zeros.
The discriminant Δ=b2− 4ac and the nature of the 
roots, that is, two distinct real roots, two equal real 
roots, no real roots.Example : For the equation 3kx2+ 2x+k= 0, find 
the possible values of k, which will give two distinct 
real roots, two equal real roots or no real roots.
Connections
Links  to other  subjects:  Projectile  motion  and  energy  changes  in simple  harmonic  motion  (physics); 
equilibrium equations (chemistry).
International-mindedness : The Babylonian method of multiplication: ab=(a+b)2−a2−b2
2. Sulba Sutras 
in ancient  India  and  the Bakhshali  Manuscript  contained  an algebraic  formula  for solving  quadratic 
equations.Syllabus content
33 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
TOK : What are the key concepts that provide the building blocks for mathematical knowledge?
Use of technology:  Dynamic graphing software with a slider.
Enrichment:  Deriving the quadratic formula by completing the square.
Download connections template
SL 2.8
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The reciprocal function f(x) =1
x,x≠ 0: its graph 
and self-inverse nature.
Rational functions of the form f(x) =ax+b
cx+d and 
their graphs.
Equations of vertical and horizontal asymptotes.Sketches should include all horizontal and vertical 
asymptotes and any intercepts with the axes.
Link to:  transformations (SL2.11).
Vertical asymptote: x= −d
c;
Horizontal asymptote: y=a
c.
Connections
International-mindedness : The development  of functions,  Rene  Descartes  (France),  Gottfried  Wilhelm 
Leibniz (Germany) and Leonhard Euler (Switzerland).
TOK : What are the implications of accepting that mathematical knowledge changes over time?
Download connections template
SL 2.9
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Exponential functions and their graphs:
f(x) =ax, a> 0, f(x) = ex
Logarithmic functions and their graphs:
f(x) = log ax, x> 0, f(x) = ln x, x> 0.Link to : financial applications of geometric 
sequences and series (SL 1.4).
Relationships between these functions:
ax= exlna; logaax=x, a, x> 0,  a≠ 1
Exponential and logarithmic functions as inverses of 
each other.
Connections
Links  to other  subjects:  Radioactive  decay,  charging  and  discharging  capacitors  (physics);  first order 
reactions and activation energy (chemistry); growth curves (biology).
Aim  8: The phrase  “exponential  growth”  is used  popularly  to describe  a number  of phenomena.  Is ths a 
misleading use of a mathematical term?
TOK : What role do “models” play in mathematics? Do they play a different role in mathematics compared to 
their role in other areas of knowledge?
Download connections template
SL 2.10
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Solving equations, both graphically and analytically. Example:  e2x− 5ex+ 4 = 0  .
Link to:  function graphing skills (SL 2.3).
Use of technology to solve a variety of equations, 
including those where there is no appropriate 
analytic approach.Examples: ex= sin x
x4+ 5x− 6 = 0.
Applications of graphing skills and solving 
equations that relate to real-life situations.Link to:  exponential growth (SL 2.9)
Connections
Other  contexts:  Radioactive  decay  and  population  growth  and  decay,  compound  interest,  projectile 
motion, braking distances.
Links  to other  subjects:  Radioactive  decay  (physics);  modelling  (sciences  group  subjects);  production 
possibilities curve model (economics).
TOK : What assumptions do mathematicians make when they apply mathematics to real-life situations?
Download connections template
SL 2.11
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Transformations of graphs.
Translations: y=f(x) +b;y=f(x−a).
Reflections (in both axes): y= − f(x);y=f( −x).
Vertical stretch with scale factor p: y=p f(x).
Horizontal stretch with scale factor 1
q: y=f(qx).Students should be aware of the relevance of the 
order in which transformations are performed.
Dynamic graphing packages could be used to 
investigate these transformations.
Composite transformations. Example:  Using y=x2 to sketch y= 3x2+ 2
Link to:  composite functions (SL2.5).
Not required at SL : transformations of the form 
f(ax+b).
Connections
Links  to other  subjects:  Shift  in supply  and  demand  curves  (Economics);  induced  emf  and  simple 
harmonic motion (physics).
Download connections template
AHL content
Recommended teaching hours: 11
The aim of the AHL  functions  topic  is to extend  and  build  upon  the aims,  concepts  and  skills  from  the SL 
content.  It introduces  students  to useful  techniques  for finding  and  using  roots  of polynomials,  graphing 
and  interpreting  rational  functions,  additional  ways  to classify  functions,  solving  inequations  and  solving 
equations involving modulus notation.Syllabus content
39 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
HL students  may  be required  to use technology  to solve  equations  where  there  is no appropriate  analytic 
approach.
AHL 2.12
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Polynomial functions, their graphs and equations; 
zeros, roots and factors.
The factor and remainder theorems.
Sum and product of the roots of polynomial 
equations.For the polynomial equation: ∑
r= 0n
arxr= 0,
the sum is −an− 1
an
the product is ( − 1)na0
an
Link to:  complex roots of quadratic and polynomial 
equations (AHL 1.14).
Connections
Links to other subjects:  Modelling (sciences group subjects)
TOK:  Is it an oversimplification  to say that  some  areas  of knowledge  give  us facts  whereas  other  areas  of 
knowledge give us interpretations?
Enrichment:  Viete’s  theorem  in full, “The  equation  that  couldn’t  be solved”  quadratic  formula  reducing  a 
quadratic to a linear, Cardano and Bombelli.
Download connections template
AHL 2.13
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Rational functions of the form
f(x) =ax+b
cx2+dx+e, and f(x) =ax2+bx+c
dx+eThe reciprocal function is a particular case.
Graphs should include all asymptotes (horizontal, 
vertical and oblique) and any intercepts with axes.
Dynamic graphing packages could be used to 
investigate these functions.
Link to:  rational functions (SL 2.8).
Connections
International mindedness : Bourbaki group analytical approach versus Mandlebrot visual approach.
TOK : Does  studying  the graph  of a function  contain  the same  level  of mathematical  rigour  as studying  the 
function algebraically? What are the advantages and disadvantages of having different forms and symbolic 
language in mathematics?
Download connections template
AHL 2.14
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Odd and even functions. Even: f( −x) =f(x)
Odd: f( −x) = − f(x)
Includes periodic functions.
Finding the inverse function, f−1(x),
including domain restriction.
Self-inverse functions.
Connections
International-mindedness : The notation  for functions  was  developed  by a number  of different 
mathematicians in the 17th and 18th centuries. How did the notation we use today become internationally 
accepted?
TOK : If systems  of notation  and  measurement  are culturally  and historically  situated,  does  this mean 
mathematics cannot be seen as independent of culture?
Download connections template
AHL 2.15
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Solutions of g(x) ≥f(x), both graphically and 
analytically.Graphical or algebraic methods for simple 
polynomials up to degree 3. Use of technology for 
these and other functions.
Connections
TOK : Are there differences in terms of value that different cultures ascribe to mathematics, or to the relative 
value that they ascribe to different areas of knowledge?
Download connections template
AHL 2.16
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The graphs of the functions, y= |f(x)|
and 
y=f(|x|), y=1
f(x), y=f(ax+b), y= [f(x)]2.Dynamic graphing packages could be used to 
investigate these transformations.
Solution of modulus equations and inequalities. Example:  |3xarccos( x)| > 1
Connections
International-mindedness : The Bourbaki group analytic approach versus Mandlebrot visual approach.
Download connections template
Topic 3: Geometry and trigonometry
Concepts
Essential understandings:
Geometry  and  trigonometry  allows  us to quantify  the physical  world,  enhancing  our spatial  awareness  in 
two  and  three  dimensions.  This  topic  provides  us with  the tools  for analysis,  measurement  and 
transformation of quantities, movements and relationships.
Suggested concepts embedded in this topic:
Generalization, space, relationships, equivalence, representation,
AHL:  Quantity, Modelling.
Content-specific conceptual understandings:
• The properties of shapes depend on the dimension they occupy in space.
• Volume and surface area of shapes are determined by formulae, or general mathematical relationships 
or rules expressed using symbols or variables.
• The relationships between the length of the sides and the size of the angles in a triangle can be used 
to solve many problems involving position, distance, angles and area.
• Equivalent measurement systems, such as degrees and radians, can be used for angles to facilitate 
ease of calculation.
• Different representations of the values of trigonometric relationships, such as exact or approximate, 
may not be equivalent to one another.
• The trigonometric functions of angles may be defined on the unit circle, which can visually and 
algebraically represent the periodic or symmetric nature of their values.
AHL
• Position and movement can be modelled in three-dimensional space using vectors.
• The relationships between algebraic, geometric and vector methods can help us to solve problems 
and quantify those positions and movements.
SL content
Recommended teaching hours: 25
The aim of the SL content  of the geometry  and  trigonometry  topic  is to introduce  students  to geometry  in 
three  dimensions  and  to non  right-angled  trigonometry.  Students  will explore  the circular  functions  and 
use properties and identities to solve problems in abstract and real-life contexts.
Throughout  this topic  students  should  be given  the opportunity  to use technology  such as graphing 
packages,  graphing  calculators  and  dynamic  geometry  software  to develop  and  apply  their  knowledge  of 
geometry and trigonometry.
On examination papers, radian measure should be assumed unless otherwise indicated.
Sections  SL3.1  to SL3.3  are content  common  to both  Mathematics:  analysis  and  approaches  and 
Mathematics: applications and interpretation.
SL 3.1
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The distance between two points in three-
dimensional space, and their midpoint.In SL examinations, only right-angled trigonometry 
questions will be set in reference to three-
dimensional shapes.Syllabus content
42 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Volume and surface area of three-dimensional solids 
including right-pyramid, right cone, sphere, 
hemisphere and combinations of these solids.
The size of an angle between two intersecting lines 
or between a line and a plane.In problems related to these topics, students should 
be able to identify relevant right-angled triangles in 
three-dimensional objects and use them to find 
unknown lengths and angles.
Connections
Other contexts:  Architecture and design.
Links to other subjects:  Design technology; volumes of stars and inverse square law (physics).
TOK : What is an axiomatic system? Are axioms self evident to everybody?
Download connections template
SL 3.2
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Use of sine, cosine and tangent ratios to find the 
sides and angles of right-angled triangles.In all areas of this topic, students should be 
encouraged to sketch well-labelled diagrams to 
support their solutions.
Link to:  inverse functions (SL2.2) when finding 
angles.
The sine rule: a
sinA=b
sinB=c
sinC.
The cosine rule: c2=a2+b2− 2abcosC;
cosC=a2+b2−c2
2ab .
Area of a triangle as 1
2absinC.This section does not include the ambiguous case of 
the sine rule.
Connections
Other contexts:  Triangulation, map-making.
Links to other subjects:  Vectors (physics).
International-mindedness : Diagrams  of Pythagoras’  theorem  occur  in early  Chinese  and  Indian 
manuscripts.  The earliest  references  to trigonometry  are in Indian  mathematics;  the use of triangulation  to 
find  the curvature  of the Earth  in order  to settle  a dispute  between  England  and  France  over  Newton’s 
gravity.
TOK : Is it ethical  that  Pythagoras  gave  his name  to a theorem  that  may  not have  been  his own  creation? 
What criteria might we use to make such a judgment?
Download connections template
SL 3.3
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Applications of right and non-right angled 
trigonometry, including Pythagoras’s theorem.
Angles of elevation and depression.Contexts may include use of bearings.Syllabus content
43 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Construction of labelled diagrams from written 
statements.
Connections
Other  contexts:  Triangulation,  map-making,  navigation  and  radio  transmissions.  Use of parallax  for 
navigation.
Links  to other  subjects:  Vectors,  scalars,  forces  and  dynamics  (physics);  field  studies  (sciences  group 
subjects)
Aim 8:  Who really invented Pythagoras’s theorem?
Aim 9:  In how many ways can you prove Pythagoras’s theorem?
International-mindedness : The use of triangulation  to find  the curvature  of the Earth  in order  to settle  a 
dispute between England and France over Newton’s gravity.
TOK : If the angles  of a triangle  can add  up to less than  180°,  180°  or more  than  180°,  what  does  this tell us 
about the nature of mathematical knowledge?
Download connections template
SL 3.4
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The circle: radian measure of angles; length of an 
arc; area of a sector.Radian measure may be expressed as exact 
multiples of π, or decimals.
Connections
Links to other subjects:  Diffraction patterns and circular motion (physics).
International-mindedness:  Seki  Takakazu  calculating  π to ten decimal  places;  Hipparchus,  Menelaus  and 
Ptolemy; Why are there 360 degrees in a complete turn? Links to Babylonian mathematics.
TOK:  Which  is a better  measure  of angle:  radian  or degree?  What  criteria  can/do/should  mathematicians 
use to make such decisions?
Download connections template
SL 3.5
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Definition of cosθ, sinθ in terms of the unit circle. Includes the relationship between angles in different 
quadrants.
Examples:  cosx= cos( − x)
tan(3π − x) = − tan x
sin(π + x) = − sin x
Definition of tanθ as sinθ
cosθ.The equation of a straight line through the origin is 
y=xtanθ, where θ is the angle formed between the 
line and positive x-axis.
Exact values of trigonometric ratios of 0, π
6, π
4, π
3, π
2
and their multiples.sinπ
3=3
2, cos3π
4= −1
2, tan  210° =3
3
Extension of the sine rule to the ambiguous case.Syllabus content
44 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Connections
International-mindedness:  The first work  to refer  explicitly  to the sine  as a function  of an angle  is the 
Aryabhatiya of Aryabhata (ca 510).
TOK:  Trigonometry  was  developed  by successive  civilizations  and  cultures.  To what  extent  is mathematical 
knowledge  embedded  in particular  traditions  or bound  to particular  cultures?  How  have  key events  in the 
history of mathematics shaped its current form and methods?
Enrichment:  The proof of Pythagoras’ theorem in three dimensions .
Download connections template
SL 3.6
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The Pythagorean identity cos2θ+ sin2θ= 1.
Double angle identities for sine and cosine.Simple geometrical diagrams and dynamic graphing 
packages may be used to illustrate the double angle 
identities (and other trigonometric identities).
The relationship between trigonometric ratios. Examples:
Given sinθ, find possible values of tanθ, (without 
finding θ).
Given cosx=3
4 and x is acute, find sin 2 x, (without 
finding x).
Connections
Download connections template
SL 3.7
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The circular functions sinx, cosx, and tanx; 
amplitude, their periodic nature, and their graphs
Composite functions of the form
f(x) =asin(b(x+c)) +d.Trigonometric functions may have domains given in 
degrees or radians.
Examples: f(x) = tan( x−π
4),
f(x) = 2cos(3( x− 4)) + 1 .
Transformations. Example: y= sin x used to obtain y= 3sin2 x by a 
stretch of scale factor 3 in the y direction and a 
stretch of scale factor 1
2 in the x direction.
Link to:  transformations of graphs (SL2.11).
Real-life contexts. Examples:  height of tide, motion of a Ferris wheel.
Students should be aware that not all regression 
technology produces trigonometric functions in the 
form f(x) =asin (b(x+c)) +d.
Connections
Links to other subjects:  Simple harmonic motion (physics).
TOK:  Music  can be expressed  using  mathematics.  What  does  this tell us about  the relationship  between 
music and mathematics?Syllabus content
45 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Download connections template
SL 3.8
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Solving trigonometric equations in a finite interval, 
both graphically and analytically. Examples:  2sinx= 1,  0 ≤x≤ 2π
2sin2 x= 3cos x, 0° ≤ x≤ 180°
2tan(3( x− 4)) = 1,  − π ≤ x≤ 3π
Equations leading to quadratic equations in 
sinx, cos x or tanx.Examples: 2sin2x+ 5cos x+ 1 = 0  for 0 ≤x≤ 4π ,
2sinx= cos2 x, − π ≤ x≤ π
Not required:  The general solution of trigonometric 
equations.
Connections
Download connections template
AHL content
Recommended teaching hours: 26
The aim of the AHL  content  in the geometry  and  trigonometry  topic  is to extend  and  build  upon  the aims, 
concepts  and  skills  from  the SL content.  It further  explores  the circular  functions,  introduces  some 
important  trigonometric  identities,  and  introduces  vectors  in two  and  three  dimensions.  This  will facilitate 
problem-solving involving points, lines and planes.
On examination papers radian measure should be assumed unless otherwise indicated.
AHL 3.9
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Definition of the reciprocal trigonometric ratios secθ, 
cosec θ and cotθ.
Pythagorean identities: 1 + tan2θ= sec2θ
1 + cot2θ= cosec2θ
The inverse functions f(x) = arcsin x,
f(x) = arccos x,f(x) = arctan x; their domains and 
ranges; their graphs.
Connections
International-mindedness:  The origin  of degrees  in the mathematics  of Mesopotamia  and  why  we use 
minutes and seconds for time; the origin of the word sine.
TOK:  What  is the relationship  between  concepts  and  facts?  To what  extent  do the concepts  that  we use 
shape the conclusions that we reach?
Download connections template
AHL 3.10
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Compound angle identities.
Double angle identity for tan.Derivation of double angle identities from 
compound angle identities.
Link to:  De Moivre’s theorem (AHL1.14).
Connections
Other  contexts:  Triangulation  used  by GPSs  (global  positioning  systems);  concepts  in electrical 
engineering including generation of sinusoidal voltage.
Download connections template
AHL 3.11
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Relationships between trigonometric functions and 
the symmetry properties of their graphs.sin(π − θ) = sin θ
cos(π − θ) = − cos θ
tan(π − θ) = − tan θ
Link to : the unit circle (SL3.5), odd and even 
functions (AHL2.14), compound angles (AHL3.10).
Connections
Links to other subjects:  Simple harmonic motion graphs (physics)
TOK : Mathematics  and  knowledge  claims:  how  can there  be an infinite  number  of discrete  solutions  to an 
equation?
Download connections template
AHL 3.12
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Concept of a vector; position vectors; displacement 
vectors.
Representation of vectors using directed line 
segments.
Base vectors i,  j,  k.
Components of a vector:
v=v1
v2
v3=v1i+v2j+v3k.
Algebraic and geometric approaches to the 
following:
• the sum and difference of two vectors
• the zero vector 0, the vector −v
• multiplication by a scalar, kv, parallel vectorsDistance between points A and B is the magnitude 
of AB→Syllabus content
47 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
•magnitude of a vector, |v|; unit vectors, v
|v|
•position vectors OA→=a, OB→=b
•displacement vector AB→=b−a
Proofs of geometrical properties using vectors.
Connections
Links to other subjects:  Vectors, scalars, forces and dynamics (physics).
Aim 8:  Vectors are used to solve many problems in position location. This can be used to save a lost sailor or 
destroy a building with a laser-guided bomb.
TOK : Vectors  are used  to solve  many  problems  in position  location.  This  can be used  to save  a lost sailor  or 
destroy a building with a laser-guided bomb. To what extent does possession of knowledge carry with it an 
ethical obligation?
Download connections template
AHL 3.13
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The definition of the scalar product of two vectors.
The angle between two vectors.
Perpendicular vectors; parallel vectors.Applications of the properties of the scalar product
v·w=w·v;
u· (v+w) =u·v+u·w;
(kv) ·w=k(v·w);
v·v=v2.
v·w=vwcosθ, where θ is the angle between v and 
w.
For non-zero vectors v·w= 0 is equivalent to the vectors being perpendicular; for parallel vectors 
|v⋅w| = |v||w|.
Connections
Links to other subjects:  Forces and dynamics (physics).
TOK : The nature of mathematics: why this definition of scalar product?
Enrichment:  Proof of the cosine rule using the dot product.
Download connections template
AHL 3.14
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Vector equation of a line in two and three 
dimensions:
r=a+λb.Relevance of a (position) and b (direction).
Knowledge of the following forms for equations of 
lines:
Parametric form:
x=x0+λl, y=y0+λm, z=z0+λn.Syllabus content
48 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Cartesian form:
x−x0
l=y−y0
m=z−z0
n .
The angle between two lines. Using the scalar product of the two direction 
vectors.
Simple applications to kinematics. Interpretation of λ as time and b as velocity, with |b|
representing speed.
Connections
Other contexts:  Modelling linear motion in three dimensions; navigational devices, for example GPS.
TOK : Why  might  it be argued  that  one  form  of representation  is superior  to another?  What  criteria  might  a 
mathematician use in making such an argument?
Download connections template
AHL 3.15
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Coincident, parallel, intersecting and skew lines, 
distinguishing between these cases.
Points of intersection.Skew lines are non-parallel lines that do not 
intersect in three-dimensional space.
Connections
TOK : How  can there  be an infinite  number  of discrete  solutions  to an equation?  What  does  this suggest 
about the nature of mathematical knowledge and how it compares to knowledge in other disciplines?
Download connections template
AHL 3.16
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The definition of the vector product of two vectors. The vector product is also known as the “cross 
product”.
v×w=vwsinθn, where θ
is the angle between v and w, and n is the unit 
normal vector whose direction is given by the right-
hand screw rule.
Properties of the vector product. v×w= − w×v;
u× (v+w) =u×v+u×w;
(kv) ×w=k(v×w);
v×v=0.
For non-zero vectors v×w=0 is equivalent to the vectors being parallel.
Geometric interpretation of |v×w| Use of |v×w| to find the area of a parallelogram 
(and hence a triangle).Syllabus content
49 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Connections
Links to other subjects:  Magnetic forces and fields (physics).
TOK : To what  extent  is certainty  attainable  in mathematics?  Is certainty  attainable,  or desirable,  in other 
areas of knowledge?
Download connections template
AHL 3.17
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Vector equations of a plane:
r=a+λb+μc, where b and c are non-parallel 
vectors within the plane.
r·n=a·n, where n is a normal to the plane and a is 
the position vector of a point on the plane.
Cartesian equation of a plane ax+by+cz=d.
Connections
Download connections template
AHL 3.18
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Intersections of: a line with a plane; two planes; 
three planes.
Angle between: a line and a plane; two planes.Finding intersections by solving equations; 
geometrical interpretation of solutions.
Link to : solutions of systems of linear equations 
(AHL 1.16).
Connections
TOK : Mathematics  and  the knower:  are symbolic  representations  of three-dimensional  objects  easier  to 
deal  with  than  visual  representations?  What  does  this tell us about  our knowledge  of mathematics  in other 
dimensions?
Download connections template
Topic 4: Statistics and probability
Concepts
Essential understandings:
Statistics  is concerned  with  the collection,  analysis  and  interpretation  of data  and  the theory  of probability 
can be used to estimate parameters, discover empirical laws, test hypotheses and predict the occurrence of 
events.  Statistical  representations  and  measures  allow  us to represent  data  in many  different  forms  to aid 
interpretation.
Probability enables us to quantify the likelihood of events occurring and so evaluate risk. Both statistics and 
probability provide important representations which enable us to make predictions, valid comparisons and 
informed  decisions.  These  fields  have  power  and  limitations  and  should  be applied  with  care  and  critically Syllabus content
50 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
questioned  to differentiate  between  the theoretical  and  the empirical/observed.  Probability  theory  allows 
us to make informed choices, to evaluate risk, and to make predictions about seemingly random events.
Suggested concepts embedded in this topic:
Quantity, validity, approximation, generalization.
AHL:  Change, systems.
Content-specific conceptual understandings:
• Organizing, representing, analysing and interpreting data and utilizing different statistical tools 
facilitates prediction and drawing of conclusions.
• Different statistical techniques require justification and the identification of their limitations and validity.
• Approximation in data can approach the truth but may not always achieve it.
• Some techniques of statistical analysis, such as regression, standardization or formulae, can be applied 
in a practical context to apply to general cases.
• Modelling through statistics can be reliable, but may have limitations.
AHL
• Properties of probability density functions can be used to identify measure of central tendency such as 
mean, mode and median.
• Probability methods such as Bayes theorem can be applied to real-world systems, such as medical 
studies or economics, to inform decisions and to better understand outcomes.
SL content
Recommended teaching hours: 27
The aim of the SL content  in the statistics  and  probability  topic  is to introduce  students  to the important 
concepts,  techniques  and  representations  used  in statistics  and  probability.  Students  should  be given  the 
opportunity to approach this topic in a practical way, to understand why certain techniques are used and to 
interpret  the results.  The use of technology  such  as simulations,  spreadsheets,  statistics  software  and 
statistics apps can greatly enhance this topic.
It is expected  that  most  of the calculations  required  will be carried  out using  technology,  but explanations 
of calculations  by hand  may  enhance  understanding.  The emphasis  is on understanding  and  interpreting 
the results obtained, in context.
In examinations  students  should  be familiar  with  how  to use the statistics  functionality  of allowed 
technology.
At SL the data set will be considered to be the population unless otherwise stated.
Sections  SL4.1  to SL4.9  are content  common  to both  Mathematics:  analysis  and  approaches  and 
Mathematics: applications and interpretation.
SL 4.1
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Concepts of population, sample, random sample, 
discrete and continuous data.This is designed to cover the key questions that 
students should ask when they see a data set/
analysis.
Reliability of data sources and bias in sampling. Dealing with missing data, errors in the recording of 
data.
Interpretation of outliers. Outlier is defined as a data item which is more than 
1.5 × interquartile range (IQR) from the nearest 
quartile.Syllabus content
51 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Awareness that, in context, some outliers are a valid 
part of the sample but some outlying data items 
may be an error in the sample.
Link to : box and whisker diagrams (SL4.2) and 
measures of dispersion (SL4.3).
Sampling techniques and their effectiveness. Simple random, convenience, systematic, quota and 
stratified sampling methods.
Connections
Links  to other  subjects:  Descriptive  statistics  and  random  samples  (biology,  psychology,  sports  exercise 
and  health  science,  environmental  systems  and  societies,  geography,  economics;  business  management); 
research methodologies (psychology).
Aim  8: Misleading  statistics;  examples  of problems  caused  by absence  of representative  samples,  for 
example  Google  flu predictor,  US presidential  elections  in 1936,  Literary  Digest  v George  Gallup,  Boston 
“pot-hole” app.
International-mindedness : The Kinsey report–famous sampling techniques.
TOK : Why  have  mathematics  and  statistics  sometimes  been  treated  as separate  subjects?  How  easy  is it to 
be misled by statistics? Is it ever justifiable to purposely use statistics to mislead others?
Download connections template
SL 4.2
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Presentation of data (discrete and continuous): 
frequency distributions (tables).Class intervals will be given as inequalities, without 
gaps.
Histograms.
Cumulative frequency; cumulative frequency 
graphs; use to find median, quartiles, percentiles, 
range and interquartile range (IQR).Frequency histograms with equal class intervals.
Not required:  Frequency density histograms.
Production and understanding of box and whisker 
diagrams.Use of box and whisker diagrams to compare two 
distributions, using symmetry, median, interquartile 
range or range. Outliers should be indicated with a 
cross.
Determining whether the data may be normally 
distributed by consideration of the symmetry of the 
box and whiskers.
Connections
Links to other subjects:  Presentation of data (sciences, individuals and societies).
International-mindedness : Discussion  of the different  formulae  for the same  statistical  measure  (for example, 
variance).
TOK : What  is the difference  between  information  and  data?  Does  “data”  mean  the same  thing  in different 
areas of knowledge?
Download connections template
SL 4.3
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Measures of central tendency (mean, median and 
mode).
Estimation of mean from grouped data.Calculation of mean using formula and technology.
Students should use mid-interval values to estimate 
the mean of grouped data.
Modal class. For equal class intervals only.
Measures of dispersion (interquartile range, 
standard deviation and variance).Calculation of standard deviation and variance of 
the sample using only technology, however hand 
calculations may enhance understanding.
Variance is the square of the standard deviation.
Effect of constant changes on the original data. Examples:  If three is subtracted from the data items, 
then the mean is decreased by three, but the 
standard deviation is unchanged.
If all the data items are doubled, the mean is 
doubled and the standard deviation is also doubled.
Quartiles of discrete data. Using technology. Awareness that different 
methods for finding quartiles exist and therefore the 
values obtained using technology and by hand may 
differ.
Connections
Other  contexts:  Comparing  variation  and  spread  in populations,  human  or natural,  for example 
agricultural crop data, social indicators, reliability and maintenance.
Links  to other  subjects:  Descriptive  statistics  (sciences  and  individuals  and  societies);  consumer  price 
index (economics).
International-mindedness : The benefits of sharing and analysing data from different countries; discussion 
of the different formulae for variance.
TOK : Could  mathematics  make  alternative,  equally  true,  formulae?  What  does  this tell us about 
mathematical  truths?  Does  the use of statistics  lead  to an over-emphasis  on attributes  that  can be easily 
measured over those that cannot?
Download connections template
SL 4.4
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Linear correlation of bivariate data.
Pearson’s product-moment correlation coefficient, r.Technology should be used to calculate r. However, 
hand calculations of r may enhance understanding.
Critical values of r will be given where appropriate.
Students should be aware that Pearson’s product 
moment correlation coefficient ( r) is only meaningful 
for linear relationships.
Scatter diagrams; lines of best fit, by eye, passing 
through the mean point.Positive, zero, negative; strong, weak, no correlation.
Students should be able to make the distinction 
between correlation and causation and know that 
correlation does not imply causation.
Equation of the regression line of y on x. Technology should be used to find the equation.Syllabus content
53 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Use of the equation of the regression line for 
prediction purposes.
Interpret the meaning of the parameters, a and b, in 
a linear regression y=ax+b.Students should be aware:
• of the dangers of extrapolation
• that they cannot always reliably make a 
prediction of x from a value of y, when using a y
on x line.
Connections
Other contexts:  Linear  regressions  where  correlation  exists  between  two  variables.  Exploring  cause  and 
dependence for categorical variables, for example, on what factors might political persuasion depend?
Links  to other  subjects:  Curves  of best  fit, correlation  and  causation  (sciences  group  subjects);  scatter 
graphs (geography).
Aim  8: The correlation  between  smoking  and  lung  cancer  was  “discovered”  using  mathematics.  Science 
had to justify the cause.
TOK : Correlation  and  causation–can  we have knowledge  of cause  and  effect  relationships  given  that  we 
can only  observe  correlation?  What  factors  affect  the reliability  and  validity  of mathematical  models  in 
describing real-life phenomena?
Download connections template
SL 4.5
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Concepts of trial, outcome, equally likely outcomes, 
relative frequency, sample space ( U) and event.
The probability of an event A is P(A) =n(A)
n(U).
The complementary events A and A′
(not A).Sample spaces can be represented in many ways, for 
example as a table or a list.
Experiments using coins, dice, cards and so on, can 
enhance understanding of the distinction between 
experimental (relative frequency) and theoretical 
probability.
Simulations may be used to enhance this topic.
Expected number of occurrences. Example:  If there are 128 students in a class and the 
probability of being absent is 0.1, the expected 
number of absent students is 12.8.
Connections
Other contexts:  Actuarial  studies  and  the link between  probability  of life spans  and  insurance  premiums, 
government planning based on likely projected figures, Monte Carlo methods.
Links  to other  subjects:  Theoretical  genetics  and  Punnett  squares  (biology);  the position  of a particle 
(physics).
Aim 8:  The ethics of gambling.
International-mindedness:  The St Petersburg paradox; Chebyshev and Pavlovsky (Russian).
TOK:  To what  extent  are theoretical  and  experimental  probabilities  linked?  What  is the role  of emotion  in 
our perception of risk, for example in business, medicine and travel safety?
Use of technology:  Computer simulations may be useful to enhance this topic.
Download connections template
SL 4.6
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Use of Venn diagrams, tree diagrams, sample space 
diagrams and tables of outcomes to calculate 
probabilities.
Combined events: 
P(A∪B) = P( A) + P( B) − P( A∩B).
Mutually exclusive events: P(A∩B) = 0 .The non-exclusivity of “or”.
Conditional probability: P(A|B) =P(A∩B)
P(B).An alternate form of this is:
P(A∩B) = P( B)P(A|B).
Problems can be solved with the aid of a Venn 
diagram, tree diagram, sample space diagram or 
table of outcomes without explicit use of formulae.
Probabilities with and without replacement.
Independent events: P(A∩B) = P( A)P(B).
Connections
Aim  8: The gambling  issue:  use of probability  in casinos.  Could  or should  mathematics  help  increase 
incomes in gambling?
TOK : Can  calculation  of gambling  probabilities  be considered  an ethical  application  of mathematics? 
Should mathematicians be held responsible for unethical applications of their work?
Download connections template
SL 4.7
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Concept of discrete random variables and their 
probability distributions.
Expected value (mean), for discrete data.
Applications.Probability distributions will be given in the following ways:
X 1 2 3 4 5
P(X=x) 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 15 0 . 05 0 . 5
P(X=x) =1
18(4 + x) for x∈ {1, 2, 3}
E(X) = 0  indicates a fair game where X represents 
the gain of a player.
Connections
Other contexts:  Games of chance.
Aim  8: Why  has it been  argued  that  theories  based  on the calculable  probabilities  found  in casinos  are 
pernicious when applied to everyday life (for example, economics)?
TOK:  What do we mean by a “fair” game? Is it fair that casinos should make a profit?
Download connections template
SL 4.8
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Binomial distribution.
Mean and variance of the binomial distribution.Situations where the binomial distribution is an 
appropriate model.
In examinations, binomial probabilities should be 
found using available technology.
Not required:  Formal proof of mean and variance.
Link to:  expected number of occurrences (SL4.5).
Connections
Aim 8:  Pascal’s triangle, attributing the origin of a mathematical discovery to the wrong mathematician.
International-mindedness : The so-called  “Pascal’s  triangle”  was  known  to the Chinese  mathematician 
Yang Hui much earlier than Pascal.
TOK:  What criteria can we use to decide between different models?
Enrichment:  Hypothesis testing using the binomial distribution.
Download connections template
SL 4.9
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The normal distribution and curve.
Properties of the normal distribution.
Diagrammatic representation.Awareness of the natural occurrence of the normal 
distribution.
Students should be aware that approximately 68% 
of the data lies between μ±σ, 95% lies between 
μ± 2σ and 99.7% of the data lies between μ± 3σ.
Normal probability calculations. Probabilities and values of the variable must be 
found using technology.
Inverse normal calculations For inverse normal calculations mean and standard 
deviation will be given.
This does not involve transformation to the 
standardized normal variable z.
Connections
Links  to other  subjects:  Normally  distributed  real-life  measurements  and  descriptive  statistics  (sciences 
group subjects, psychology, environmental systems and societies)
Aim 8:  Why might the misuse of the normal distribution lead to dangerous inferences and conclusions?
International-mindedness:  De Moivre’s  derivation  of the normal  distribution  and  Quetelet’s  use of it to 
describe l’homme moyen .
TOK:  To what extent can we trust mathematical models such as the normal distribution? How can we know 
what to include, and what to exclude, in a model?
Download connections template
SL 4.10
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Equation of the regression line of x on y.
Use of the equation for prediction purposes. Students should be aware that they cannot always 
reliably make a prediction of y from a value of x, 
when using an x on y line.
Connections
TOK:  Is it possible to have knowledge of the future?
Download connections template
SL 4.11
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Formal definition and use of the formulae:
P(A|B) =P(A∩B)
P(B) for conditional probabilities, and
P(A|B) = P( A) = P( A|B′) for independent events.An alternate form of this is: P(A∩B) = P( B)P(A|B).
Testing for independence.
Connections
Other contexts:  Use of probability methods in medical studies to assess risk factors for certain diseases.
TOK:  Given  the interdisciplinary  nature  of many  real-world  applications  of probability,  is the division  of 
knowledge into discrete disciplines or areas of knowledge artificial and/or useful?
Download connections template
SL 4.12
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Standardization of normal variables ( z- values). Probabilities and values of the variable must be 
found using technology.
The standardized value ( z) gives the number of 
standard deviations from the mean.
Inverse normal calculations where mean and 
standard deviation are unknown.Use of z-values to calculate unknown means and 
standard deviations.
Connections
Links to other subjects:  The normal distribution (biology); descriptive statistics (psychology).
Download connections template
AHL content
Recommended teaching hours: 6
The aim of the AHL  content  in the statistics  and  probability  topic  is to extend  and  build  upon  the aims, concepts and skills from the SL content. Students are introduced to further conditional probability theory in the form  of Bayes  Theorem  and  properties  of discrete  and  continuous  random  variables  are further 
explored.
AHL 4.13
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Use of Bayes’ theorem for a maximum of three 
events.Link to:  independent events (SL4.6).
Connections
Other contexts:  Use of probability methods in medical studies to assess risk factors for certain diseases.
TOK:  Does  the applicability  of knowledge  vary  across  the different  areas  of knowledge?  What  would  the 
implications be if the value of all knowledge was measured solely in terms of its applicability?
Download connections template
AHL 4.14
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Variance of a discrete random variable. Link to:  discrete random variables (SL 4.7)
Continuous random variables and their probability 
density functions.0 ≤ f(x) ≤ 1 , ∫
−∞∞
f(x)dx= 1 including piecewise 
functions.
Mode and median of continuous random variables. For a continuous random variable, a value at which 
the probability density function has a maximum 
value is called a mode and for the median: 
∫
−∞m
f(x)dx=1
2.
Mean, variance and standard deviation of both 
discrete and continuous random variables.Use of the notation E(X), E( X2), Var( X),
where Var( X) = E( X2) − [E( X)]2
and related formulae.
Use of E(X) for “fair” games.
The effect of linear transformations of X. E(aX+b) =aE(X) +b, Var(aX+b) =a2Var( X)
Connections
Other contexts:  Other  discrete  distributions,  for example  Poisson,  may  be appropriate  for IA/toolkit  and 
further  investigation;  expected  value  used  in decision  making  in business,  economics  and  life in general; 
expected gain to insurance companies.
TOK:  Is mathematics more or less useful than other areas of knowledge for solving problems?
Enrichment:  Is there  a relationship  between  the interquartile  range  and  the standard  deviation  for a 
normally distributed data set?
Download connections template
Topic 5: Calculus
Concepts
Essential understandings:
Calculus  describes  rates  of change  between  two  variables  and  the accumulation  of limiting  areas. 
Understanding  these  rates  of change  and  accumulations  allow  us to model,  interpret  and  analyze  real-
world problems and situations. Calculus helps us to understand the behaviour of functions and allows us to 
interpret the features of their graphs.
Suggested concepts embedded in this topic:
Change, patterns, relationships, approximation, generalization, space, modelling.
AHL:  Systems, quantity.
Content-specific conceptual understandings:
• The derivative may be represented physically as a rate of change and geometrically as the gradient or 
slope function.
• Areas under curves can be can be approximated by the sum of the areas of rectangles which may be 
calculated even more accurately using integration.
• Examining rates of change close to turning points helps to identify intervals where the function 
increases/decreases, and identify the concavity of the function.
• Numerical integration can be used to approximate areas in the physical world.
• Mathematical modelling can provide effective solutions to real-life problems in optimization by 
maximizing or minimizing a quantity, such as cost or profit.
• Derivatives and integrals describe real-world kinematics problems in two and three-dimensional space 
by examining displacement, velocity and acceleration.
AHL
• Some functions may be continuous everywhere but not differentiable everywhere.
• A finite number of terms of an infinite series can be a general approximation of a function over a 
limited domain.
• Limits describe the output of a function as the input approaches a certain value and can represent 
convergence and divergence.
• Examining limits of functions at a point can help determine continuity and differentiability at a point.
SL content
Recommended teaching hours: 28
The aim of the SL content  in the calculus  topic  is to introduce  students  to the concepts  and  techniques  of 
differential and integral calculus and their applications.
Throughout  this topic  students  should  be given  the opportunity  to use technology  such  as graphing 
packages and graphing calculators to develop and apply their knowledge of calculus.
Sections  SL5.1  to SL5.5  are content  common  to both  Mathematics:  analysis  and  approaches  and 
Mathematics: applications and interpretation.
SL 5.1
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Introduction to the concept of a limit. Estimation of the value of a limit from a table or 
graph.Syllabus content
59 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Not required:  Formal analytic methods of 
calculating limits.
Derivative interpreted as gradient function and as 
rate of change.Forms of notation: dy
dx, f′(x), dV
dr or ds
dt for the first 
derivative.
Informal understanding of the gradient of a curve as 
a limit.
Connections
Links  to other  subjects:  Marginal  cost,  marginal  revenue,  marginal  profit,  market  structures  (economics); 
kinematics,  induced  emf  and  simple  harmonic  motion  (physics);  interpreting  the gradient  of a curve 
(chemistry)
Aim  8: The debate  over  whether  Newton  or Leibnitz  discovered  certain  calculus  concepts;  how  the Greeks’ 
distrust of zero meant that Archimedes’ work did not lead to calculus.
International-mindedness:  Attempts by Indian mathematicians (500-1000 CE) to explain division by zero.
TOK:  What  value  does  the knowledge  of limits  have?  Is infinitesimal  behaviour  applicable  to real life?  Is 
intuition a valid way of knowing in mathematics?
Use of technology:  Spreadsheets, dynamic graphing software and GDC should be used to explore ideas of 
limits, numerically and graphically. Hypotheses can be formed and then tested using technology.
Download connections template
SL 5.2
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Increasing and decreasing functions.
Graphical interpretation of 
f′(x) > 0, f′(x) = 0, f′(x) < 0.Identifying intervals on which functions are 
increasing (f′(x) > 0)  or decreasing (f′(x) < 0) .
Connections
Download connections template
SL 5.3
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Derivative of f(x) =axn is f′(x) =anxn− 1, n∈ℤ
The derivative of functions of the form
f(x) =axn+bxn− 1. . . .
where all exponents are integers.
Connections
TOK:  The seemingly  abstract  concept  of calculus  allows  us to create  mathematical  models  that  permit 
human  feats  such as getting  a man  on the Moon.  What  does  this tell us about  the links  between 
mathematical models and reality?
Download connections template
SL 5.4
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Tangents and normals at a given point, and their 
equations.Use of both analytic approaches and technology.
Connections
Links  to other  subjects:  Instantaneous  velocity  and  optics,  equipotential  surfaces  (physics);  price  elasticity 
(economics).
TOK:  In what  ways  has technology  impacted  how  knowledge  is produced  and  shared  in mathematics? 
Does  technology  simply  allow  us to arrange  existing  knowledge  in new  and  different  ways,  or should  this 
arrangement itself be considered knowledge?
Download connections template
SL 5.5
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Introduction to integration as anti-differentiation of 
functions of the form f(x) =axn+bxn− 1+ ....,
where n∈ℤ, n≠ − 1Students should be aware of the link between anti-
derivatives, definite integrals and area.
Anti-differentiation with a boundary condition to 
determine the constant term.Example:  If  dy
dx= 3x2+x and y= 10
 when x= 1, then y=x3+1
2x2+ 8.5 .
Definite integrals using technology.
Area of a region enclosed by a curve y=f(x)
and the x -axis, where f(x) > 0 .Students are expected to first write a correct 
expression before calculating the area, for example 
∫
26
(3x2+ 4)d x.
The use of dynamic geometry or graphing software 
is encouraged in the development of this concept.
Connections
Other contexts:  Velocity-time graphs
Links  to other  subjects:  Velocity-time  and  acceleration-time  graphs  (physics  and  sports  exercise  and 
health science)
TOK:  Is it possible for an area of knowledge to describe the world without transforming it?
Download connections template
SL 5.6
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Derivative of xn(n∈ℚ), sinx, cosx, ex and lnx.
Differentiation of a sum and a multiple of these 
functions.
The chain rule for composite functions. Example:  f(x) = e(x2+ 2), f(x) = sin(3 x− 1)Syllabus content
61 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The product and quotient rules. Link to:  composite functions (SL2.5).
Connections
Links to other subjects:  Uniform circular motion and induced emf (physics).
TOK : What  is the role  of convention  in mathematics?  Is this similar  or different  to the role  of convention  in 
other areas of knowledge?
Download connections template
SL 5.7
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The second derivative.
Graphical behaviour of functions, including the 
relationship between the graphs of f,f′ and f″.Use of both forms of notation, d2y
dx2 and f″(x).
Technology can be used to explore graphs and 
calculate the derivatives of functions.
Link to:  function graphing skills (SL2.3).
Connections
Links to other subjects:  Simple harmonic motion (physics).
Download connections template
SL 5.8
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Local maximum and minimum points.
Testing for maximum and minimum.Using change of sign of the first derivative or using 
sign of the second derivative where f″(x) > 0
implies a minimum and f″(x) < 0  implies a 
maximum.
Optimization. Examples of optimization may include profit, area 
and volume.
Points of inflexion with zero and non-zero gradients. At a point of inflexion, f″(x) = 0  and  changes sign 
(concavity change), for example f″(x) = 0  is not a 
sufficient condition for a point of inflexion for 
y=x4 at (0, 0) .
Use of the terms “concave-up” for f″(x) > 0 , and 
“concave-down” for f″(x) < 0 .
Connections
Other contexts:  Profit, area, volume.
Links  to other  subjects:  Velocity-time  graphs,  simple  harmonic  motion  graphs  and  kinematics  (physics); 
allocative efficiency (economics).
TOK:  When  mathematicians  and  historians  say that  they  have  explained  something,  are they  using  the 
word “explain” in the same way?
Download connections template
SL 5.9
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Kinematic problems involving displacement s, 
velocity v, acceleration a and total distance 
travelled.v=ds
dt; a=dv
dt=d2s
dt2
Displacement from t1 to t2 is given by ∫t1t2
v(t)dt.
Distance between t1 to t2 is given by ∫t1t2
|v(t)|dt.
Speed is the magnitude of velocity.
Connections
Links to other subjects:  Kinematics (physics).
International-mindedness:  Does  the inclusion  of kinematics  as core  mathematics  reflect  a particular 
cultural heritage? Who decides what is mathematics?
TOK:  Is mathematics  independent  of culture?  To what  extent  are we people  aware  of the impact  of culture 
on what we they believe or know?
Download connections template
SL 5.10
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Indefinite integral of xn(n∈ℚ), sin x, cos x,1
x and 
ex.∫1
xdx= ln x+C
The composites of any of these with the linear 
function ax+b.Example: 
f′(x) = cos(2 x+ 3) ⇒ f(x) =1
2sin(2 x+ 3) + C
Integration by inspection (reverse chain rule) or by 
substitution for expressions of the form:
∫kg′(x)f(g(x))dx.Examples:
∫2x(x2+ 1)4dx, ∫4xsinx2dx, ∫sinx
cosxdx.
Connections
Download connections template
SL 5.11
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Definite integrals, including analytical approach.∫
ab
g′(x)dx=g(b) −g(a).
The value of some definite integrals can only be 
found using technology.
Link to : definite integrals using technology (SL5.5).Syllabus content
63 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Areas of a region enclosed by a curve y=f(x) and 
the x-axis, where f(x) can be positive or negative, 
without the use of technology.
Areas between curves.Students are expected to first write a correct 
expression before calculating the area.
Technology may be used to enhance understanding 
of the relationship between integrals and areas.
Connections
International-mindedness:  Accurate calculation of the volume of a cylinder by Chinese mathematician Liu 
Hui;  Ibn Al Haytham:  first mathematician  to calculate  the integral  of a function,  in order  to find  the volume 
of a paraboloid.
TOK:  Consider  f(x) =1
x, 1 ≤ x≤ ∞ . An infinite  area  sweeps  out a finite  volume.  Can  this be reconciled 
with our intuition? Do emotion and intuition have a role in mathematics?
Enrichment:  Exploring numerical integration techniques such as Simpson’s rule or the trapezoidal rule.
Download connections template
AHL content
Recommended teaching hours: 27
The aim of the AHL  content  in the calculus  topic  is to extend  and  build  upon  the aims,  concepts  and  skills 
from  the SL content.  Further  powerful  techniques  and  useful  applications  of differential  and  integral 
calculus are introduced.
AHL 5.12
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Informal understanding of continuity and 
differentiability of a function at a point.In examinations, students will not be asked to test 
for continuity and differentiability.
Understanding of limits (convergence and 
divergence).
Definition of derivative from first principles 
f′(x) = lim
h→ 0f(x+h) −f(x)
h.Link to:  infinite geometric sequences (SL1.8).
Use of this definition for polynomials only.
Higher derivatives.Familiarity with the notations dny
dxn, f(n)(x).
Link to : proof by mathematical induction (AHL 1.15).
Connections
Links to other subjects:  Theory of the firm (economics).
International-mindedness:  How  the Greeks’  distrust  of zero  meant  that  Archimedes’  work  did not lead  to 
the Calculus; investigate attempts by Indian mathematicians (500-1000AD) to explain division by zero.
TOK:  Does  the fact that  Leibniz  and  Newton  came  across  the Calculus  at similar  times  support  the 
argument of Platonists over Constructivists?
Enrichment:  Fundamental theorem of calculus.
Download connections template
AHL 5.13
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The evaluation of limits of the form lim
x→af(x)
g(x) and 
lim
x→ ∞f(x)
g(x) using l’Hôpital’s rule or the Maclaurin 
series.The indeterminate forms 0
0 and ∞
∞.
For example: lim
θ→ 0sinθ
θ= 1 .
Link to:  horizontal asymptotes (SL2.8) .
Repeated use of l’Hôpital’s rule.
Connections
Download connections template
AHL 5.14
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Implicit differentiation.
Related rates of change.
Optimisation problems.Appropriate use of the chain rule or implicit 
differentiation, including cases where the optimum 
solution is at the end point.
Connections
Other contexts:  Links between mathematical and physical models.
TOK:  Euler was able to make important advances in mathematical analysis before calculus had been put on 
a solid  theoretical  foundation  by Cauchy  and  others.  However,  some  work  was  not possible  until  after 
Cauchy’s  work.  What  does  this suggest  about  the nature  of progress  and  development  in mathematics? 
How might this be similar/different to the nature of progress and development in other areas of knowledge?
Download connections template
AHL 5.15
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Derivatives of tanx, secx, cosec x, cotx, ax,
logax, arcsin x, arccos x, arctan x.
Indefinite integrals of the derivatives of any of the 
above functions.
The composites of any of these with a linear 
function.Indefinite integral interpreted as a family of curves.
Examples:  ∫1
x2+ 2x+ 5dx=1
2arctan(x+ 1)
2+C
∫sec2(2x+ 5)d x=1
2tan(2 x+ 5) + C
Use of partial fractions to rearrange the integrand.∫1
x2+ 3x+ 2dx= lnx+ 1
x+ 2+C
Link to:  partial fractions (AHL1.11)
Connections
TOK:  Can a mathematical statement be true before it has been proven?Syllabus content
65 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Download connections template
AHL 5.16
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Integration by substitution. On examination papers, substitutions will be 
provided if the integral is not of the form 
∫kg′(x)f(g(x))dx.
Integration by parts.Examples:  ∫xsinxdx, ∫lnxdx, ∫arcsin xdx
Repeated integration by parts.Examples: ∫x2exdx and ∫exsinxdx.
Connections
Download connections template
AHL 5.17
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Area of the region enclosed by a curve and the y-
axis in a given interval.
Volumes of revolution about the x-axis or y-axis.
Connections
Other contexts:  Industrial design.
Download connections template
AHL 5.18
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
First order differential equations.
Numerical solution of dy
dx=f(x,y)
using Euler’s method.xn+ 1=xn+h, where h is a constant.
Variables separable. Example : the logistic equation 
dn
dt=kn(a−n), a, k∈ℝ
Link to : partial fractions (AHL1.11) and use of partial 
fractions to rearrange the integrand (AHL5.15).
Homogeneous differential equation dy
dx=f(y
x)
using the substitution y=vx.Syllabus content
66 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Solution of y′ +P(x)y=Q(x), using the integrating 
factor.
Connections
Other contexts:  Newton’s law of cooling, population growth, carbon dating.
Links to other subjects:  Decay curves (physics); first order reactions (chemistry)
TOK:  Does  personal  experience  play  a role  in the formation  of knowledge  claims  in mathematics?  Does  it 
play a different role in mathematics compared to other areas of knowledge?
Download connections template
AHL 5.19
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Maclaurin series to obtain expansions for 
ex, sinx, cosx, ln(1 + x), (1 + x)p,
p∈ℚ.
Use of simple substitution, products, integration and 
differentiation to obtain other series.Example : for substitution: replace x with x2 to define 
the Maclaurin series for ex2.
Example : the expansion of exsinx.
Maclaurin series developed from differential equations.
Connections
International-mindedness : Comparison of the Bourbaki to the Kerala School.
TOK : Is there always a trade-off between accuracy and simplicity?
Download connections template
General
Assessment  is an integral  part  of teaching  and  learning.  The most  important  aim of assessment  in the DP is 
that  it should  support  curricular  goals  and  encourage  appropriate  student  learning.  Both  external  and 
internal  assessments  are used  in the DP. IB examiners  mark  work  produced  for external  assessment,  while 
work produced for internal assessment is marked by teachers and externally moderated by the IB.
There are two types of assessment identified by the IB.
Formative  assessment  informs  both  teaching  and  learning.  It is concerned  with  providing  accurate  and 
helpful  feedback  to students  and  teachers  on the kind  of learning  taking  place  and  the nature  of students’ 
strengths  and  weaknesses  in order  to help  develop  students’  understanding  and  capabilities.  Formative 
assessment  can also  help  to improve  teaching  quality,  as it can provide  information  to monitor  progress 
towards meeting the course aims and objectives.
Summative  assessment  gives  an overview  of previous  learning  and  is concerned  with  measuring  student 
achievement.
The DP primarily focuses on summative assessment designed to record student achievement at, or towards 
the end of, the course of study. However, many of the assessment instruments can also be used formatively 
during  the course  of teaching  and  learning,  and  teachers  are encouraged  to do this.  A comprehensive 
assessment  plan  is viewed  as being  integral  with  teaching,  learning  and  course  organization.  For further 
information, see the IB Programme standards and practices  document.
The approach  to assessment  used  by the IB is criterion-related,  not norm-referenced.  This  approach  to 
assessment  judges  students’  work  by their  performance  in relation  to identified  levels  of attainment,  and 
not in relation  to the work  of other  students.  For further  information  on assessment  within  the DP please 
refer to the publication DP assessment: Principles and practice .
To support  teachers  in the planning,  delivery  and  assessment  of the DP courses,  a variety  of resources  can 
be found  on the programme  resource  centre  or purchased  from  the IB store  (store.ibo.org).  Additional 
publications  such  as specimen  papers  and  markschemes,  teacher  support  materials,  subject  reports  and 
grade descriptors can also be found on the programme resource centre. Past examination papers as well as 
markschemes can be purchased from the IB store.
Methods of assessment
The IB uses several methods to assess work produced by students.
Assessment criteria
Assessment  criteria  are used  when  the assessment  task  is open-ended.  Each  criterion  concentrates  on a 
particular  skill that  students  are expected  to demonstrate.  An assessment  objective  describes  what 
students should be able to do, and assessment criteria describe how well they should be able to do it. Using 
assessment criteria allows discrimination between different answers and encourages a variety of responses. 
Each  criterion  comprises  a set of hierarchically-ordered  level descriptors.  Each  level  descriptor  is worth  one 
or more marks. Each criterion is applied independently using a best-fit model. The maximum marks for each 
criterion may differ according to the criterion’s importance. The marks awarded for each criterion are added 
together to give the total mark for the piece of work.
Assessment bands
Assessment  bands  are a comprehensive  statement  of expected  performance  against  which  responses  are judged. 
They represent a single holistic criterion divided into level descriptors. Each level descriptor corresponds to 
a range  of marks  to differentiate  student  performance.  A best-fit  approach  is used  to ascertain  which 
particular mark to use from the possible range for each level descriptor.
Analytic markschemes
Analytic  markschemes  are prepared  for those  examination  questions  that  expect  a particular  kind  of 
response and/or a given final answer from students. They give detailed instructions to examiners on how to 
break down the total mark for each question for different parts of the response.
Marking notes
For some  assessment  components  marked  using  assessment  criteria,  marking  notes  are provided.  Marking 
notes give guidance on how to apply assessment criteria to the particular requirements of a question.
Inclusive assessment arrangements
Inclusive  assessment  arrangements  are available  for candidates  with  assessment  access  requirements. 
These  arrangements  enable  candidates  with  diverse  needs  to access  the examinations  and  demonstrate 
their knowledge and understanding of the constructs being assessed.
The IB’s Access  and  inclusion  policy  provides  details  on all the inclusive  assessment  arrangements  available 
to candidates with learning support requirements. The IB document Learning diversity and inclusion in the IB 
programmes  outlines  the position  of the IB with  regard  to candidates  with  diverse  learning  needs  in the IB 
programmes.  For candidates  affected  by adverse  circumstances,  the IB documents  General  regulations: 
Diploma  Programme  and  Diploma  Programme  Assessment  procedures  provide  details  on access 
consideration.
Responsibilities of the school
The school  is required  to ensure  that  that  equal  access  arrangements  and  reasonable  adjustments  are 
provided  to candidates  with  learning  support  requirements  that  are in line with  the IB documents  Access 
and inclusion policy  and Learning diversity and inclusion in the IB programmes.
First assessment 2021
Assessment component Weighting
External assessment (3 hours)
Paper 1 (90 minutes)
No technology allowed. (80 marks)
Section A
Compulsory short-response questions based on the syllabus.
Section B
Compulsory extended-response questions based on the syllabus.80%
40%
Paper 2 (90 minutes)
Technology required. (80 marks)
Section A
Compulsory short-response questions based on the syllabus.
Section B
Compulsory extended-response questions based on the syllabus40%
Internal assessment
This component is internally assessed by the teacher and externally moderated by the IB at 
the end of the course.
Mathematical exploration
Internal assessment in mathematics is an individual exploration. This is a piece of written 
work that involves investigating an area of mathematics. (20 marks)20%
First assessment 2021
Assessment component Weighting
External assessment (5 hours)
Paper 1 (120 minutes)
No technology allowed. (110 marks)
Section A
Compulsory short-response questions based on the syllabus.
Section B
Compulsory extended-response questions based on the syllabus.80%
30%
Paper 2 (120 minutes)
Technology required. (110 marks)
Section A
Compulsory short-response questions based on the syllabus.
Section B
Compulsory extended-response questions based on the syllabus.
Paper 3 (60 minutes)
Technology required. (55 marks)
Two compulsory extended response problem-solving questions.30%
20%
Internal assessment
This component is internally assessed by the teacher and externally moderated by the IB at 
the end of the course.
Mathematical exploration
Internal assessment in mathematics is an individual exploration. This is a piece of written 
work that involves investigating an area of mathematics. (20 marks)20%
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.
External assessment details—SL
General information
Paper 1 and paper 2
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with HL.
Calculators
Paper 1
Students  are not permitted  access  to any calculator.  Questions  will mainly  involve  analytic  approaches  to 
solutions,  rather  than  requiring  the use of a GDC.  The paper  is not intended  to require  complicated 
calculations,  with  the potential  for careless  errors.  However,  questions  will include  some  arithmetical 
manipulations when they are essential to the development of the question.
Paper 2
Students must have access to a graphic display calculator (GDC) at all times. However, not all questions will 
necessarily  require  the use of the GDC.  Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in 
Diploma Programme Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the programme  resource  centre  and  to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In paper  1 and  paper  2, full marks  are not necessarily  awarded  for a correct  answer  with  no working. 
Answers  must  be supported  by working  and/or  explanations  (in the form  of, for example  diagrams,  graphs 
or calculations).  Where  an answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  this 
is shown by written working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 1 hour 30 minutes
Weighting: 40%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
Assessment
External assessment
72 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
• Students are not permitted access to any calculator on this paper.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 80 marks, representing 40%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 40 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
• This section consists of a small number of compulsory extended-response questions based on the 
whole syllabus. It is worth approximately 40 marks.
• Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus in depth. The range 
of syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 2
Duration: 1 hour 30 minutes
Weighting: 40%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 80 marks, representing 40%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 40 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
• This section consists of a small number of compulsory extended-response questions based on the 
whole syllabus. It is worth approximately 40 marks.
• Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus in depth. The range 
of syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC.  Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline in difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of the question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.
External assessment details—SL
General information
Paper 1 and paper 2
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with HL.
Calculators
Paper 1
Students  are not permitted  access  to any calculator.  Questions  will mainly  involve  analytic  approaches  to 
solutions,  rather  than  requiring  the use of a GDC.  The paper  is not intended  to require  complicated 
calculations,  with  the potential  for careless  errors.  However,  questions  will include  some  arithmetical 
manipulations when they are essential to the development of the question.
Paper 2
Students must have access to a graphic display calculator (GDC) at all times. However, not all questions will 
necessarily  require  the use of the GDC.  Regulations covering the types of GDC allowed are provided in 
Diploma Programme Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the programme  resource  centre  and  to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In paper  1 and  paper  2, full marks  are not necessarily  awarded  for a correct  answer  with  no working. 
Answers  must  be supported  by working  and/or  explanations  (in the form  of, for example  diagrams,  graphs 
or calculations).  Where  an answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  this 
is shown by written working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 1 hour 30 minutes
Weighting: 40%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
Assessment
External assessment
72 Mathematics: analysis and approaches guide
• Students are not permitted access to any calculator on this paper.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 80 marks, representing 40%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 40 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
• This section consists of a small number of compulsory extended-response questions based on the 
whole syllabus. It is worth approximately 40 marks.
• Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus in depth. The range 
of syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 2
Duration: 1 hour 30 minutes
Weighting: 40%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 80 marks, representing 40%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 40 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
• This section consists of a small number of compulsory extended-response questions based on the 
whole syllabus. It is worth approximately 40 marks.
• Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus in depth. The range 
of syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC.  Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
Paper 1
Students  are not permitted  access  to any calculator.  Questions  will mainly  involve  analytic  approaches  to 
solutions,  rather  than  requiring  the use of a GDC.  The paper  is not intended  to require  complicated 
calculations,  with  the potential  for careless  errors.  However,  questions  will include  some  arithmetical 
manipulations when they are essential to the development of the question.
Paper 2
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all questions will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC.  Regulations covering the types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment 
procedures .
Paper 3
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all question parts will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC.  Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school to download a copy from IBIS or the Programme Resource Centre and to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers  1, 2 and  3, full marks  are not necessarily  awarded  for a correct  answer  with  no working.  Answers 
must  be supported  by working  and/or  explanations  (in the form  of, for example  diagrams,  graphs  or 
calculations).  Where  an answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  that 
this is shown by written working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• Students are not permitted access to any calculator on this paper.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing 30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 55 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
This  section  consists  of a small  number  of compulsory  extended-response  questions  based  on the whole 
syllabus. It is worth approximately 55 marks.
Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
The intention  of this section  is to assess  students  across  the breadth  of the syllabus  in depth.  The range  of 
syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing 30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 55 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
This  section  consists  of a small  number  of compulsory  extended-response  questions  based  on the whole 
syllabus. It is worth approximately 55 marks.
Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus in depth. The range 
of syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC.  Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
Paper 1
Students  are not permitted  access  to any calculator.  Questions  will mainly  involve  analytic  approaches  to 
solutions,  rather  than  requiring  the use of a GDC.  The paper  is not intended  to require  complicated 
calculations,  with  the potential  for careless  errors.  However,  questions  will include  some  arithmetical 
manipulations when they are essential to the development of the question.
Paper 2
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all questions will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC.  Regulations covering the types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment 
procedures .
Paper 3
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all question parts will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC.  Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school to download a copy from IBIS or the Programme Resource Centre and to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers  1, 2 and  3, full marks  are not necessarily  awarded  for a correct  answer  with  no working.  Answers 
must  be supported  by working  and/or  explanations  (in the form  of, for example  diagrams,  graphs  or 
calculations).  Where  an answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  that 
this is shown by written working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• Students are not permitted access to any calculator on this paper.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing 30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 55 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
This  section  consists  of a small  number  of compulsory  extended-response  questions  based  on the whole 
syllabus. It is worth approximately 55 marks.
Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
The intention  of this section  is to assess  students  across  the breadth  of the syllabus  in depth.  The range  of 
syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing 30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 55 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
This  section  consists  of a small  number  of compulsory  extended-response  questions  based  on the whole 
syllabus. It is worth approximately 55 marks.
Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus in depth. The range 
of syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC.  Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
Paper 1
Students  are not permitted  access  to any calculator.  Questions  will mainly  involve  analytic  approaches  to 
solutions,  rather  than  requiring  the use of a GDC.  The paper  is not intended  to require  complicated 
calculations,  with  the potential  for careless  errors.  However,  questions  will include  some  arithmetical 
manipulations when they are essential to the development of the question.
Paper 2
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all questions will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC. Regulations covering the types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment 
procedures .
Paper 3
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all question parts will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC. Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school to download a copy from IBIS or the Programme Resource Centre and to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers  1, 2 and  3, full marks  are not necessarily  awarded  for a correct  answer  with  no working.  Answers 
must  be supported  by working  and/or  explanations  (in the form  of, for example  diagrams,  graphs  or 
calculations).  Where  an answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  that 
this is shown by written working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• Students are not permitted access to any calculator on this paper.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing 30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 55 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
This  section  consists  of a small  number  of compulsory  extended-response  questions  based  on the whole 
syllabus. It is worth approximately 55 marks.
Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
The intention  of this section  is to assess  students  across  the breadth  of the syllabus  in depth.  The range  of 
syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing 30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 55 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
This  section  consists  of a small  number  of compulsory  extended-response  questions  based  on the whole 
syllabus. It is worth approximately 55 marks.
Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus in depth. The range 
of syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC.  Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
Paper 1
Students  are not permitted  access  to any calculator.  Questions  will mainly  involve  analytic  approaches  to 
solutions,  rather  than  requiring  the use of a GDC.  The paper  is not intended  to require  complicated 
calculations,  with  the potential  for careless  errors.  However,  questions  will include  some  arithmetical 
manipulations when they are essential to the development of the question.
Paper 2
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all questions will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC. Regulations covering the types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment 
procedures .
Paper 3
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all question parts will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC. Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school to download a copy from IBIS or the Programme Resource Centre and to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers  1, 2 and  3, full marks  are not necessarily  awarded  for a correct  answer  with  no working.  Answers 
must  be supported  by working  and/or  explanations  (in the form  of, for example  diagrams,  graphs  or 
calculations).  Where  an answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  that 
this is shown by written working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• Students are not permitted access to any calculator on this paper.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing 30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 55 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
This  section  consists  of a small  number  of compulsory  extended-response  questions  based  on the whole 
syllabus. It is worth approximately 55 marks.
Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
The intention  of this section  is to assess  students  across  the breadth  of the syllabus  in depth.  The range  of 
syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing 30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 55 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
This  section  consists  of a small  number  of compulsory  extended-response  questions  based  on the whole 
syllabus. It is worth approximately 55 marks.
Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus in depth. The range 
of syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC.  Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
Paper 1
Students  are not permitted  access  to any calculator.  Questions  will mainly  involve  analytic  approaches  to 
solutions,  rather  than  requiring  the use of a GDC.  The paper  is not intended  to require  complicated 
calculations,  with  the potential  for careless  errors.  However,  questions  will include  some  arithmetical 
manipulations when they are essential to the development of the question.
Paper 2
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all questions will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC. Regulations covering the types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment 
procedures .
Paper 3
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all question parts will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC. Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school to download a copy from IBIS or the Programme Resource Centre and to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers  1, 2 and  3, full marks  are not necessarily  awarded  for a correct  answer  with  no working.  Answers 
must  be supported  by working  and/or  explanations  (in the form  of, for example  diagrams,  graphs  or 
calculations).  Where  an answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  that 
this is shown by written working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• Students are not permitted access to any calculator on this paper.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing 30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 55 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
This  section  consists  of a small  number  of compulsory  extended-response  questions  based  on the whole 
syllabus. It is worth approximately 55 marks.
Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
The intention  of this section  is to assess  students  across  the breadth  of the syllabus  in depth.  The range  of 
syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing 30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 55 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
This  section  consists  of a small  number  of compulsory  extended-response  questions  based  on the whole 
syllabus. It is worth approximately 55 marks.
Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus in depth. The range 
of syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC.  Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
Paper 1
Students  are not permitted  access  to any calculator.  Questions  will mainly  involve  analytic  approaches  to 
solutions,  rather  than  requiring  the use of a GDC.  The paper  is not intended  to require  complicated 
calculations,  with  the potential  for careless  errors.  However,  questions  will include  some  arithmetical 
manipulations when they are essential to the development of the question.
Paper 2
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all questions will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC. Regulations covering the types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment 
procedures .
Paper 3
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all question parts will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC. Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school to download a copy from IBIS or the Programme Resource Centre and to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers  1, 2 and  3, full marks  are not necessarily  awarded  for a correct  answer  with  no working.  Answers 
must  be supported  by working  and/or  explanations  (in the form  of, for example  diagrams,  graphs  or 
calculations).  Where  an answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  that 
this is shown by written working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• Students are not permitted access to any calculator on this paper.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing 30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 55 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
This  section  consists  of a small  number  of compulsory  extended-response  questions  based  on the whole 
syllabus. It is worth approximately 55 marks.
Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
The intention  of this section  is to assess  students  across  the breadth  of the syllabus  in depth.  The range  of 
syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing 30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 55 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
This  section  consists  of a small  number  of compulsory  extended-response  questions  based  on the whole 
syllabus. It is worth approximately 55 marks.
Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus in depth. The range 
of syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC.  Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
Paper 1
Students  are not permitted  access  to any calculator.  Questions  will mainly  involve  analytic  approaches  to 
solutions,  rather  than  requiring  the use of a GDC.  The paper  is not intended  to require  complicated 
calculations,  with  the potential  for careless  errors.  However,  questions  will include  some  arithmetical 
manipulations when they are essential to the development of the question.
Paper 2
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all questions will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC. Regulations covering the types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment 
procedures .
Paper 3
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all question parts will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC. Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school to download a copy from IBIS or the Programme Resource Centre and to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers  1, 2 and  3, full marks  are not necessarily  awarded  for a correct  answer  with  no working.  Answers 
must  be supported  by working  and/or  explanations  (in the form  of, for example  diagrams,  graphs  or 
calculations).  Where  an answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  that 
this is shown by written working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• Students are not permitted access to any calculator on this paper.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing 30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 55 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
This  section  consists  of a small  number  of compulsory  extended-response  questions  based  on the whole 
syllabus. It is worth approximately 55 marks.
Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
The intention  of this section  is to assess  students  across  the breadth  of the syllabus  in depth.  The range  of 
syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing 30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 55 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
This  section  consists  of a small  number  of compulsory  extended-response  questions  based  on the whole 
syllabus. It is worth approximately 55 marks.
Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus in depth. The range 
of syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC.  Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
Paper 1
Students  are not permitted  access  to any calculator.  Questions  will mainly  involve  analytic  approaches  to 
solutions,  rather  than  requiring  the use of a GDC.  The paper  is not intended  to require  complicated 
calculations,  with  the potential  for careless  errors.  However,  questions  will include  some  arithmetical 
manipulations when they are essential to the development of the question.
Paper 2
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all questions will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC. Regulations covering the types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment 
procedures .
Paper 3
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all question parts will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC. Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school to download a copy from IBIS or the Programme Resource Centre and to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers  1, 2 and  3, full marks  are not necessarily  awarded  for a correct  answer  with  no working.  Answers 
must  be supported  by working  and/or  explanations  (in the form  of, for example  diagrams,  graphs  or 
calculations).  Where  an answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  that 
this is shown by written working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• Students are not permitted access to any calculator on this paper.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing 30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 55 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
This  section  consists  of a small  number  of compulsory  extended-response  questions  based  on the whole 
syllabus. It is worth approximately 55 marks.
Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
The intention  of this section  is to assess  students  across  the breadth  of the syllabus  in depth.  The range  of 
syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing 30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 55 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
This  section  consists  of a small  number  of compulsory  extended-response  questions  based  on the whole 
syllabus. It is worth approximately 55 marks.
Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus in depth. The range 
of syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC.  Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
Paper 1
Students  are not permitted  access  to any calculator.  Questions  will mainly  involve  analytic  approaches  to 
solutions,  rather  than  requiring  the use of a GDC.  The paper  is not intended  to require  complicated 
calculations,  with  the potential  for careless  errors.  However,  questions  will include  some  arithmetical 
manipulations when they are essential to the development of the question.
Paper 2
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all questions will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC. Regulations covering the types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment 
procedures .
Paper 3
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all question parts will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC. Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school to download a copy from IBIS or the Programme Resource Centre and to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers  1, 2 and  3, full marks  are not necessarily  awarded  for a correct  answer  with  no working.  Answers 
must  be supported  by working  and/or  explanations  (in the form  of, for example  diagrams,  graphs  or 
calculations).  Where  an answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  that 
this is shown by written working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• Students are not permitted access to any calculator on this paper.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing 30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 55 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
This  section  consists  of a small  number  of compulsory  extended-response  questions  based  on the whole 
syllabus. It is worth approximately 55 marks.
Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
The intention  of this section  is to assess  students  across  the breadth  of the syllabus  in depth.  The range  of 
syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing 30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 55 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
This  section  consists  of a small  number  of compulsory  extended-response  questions  based  on the whole 
syllabus. It is worth approximately 55 marks.
Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus in depth. The range 
of syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC.  Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
Paper 1
Students  are not permitted  access  to any calculator.  Questions  will mainly  involve  analytic  approaches  to 
solutions,  rather  than  requiring  the use of a GDC.  The paper  is not intended  to require  complicated 
calculations,  with  the potential  for careless  errors.  However,  questions  will include  some  arithmetical 
manipulations when they are essential to the development of the question.
Paper 2
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all questions will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC. Regulations covering the types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment 
procedures .
Paper 3
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all question parts will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC. Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school to download a copy from IBIS or the Programme Resource Centre and to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers  1, 2 and  3, full marks  are not necessarily  awarded  for a correct  answer  with  no working.  Answers 
must  be supported  by working  and/or  explanations  (in the form  of, for example  diagrams,  graphs  or 
calculations).  Where  an answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  that 
this is shown by written working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• Students are not permitted access to any calculator on this paper.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing 30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 55 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
This  section  consists  of a small  number  of compulsory  extended-response  questions  based  on the whole 
syllabus. It is worth approximately 55 marks.
Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
The intention  of this section  is to assess  students  across  the breadth  of the syllabus  in depth.  The range  of 
syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing 30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 55 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
This  section  consists  of a small  number  of compulsory  extended-response  questions  based  on the whole 
syllabus. It is worth approximately 55 marks.
Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus in depth. The range 
of syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC.  Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
Paper 1
Students  are not permitted  access  to any calculator.  Questions  will mainly  involve  analytic  approaches  to 
solutions,  rather  than  requiring  the use of a GDC.  The paper  is not intended  to require  complicated 
calculations,  with  the potential  for careless  errors.  However,  questions  will include  some  arithmetical 
manipulations when they are essential to the development of the question.
Paper 2
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all questions will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC. Regulations covering the types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment 
procedures .
Paper 3
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all question parts will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC. Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school to download a copy from IBIS or the Programme Resource Centre and to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers  1, 2 and  3, full marks  are not necessarily  awarded  for a correct  answer  with  no working.  Answers 
must  be supported  by working  and/or  explanations  (in the form  of, for example  diagrams,  graphs  or 
calculations).  Where  an answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  that 
this is shown by written working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• Students are not permitted access to any calculator on this paper.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing 30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 55 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
This  section  consists  of a small  number  of compulsory  extended-response  questions  based  on the whole 
syllabus. It is worth approximately 55 marks.
Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
The intention  of this section  is to assess  students  across  the breadth  of the syllabus  in depth.  The range  of 
syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing 30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 55 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
This  section  consists  of a small  number  of compulsory  extended-response  questions  based  on the whole 
syllabus. It is worth approximately 55 marks.
Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus in depth. The range 
of syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC.  Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
Paper 1
Students  are not permitted  access  to any calculator.  Questions  will mainly  involve  analytic  approaches  to 
solutions,  rather  than  requiring  the use of a GDC.  The paper  is not intended  to require  complicated 
calculations,  with  the potential  for careless  errors.  However,  questions  will include  some  arithmetical 
manipulations when they are essential to the development of the question.
Paper 2
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all questions will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC. Regulations covering the types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment 
procedures .
Paper 3
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all question parts will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC. Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school to download a copy from IBIS or the Programme Resource Centre and to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers  1, 2 and  3, full marks  are not necessarily  awarded  for a correct  answer  with  no working.  Answers 
must  be supported  by working  and/or  explanations  (in the form  of, for example  diagrams,  graphs  or 
calculations).  Where  an answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  that 
this is shown by written working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• Students are not permitted access to any calculator on this paper.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing 30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 55 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
This  section  consists  of a small  number  of compulsory  extended-response  questions  based  on the whole 
syllabus. It is worth approximately 55 marks.
Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
The intention  of this section  is to assess  students  across  the breadth  of the syllabus  in depth.  The range  of 
syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing 30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 55 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
This  section  consists  of a small  number  of compulsory  extended-response  questions  based  on the whole 
syllabus. It is worth approximately 55 marks.
Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus in depth. The range 
of syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC.  Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
Paper 1
Students  are not permitted  access  to any calculator.  Questions  will mainly  involve  analytic  approaches  to 
solutions,  rather  than  requiring  the use of a GDC.  The paper  is not intended  to require  complicated 
calculations,  with  the potential  for careless  errors.  However,  questions  will include  some  arithmetical 
manipulations when they are essential to the development of the question.
Paper 2
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all questions will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC. Regulations covering the types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment 
procedures .
Paper 3
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all question parts will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC. Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school to download a copy from IBIS or the Programme Resource Centre and to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers  1, 2 and  3, full marks  are not necessarily  awarded  for a correct  answer  with  no working.  Answers 
must  be supported  by working  and/or  explanations  (in the form  of, for example  diagrams,  graphs  or 
calculations).  Where  an answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  that 
this is shown by written working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• Students are not permitted access to any calculator on this paper.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing 30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 55 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
This  section  consists  of a small  number  of compulsory  extended-response  questions  based  on the whole 
syllabus. It is worth approximately 55 marks.
Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
The intention  of this section  is to assess  students  across  the breadth  of the syllabus  in depth.  The range  of 
syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing 30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 55 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
This  section  consists  of a small  number  of compulsory  extended-response  questions  based  on the whole 
syllabus. It is worth approximately 55 marks.
Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus in depth. The range 
of syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on sustained reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC.  Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
Paper 1
Students  are not permitted  access  to any calculator.  Questions  will mainly  involve  analytic  approaches  to 
solutions,  rather  than  requiring  the use of a GDC.  The paper  is not intended  to require  complicated 
calculations,  with  the potential  for careless  errors.  However,  questions  will include  some  arithmetical 
manipulations when they are essential to the development of the question.
Paper 2
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all questions will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC. Regulations covering the types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment 
procedures .
Paper 3
Students must have access to a GDC at all times. However, not all question parts will necessarily require the 
use of the GDC. Regulations  covering  the types  of GDC  allowed  are provided  in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school to download a copy from IBIS or the Programme Resource Centre and to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers  1, 2 and  3, full marks  are not necessarily  awarded  for a correct  answer  with  no working.  Answers 
must  be supported  by working  and/or  explanations  (in the form  of, for example  diagrams,  graphs  or 
calculations).  Where  an answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  that 
this is shown by written working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of section A, short-response questions, and section B, extended-response 
questions.
• Students are not permitted access to any calculator on this paper.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing 30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Section A
• This section consists of compulsory short-response questions based on the whole syllabus. It is worth 
approximately 55 marks.
• The intention of this section is to assess students across the breadth of the syllabus. However, it should 
not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Question type
• A small number of steps are needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Section B
This  section  consists  of a small  number  of compulsory  extended-response  questions  based  on the whole 
syllabus. It is worth approximately 55 marks.
Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
The intention  of this section  is to assess  students  across  the breadth  of the syllabus  in depth.  The range  of 
syllabus topics tested in this section may be narrower than that tested in section A.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions will develop a single theme.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of

Internal assessment criteria

Assessment in the Diploma Programme
Assessment outline—SL
Assessment outline—HL
External assessment
Internal assessment