Geography guide
First examinations 2019Geography guide
First examinations 2019
Published February 2017
Published by
International Baccalaureate Organization
15 Route des Morillons
1218 Le Grand-Saconnex
Geneva, Switzerland
Represented by
IB Publishing Ltd, Churchillplein 6, The Hague, 2517JW The Netherlands
© International Baccalaureate Organization 2017
The International Baccalaureate Organization (known as the IB) offers four high-quality 
and challenging educational programmes for a worldwide community of schools, aiming 
to create a better, more peaceful world. This publication is one of a range of materials 
produced to support these programmes.
The IB may use a variety of sources in its work and checks information to verify accuracy 
and authenticity, particularly when using community-based knowledge sources such as 
Wikipedia. The IB respects the principles of intellectual property and makes strenuous 
efforts to identify and obtain permission before publication from rights holders of all 
copyright material used. The IB is grateful for permissions received for material used 
in this publication and will be pleased to correct any errors or omissions at the earliest 
opportunity.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior written permission 
of the IB, or as expressly permitted by law or by the IB’s own rules and policy. See  
www.ibo.org/copyright.
IB merchandise and publications can be purchased through the IB store at  
store.ibo.org.
Email: sales@ibo.orgDiploma Programme
Geography guide
International Baccalaureate , Baccalauréat International  and Bachillerato Internacional  
are registered trademarks of the International Baccalaureate Organization.IB mission statement
The International Baccalaureate aims to develop inquiring, knowledgeable and caring young people who 
help to create a better and more peaceful world through intercultural understanding and respect.
To this end the organization works with schools, governments and international organizations to develop 
challenging programmes of international education and rigorous assessment.
These programmes encourage students across the world to become active, compassionate and lifelong 
learners who understand that other people, with their differences, can also be right.Geography guide           1 Introduction  
Purpose of this document  
This publication is intended to guide the planning, teaching and assessment of the subject in schools. Subject 
teachers are the primary audience, although it is expected that teachers will use the guide to inform students and parents about the subject.  
This guide can be found on the subject page of the online curriculum centre (OCC) at occ.ibo.org, a password- protected IB website designed to support IB teachers. It can also be purchased from the IB store 
at store.ibo.org. 
Additional resources  
Additional publications such as specimen papers, teacher support materials, subject reports and grade descriptors can also be found on the OCC. Past examination papers as well as markschemes can be purchased from the IB store.  
Teachers are encouraged to check the OCC for additional resources created or used by other teachers. Teachers can provide details of useful resources, for example: websites, books, videos, journals or teaching 
ideas.  
Acknowledgment  
The IB wishes to thank the educators and associated schools for generously contributing time and resources 
to the production of this guide.  
First assessment 2019  Geography guide 2 The Diploma Programme  
The Diploma Programme is a rigorous pre- university course of study designed for students in the 16 to 19 
age range. It is a broad- based two- year course that aims to encourage students to be knowledgeable and 
inqui ring, but also caring and compassionate. There is a strong emphasis on encouraging students to develop 
intercultural understanding, open- mindedness, and the attitudes necessary for them to respect and evaluate 
a range of points of view.  
The Diploma Programme model  
The course is presented as six academic areas enclosing a central core (see figure 1). It encourages the 
concurrent study of a broad range of academic areas. Students study : two modern languages (or a modern 
language and a classical language) ; a humanities or social science subject ; an experimental  science ; 
mathematics ; and one of the creative arts. It is this comprehensive range of subjects that makes the Diploma 
Programme a demanding course of study designed to prepare students effectively for university entrance. In each of the academic areas students have flexibility in making their choices, which means they can choose subjects that particularly interest them and that they may wish to study further at university.  
Figure 1  
The Diploma Programme model  
Geography guide           3 Choosing the right combination  
Students are required to choose one subject from each of the six academic areas, although they can, instead 
of an arts subject, choose two subjects from another area.  Normally, three subjects (and not more than four) 
are taken at higher level (HL), and the others are taken at standard level (SL). The IB recommends 240 
teaching hours for HL subjects and 150 hours for SL. Subjects at HL are studied in greater depth and breadth 
than at SL.  
At both levels, many skills are developed, especially those of critical thinking and analysis. At the end of the 
course, students’ abilities are measured by means of external assessment. Many subjects contain some 
element of c oursework assessed by teachers.  
The core of the Diploma Progra mme model  
All Diploma Programme students participate in the three course elements that make up the core of the model.  
Theory of knowledge (TOK) is a course that is fundamentally about critical thinking and inquiry into the 
process of knowing rather than about learning a specific body of knowledge. The TOK course examines the 
nature of knowledge and how we know what we claim to know. It does this by encouraging students to analyse knowledge claims and explore questions about the construction of knowledge. The task of TOK is to emphasize connections between areas of shared knowledge and link them to personal knowledge in such a way that an individual becomes more aware of his or her own perspectives and how they might differ from others.  
Creativity, activity, service (CAS) is at the heart of the Diploma Programme. The emphasis in CAS is on helping students to develop their own identities, in accordance with the ethical principles embodied in the IB mission statement and the IB learner profile. It involves students in a range of activities alongside their 
academic studies throughout the Diploma Programme. The three strands of CAS are creativity (arts, and 
other experiences that involve creative thinking), activity (physical exertion contributing to a healthy lifestyle) and service (an unpaid and voluntary exchange that has a learning benefit for the student). Possibly, more than any other component in the Diploma Programme, CAS contributes to the IB’s mission to create a better and more peaceful world through intercultural understanding and respect.  
The extended essay, including the world studies  extended essay, offers the opportunity for IB students to 
investigate a topic of special interest, in the form of a 4,000- word piece of independent research. The area 
of research undertaken is chosen from one of the students’ six Diploma Programme subjects, or in the case 
of the interdisciplinary w orld studies essay , two subjects, and acquaints them with the independent research 
and writing skills expected at university. This leads to a major piece of formally presented, structured writing, in which ideas and findings are communicated in a reasoned and coherent manner, appropriate to the subject 
or subjects chosen. It is intended to promote high- level research and writing sk ills, intellectual discovery and 
creativity. An authentic learning experience, it provides students with an opportunity to engage in personal 
research on a topic of choice, under the guidance of a supervisor.  
Approaches to teaching and approaches to 
learning 
Approaches to teaching and learning across the Diploma Programme refers to deliberate strategies, skills 
and attitudes that  permeate the teaching and learning environment. These approaches and tools, intrinsically 
linked with the learner profile attributes, enhance student learning and assist student preparation for the 
Diploma Programme assessment and beyond. The aims of approaches to teaching and learning in the 
Diploma Programme are to:  
• empower teachers as teachers of learners as well as teachers of c ontent  
• empower teachers to create clearer strategies for facilitating learning experiences in which students are 
more meaningfully engaged in structured inquiry and greater critical and creative thinking Geography guide 4 • p romote both the aims of individual subjects (making them more than course aspirations) and linking
previously isolated knowledge (concurrency of learning)
• e ncourage students to develop an explicit  variety of skills that will equip them to continue to be actively
engaged in learning after they leave school, and to help them not only obtain university admission
through better grades but also prepare for success during tertiary education and beyond
• e nhance further the coherence and relevance of the students’ Diploma Programme experience
• a llow schools to ident ify the distinctive nature of an IB Diploma Programme education, with its blend of
idealism and practicality .
The five approaches to learning (developing thinking skills, social skills, communication skills, self -
management skills and research skills) along with the six approaches to teaching (teaching that is inquiry -
based, conceptually focused, contextuali zed, collaborative, differentiated and informed by assessment) 
encompass the key values and principles that underpin IB pedagogy.  
The IB mission statement and the IB learner 
profile 
The Diploma Programme aims to develop in students the knowledge, skills and attitudes they will need to 
fulfill the aims of the IB, as expressed in the organization’s mission statement and the learner profile. Teaching and learning in the Diploma Programme represent the reality in daily practice of the organization’s educational philosophy.  
Academic honesty  
Academic honesty in the Diploma Programme is a set of values and behaviours informed by the attributes of the learner profile. In teaching, learning and assessment, academic honesty serves to promote personal integrity, engender respect for the integrity of others and their work, and ensure that all students have an 
equal opportunity to demonstrate the knowledge and skills they acquire during their studies.  
All coursework —including work submitted for assessment —is to be authentic, based on the student’s 
individual and original ideas with the ideas and work of others fully acknowledged. Assessment tasks that 
require teachers to provide guidance to students or that require students to work collaboratively must be 
completed in full compliance with the detailed guidelines provided by the IB for the relevant subjects.  
For further information on academic honesty in the IB and the Diploma Programme, please consult the IB publications Academic honesty
 in the IB educational context, The Diploma Programme: From principles into 
practice and General regulations: Diploma Programme. Specific information regarding academic honesty as 
it pertains to external and internal assessment components of this Diploma Programme subject can be found in this guide.  
Acknowledging the ideas or work of another 
person 
Coordinators and teachers are reminded that candidates must acknowledge all sources used in work 
submitted for assessment. The following is intended as a clarification of this requirement.  
Diploma Programme candidates submit work for assessment in a variety of media that may include audio-visual material, text, graphs, images and/or data published in print or electronic sources. If a candidate uses the work or ideas of another person, the candidate must acknowledge the source using a standard style of referencing in a consistent manner.  A candidate’s failure to acknowledge a source will be investigated by the 
IB as a potential breach of regulations that may result in a penalty imposed by the IB final award committee.  Geography guide           5 The IB does not prescribe which style(s) of referencing or in- text citation should be used by candidates; this 
is left to the discretion of appropriate faculty/staff in the candidate’s school. The wide range of subjects, 
different  response languages and the diversity of referencing styles make it impractical and restrictive t o 
insist on particular styles. In practice, certain styles may prove most commonly used, but schools are free to 
choose a style that is appropriate for the subject concerned and the language in which candidates’ work is 
written. Regardless of the reference style adopted by the school for a given subject, it is expected that the 
minimum information given includes: name of author, date of publication, title of source, and page numbers as applicable.  
Candidates are expected to use a standard style and use it c onsistently so that credit is given to all sources 
used, including sources that have been paraphrased or summarized. When writing text candidates must clearly distinguish between their words and those of others by the use of quotation marks (or other method, such as indentation) followed by an appropriate citation that denotes an entry in the bibliography. If an electronic source is cited, the date of access must be indicated. Candidates are not expected to show faultless expertise in referencing, but are expected to demonstrate that all sources have been acknowledged. Candidates must be advised that audio- visual material, text, graphs, images and/or data published in print 
or in electronic sources that is not their own must also attribute the source.  Again,  an appropriate style of 
referencing/citation must be used.  
Learning diversity and learning support 
requirements  
Schools must ensure that equal access arrangements and reasonable adjustments are provided to 
candidates with learning support requirements that are in line with the IB documents Candidates with assessment access requirements and Learning diversity and inclusion in IB programmes . Geography guide           6 Nature of the subject  
Geography 
“Geography is the only subject that has given me the skills to interpret and 
understand reality in a way I could not imagine before and that will remain for life.”  
A student at the British School of Rio de Janeiro (2013)  
Geography is a dynamic subject that is firmly grounded in the real world and focuses on the interactions 
between individuals, societies and physical processes in both time and space. It seeks to identify trends and 
patterns in these interactions. It also investigates the way in which people adapt and respond to change, and 
evaluates actual and possible management strategies associated with such change. Geography describes 
and helps to explain the similarities and differences between different places. These may be defined on a variety of scales and from the perspectives of a different range of actors , with varying powers over decision -
making processes.  
Within individuals and s ocieties subject s, geography is distinctive in its spatial dimension and occupies a 
middle ground between social or human  sciences and natural sciences. The Diploma Programme geography 
course integrates physical, environmental  and human geography, and ensures that students acquire 
elements of both socio -economic and scientific methodologies. Geography takes advantage of its position to 
examine relevant concepts and ideas from a wide variety of disciplines. This helps students develop life skills 
and have an appreciation of, and a respect for, alternative approaches, viewpoints and ideas.  
Distinction between SL and HL  
Students at SL and HL in geography are presented with a syllabus that has optional geographic themes and 
a common SL and HL core. HL students also study the HL core extension. The syllabus requires the 
development of certain skills, attributes and knowledge as described in  the assessment objectives, which are 
externally assessed. Although the skills and activity of studying geography are common to both SL and HL students, HL student s are required to acquire a further body of knowledge, to demonstrate critical evaluation 
and to further synthesize the concepts in the HL extension.  
In summary:  
• SL students study two optional themes; HL students study three optional themes, providing further 
breadth.  
• Both SL and HL students study the core geographic perspectives —global change.  
• HL students study the HL extension geographic perspectives —global interactions, and further examine, 
evaluate and synthesize the prescribed concepts, which by their nature are complex, contestable, interlinked and require holistic treatment. This provides fu rther depth at HL.  
• Both SL and HL students complete a fieldwork study for the internal assessment . 
Geography and the core  
Geography and theory of knowledge  
The relationship between each subject and theory of knowledge (TOK)  is important and fundamental to the 
Diploma Programme. Having followed a course of study in individuals and soci eties, students should be able 
to reflect  critically on the various processes of knowing and methods used in human sciences, helping them 
to become “inquiring, knowledgeable and caring young people” (IB mission statement).  Geography guide           7 Many of the subjects that fall within the i ndividuals and s ocieties subject group in the D iploma Programme  
are often known collectively as the “human sciences” or “social scien ces”. The human sciences are one of 
the eight areas of knowledge at the centre of the TOK course, with the others being mathematics, the natural 
sciences, the human sciences, the arts, history, ethics, religious knowledge system s, and indigenous 
knowledge systems . In TOK, students also explore the question of how we know what we claim to know by 
examining different ways of knowing, which are specified in the TOK course as language, sense perception, emotion, reason, imagination, faith, intuition, and memory . 
As with other disciplines in the human sciences, t here are a variety of ways of gaining knowledge in 
geography —for example, archival evidence, data collection, experimentation, observation, and inductive and 
deductive reasoning. Geography students also e xplore and think critically about the interactions between 
people and their environment in time and place. All of these elements can be used to help explain patterns 
of behaviour and contribute to an examination of how we know what we claim to know.  
During the Diploma Programme geography course, a number of opportunities will  arise that can be used to 
highlight the relationship and common goals between TOK and geography. Some of the knowledge questions 
and claims that might be considered during the geography course are identified below.  
• Who decides how we classify knowledge? Why might it be useful to classify knowledge? 
• To what extent are the methods of the human sciences scientific?  
• How is statistical data used differently in different areas of knowledge? 
• How reliable are the methods available for gathering demographic data on hundreds of millions of 
people? 
• How has ready access to vast amounts of information, and the way in which the internet has contributed to our shrinking world, changed our understanding of knowledge? 
• Does language simply describe knowledge, or is it part of the knowledge itself?  
• To what extent do maps reflect reality? What are the hidden messages in maps and the stories behind 
the way maps are presented? 
• Some geographical topics, such as  climate change, are controversial. How does the scientific method 
attempt to address them? Are such topics always within the scope of the scientific method? 
• What scientific or social factors might influence the study of a complex phenomenon such as global  
warming? 
• On what basis might we decide between the judgments of experts if they disagree with each other? 
• Arguably, while some aspects of geography can be measured, others cannot. To what extent does 
knowledge need to be quantifiable?  
• Many geographers and others value diversity in human affairs. Does globali zation increase 
opportunities to share knowledge or does it diminish diversity? 
• What roles do emotion and reason play in individuals’ lifestyle choices?  
• To what extent might possession of knowledge carr y with it moral obligations?  
More information for teachers on TOK can be found in the Theory of knowledge guide. 
Geography and creativity, activity, service  
Creativity, activity, service (CAS)  experiences can be associated with each of the subject groups of the 
Diploma Programme. CAS and geography can complement each other in a number of ways ; identifying 
trends and patterns between individuals, societies and processes and how these may manifes t in local, 
regional or global issues  may give students ideas for CAS experiences.  Geography guide           8 An important characteristic of the geography course is that students examine spatial interactions, possibilities 
and change in a contextual way. Due to the interconnectednes s of our contemporary world, many global 
challenges may present themselves in students’ local or otherwise significant communities as inspiring springboards for CAS experiences. As a result of the knowledge and understanding students develop about 
issues t hrough a geographic lens, they might be able to investigate, plan, act, reflect on and demonstrate 
CAS experiences in a more informed and meaningful way. Similarly, CAS experiences can ignite students’ 
passion s for addressing a particular global matter.  
The challenge and enjoyment of CAS experiences can often have a profound effect on geography students, 
who might choose, for example, to engage with CAS in the following ways . 
• Plan, participate and implement an activity to help educate selected members of a community about 
the United Nations’  (UN)  Sustainable Development Goals regarding habitation and inequality, with 
virtual reality screenings that increase awareness of the reality of refugee migration.  
• Take lessons in  surfing, or another physical pursuit, while completing internal assessment fieldwork. 
This could be accomplished as a single experience or through a series of sessions, or by encouraging 
others to participate in —or perhaps extend—the experience by creating a community environmental 
group.  
• Explo re perspectives on regional access to employment, demonstrating an ongoing interest through 
the mediums of storytelling and craftivism that advocate awareness of a particular gender ’s position.  
A CAS experience can be a single event or may be an extended series of events. However , CAS experiences 
must be distinct from and may not be included or used in the student’s Diploma course requirements.  
Additional suggestions on the links between Diploma Programme subjects and CAS can be found in the 
Creativity, a ctivity, service teacher support material . 
Geography and the extended essay  or world studies extended essay  
An extended essay  in geography is not an extension of the internal assessment task for the subject . Students 
must ensure that they understand the clear distinction between the internal assessment  and the extended 
essay . While  there is inevitably an overlap in the skills being developed, there are clear distinctions between 
the tasks and a different emphasis in terms of the sources and types of data used.  
An extended essay in geography provides the student with an opportunity to apply a range of geographic skills to complete an independent and in- depth research investigation using geographic concepts, 
methodologies, theories, and sources with a clear spatial emphasis . 
It is important that the topic of the essay is geographic and gives a clear indication of the nature of the 
research. The essay topic may relate to an area of the Diploma Programme geography c ourse, but this is 
not a requirement and other areas of the wider subject may be explored.  
The scope of the essay should not be too broad, as such essays are rarely successful. The research question should be single and focused, clearly stated and must be framed in question form. It is the task of the 
supervisor to ensure that the research question is relevant to the subject, leads the student along a path that 
utilizes appropriate geographic sources, and encourages the application of relevant subject concepts, theories or ideas.  
It is important that the geographic and theoretical context is well established early in the essay. Investigations 
carried out at a local scale usually meet the expectations of the higher bands of the markscheme. This narrow focus d iscourages an over -reliance on published materials and encourages original research. It is rare for an 
essay that is based entirely on published texts to score highly. Investigations conducted in a location that is familiar and accessible to the student have a much greater chance of achieving success through more personal involvement, which in turn encourages greater in- depth research.  
The geographic context in which the research is being conducted should be clearly outlined, usually with the aid of one or more annotated maps and, where relevant, photographs and/or satellite images.  
  Geography guide           9 The extended essay should focus on individual research and avoid approaches involving group fieldwork 
data collection. Although there may be some similarities in approach to the geography internal assessment, the extended essay should not place so strong an emphasis on primary field data collection and processing. Many successful research topics are based on published data such as census or weather records. The 
emphasis should t herefore be more on written analysis, interpretation, discussion, critical evaluation and the 
development of a coherent, reasoned argument than on the techniques of data collection and processing.  
A descriptive or narrative approach should be avoided. Information on the methodology of the investigation 
is essential, as is the collection of high- quality data and information. It is vital that the investigation is tailored 
closely to the research question and shows evidence of careful planning.  
Appropriate res ources for an extended essay in geography could include both primary and secondary data 
and/or quantitative and qualitative information, obtained from  books, newspapers and magazines ; interviews ; 
questionnaires ; the internet ; maps ; aerial photographs and s atellite images ; digital landscape simulations ; 
videos;  geographic information systems ( GIS); diagrams and models. Geographical data should be analy sed 
using appropriate quantitative, statistical, graphical or qualitative techniques , and the findings should be 
critically evaluated.  
Indication of the possible range of topics, research questions and approaches that can be considered can be 
found in the Extended essay guide in the section “Geography: Subject -specific guidance” . 
Geography and international -mindedness  
The geography course conceptually and contextually embodies international and global awareness in several 
distinctive approaches. It examines key world issues, such as the nexus of sustainable environmental, 
societal and economic development, and climate change. It considers examples and case studies at a variety 
of scales, from local to regio nal, national, international and global.  Throughout the course, teachers have 
considerable flexibility in their choice of examples and case studies  as content in order  to ensure that Diploma 
Programme geography is a highly appropriate way to meet the needs of all students, regardless of their 
geographical location. Inherent to the syllabus is a consideration of different perspectives, economic 
circumstances and social and cultural diversity.  
Geography seeks to develop international understanding and foster a concern for global issues as well as to raise students’ awareness of their own responsibility at a local level. Geography also aims to develop values and attitudes that will help students reach a degree of personal commitment in trying to resolve these issues, appreciating our shared responsibility as citizens of an increasingly interconnected and ever shrinking world.  
Engaging with sensi tive topics 
The optional themes, the core SL and HL themes, and the HL extension cover areas of knowledge that are often affected by personal bias and value judgments. It is important that teachers are aware of this and ensure that students are not only pr esented with the facts but are taught the analytical skills to allow accurate 
interpretation and evaluation of these contemporary themes.  
Prior learning  
The geography course requires no specific prior learning. No particular background in terms of specific  
subjects studied for national or international qualifications is expected or required. The skills needed for the geography course are developed within the context of the course itself.  
Links to the Middle Years Programme  
Geography is often offered explici tly as one of the disciplines within the individuals and societies subject 
group of the IB Middle Years Programme (MYP). Regardless of whether the learner takes geography or 
another discipline within MYP individuals and societies, the course provides a str ong foundation for students 
who go on to study D iploma Programme  geography.  Geography guide           10 Like the D iploma Programme  geography course, MYP individuals and societies is a concept -driven 
curriculum aimed at helping the learner to develop broader and deeper levels of under standing and critical 
and creative thinking. MYP individuals and societies courses are framed by four prescribed key concepts:  
• change 
• global i nteractions  
• time, p lace and s pace  
• systems . 
These broad, enduring and powerful ideas are used as lenses to give breadth to learning in each unit of 
study, and to enable students to transfer knowledge across disciplines. The related concepts in any MYP 
individuals and societies course add depth to learning in terms of facilitating more subject -specific 
understanding. Diploma Programme geography adopts a similar concept -based approach, using the four 
key concepts  of place, process, power and possibility to underpin the entire course, alongside other 
organizing and topic -specific specialist concepts that provide depth to the understanding of the different 
geographic inquiries (see Figure 3).  
Inquiry -based learning is central to individuals and societies courses in both the MYP and the D iploma 
Programme , providing students with opportunities to independently and collaboratively investigate and 
analyse relevant issues. As inquiry develops curiosity and promotes active critical and creative thinking, it is 
important to emphasi ze that pedagogically, a D iploma Programme geography learning environment should 
be very similar in nature to the MYP experience.  
MYP individuals and societies students are required to practi se and develop their investigation skills, one of 
the MYP four assessment objectives, giving an i mportant foundation for the internal assessment component 
of the D iploma Programme geography course. The MYP assessment objective of thinking critically also 
corresponds to the higher order assessment objectives of evaluation and synthesis that are expected from a 
Diploma P rogramme  geography student.  
Across the MYP , there are 16 key concepts with the four highlighted below as the focus for MYP individuals 
and societies.  
The key concepts across the MYP subjects  
Aesthetics  Form  Systems  Communities  
Connections  Creativity  Culture  Development  
Change  Relationships  Identity  Time, place and space  
Perspective  Global interactions  Communication  Logic  
Links to the Career -related Programme  
In the IB Career -related Programme (CP), students study at least two Diploma Programme subjects, a core 
consisting of four components and a career -related study , which is determined by the local context and 
aligned with student needs. The CP has been designed to add value to the student’s career -related studies. 
This provi des the context for the choice of D iploma Programme courses.  Courses can be chosen from any 
group of the D iploma Programme . It is also possible to study more than one course from the same group (for 
example, visual arts and film).  
Geography may be a benefi cial choice for CP students considering careers in, for example, the environmental 
and resource sphere, health care, tourism industries, the technology industry, social informatics, urban 
planning or international engagement. Geography helps students to understand the interconnectedness of 
environments, economies and societies in the contemporary world, and to engage with similarity and diversity 
in human development. Students explore different places at different scales , from local to global, leading to 
a greater understanding of the physical and human world around them . Geography guide           11 Geography encourages the development of strong written, verbal, and visual or graphical communication 
skills; critical and complex thinking; and ethical considerations that will assist students in preparing for the future global workplace. This in turn fosters the IB learner profile attributes that are transferable to the entire 
CP, providing relevance and support for the student’s learning.  
For the CP students , Diploma Programme  courses can  be studied at SL or HL. Schools can explore 
opportunities to integrate CP students with D iploma P rogramme students.  Geography guide           12 Aims 
Individuals and societies  aims 
The aims of all subjects in the  individuals and societies  subject group are to:  
1. encourage the systematic and critical study of: human experience and behaviour; physical, 
economic and social environments; the history and development of social and cultural institutions  
2. develop in the student the capacity to identify, to analyse critical ly and to evaluate theories, concepts 
and arguments about the nature and activities of the individual and society  
3. enable the student to collect, describe and analyse data used in studies of society, to test hypotheses and interpret complex data and source material  
4. promote the appreciation of the way in which learning is relevant to both the culture in which the student lives, and the culture of other societies  
5. develop an awareness in the student that human attitudes and opinions are widely diverse and that a study of society requires an appreciation of such diversity  
6. enable the student to recognize that the content and methodologies of the subjects in the individuals 
and societies group are contestable and that their study requires the toleration of uncertai nty. 
Geography aims  
The aims of the geography course at SL and HL are to enable students to:  
1. develop an understanding of the dynamic interrelationships between people, places, spaces and the environment at different scales  
2. develop a critical awareness and consider complex ity thinking in the context of the nexus of 
geographic issues , including:  
– acquiring an in- depth understanding of how geographic issues , or wicked problems , have been 
shaped by powerful human and physical processes  
– synthesiz ing diverse geographic knowledge in order to form viewpoints about how these issues 
could be resolved 
3. understand and evaluate the need for planning and sustainable development through t he 
management of resources at varying scales . Geography guide           13 Assessment  objectives  
There are four assessment objectives  (AOs) for the SL and HL Diploma Programme geography course.  
Having followed the course at SL or HL, students will be expected to do the following.  
1. Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of specified content  
– Demonstrate knowl edge and understanding of the core theme—global change 
– Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of two optional themes at SL and three optional 
themes at  HL 
– At HL only, demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the HL extension—global interactions  
– In inter nal assessment, demonstrate knowledge and understanding of a specific geographic 
research topic  
2. Demonstrate application and analysis of knowledge and understanding 
– Apply and analyse geographic concepts and theories  
– Identify and interpret geographic patterns and processes in unfamiliar information, data and cartographic material  
– Demonstrate the extent to which theories and concepts are recognized and understood in particular contexts  
3. Demonstrate synthesis and evaluation 
– Examine and evaluate geographic  concepts, theories and perceptions  
– Use geographic concepts and examples to formulate and present an argument  
– Evaluate materials using methodology appropriate for geographic fieldwork  
– At HL only, demonstrate synthesis and evaluation of the HL extension—global interactions  
4. Select, use and apply a variety of appropriate skills and techniques  
– Select, use and apply the prescribed geographic skills in appropriate contexts  
– Produce well -structured written material, using appropriate terminology  
– Select, use and app ly techniques and skills appropriate to a geographic research question  Geography guide           14 Assessment objectives in practice 
Command terms are classified according to the assessment objectives of:  
• AO1 Knowledge and understanding of specified content  
• AO2 Application and analys is of knowledge and understanding 
• AO3 Synthesis and evaluation 
• AO4 Selection, use and application of a variety of appropriate skills and techniques.  
Although command terms are not used explicitly in the syllabus, students must be familiar with them to 
understand the depth of treatment required in examination questions. The allocation of marks in examination question markbands also reflects this classification of the assessment objectives.  
There is a progression in demand from AO1 to AO3, while AO4 terms are specific to particular skills and 
examination questions. Definitions of these command terms are listed in the appendix. The command terms within each classification are listed in alphabetical order in the following table  
Objective  Key command term  Depth  
AO1 Knowledge and 
understanding of specified content  Classify  
Define  
Describe  
Determine 
Estimate Identify  
Outline State These terms require students 
to demonstrate knowledge and 
understanding.  
AO2 Application and 
analysis of knowledge and understanding  Analyse  
Distinguish  
Explain  
Suggest  These terms require students 
to use and analyse knowledge and understanding.  
AO3 Synthesis and 
evaluation  Compare  
Compare and contrast  
Contrast  
Discuss  
Evaluate 
Examine Justify  
To what extent? These terms require students 
to make a judgment based on 
evidence and when relevant 
construct an argument.  Geography guide           15 Objective  Key command term  Depth  
AO4 Selection, use and 
application of a variety of 
appropriate skills and 
techniques  Annotate  
Construct  
Draw  
Label  These terms require students 
to demonstrate the selection 
and application of skills.  Geography guide           16 A conceptual and contextual approach to the geography 
course 
The opportunity to have concepts in the foreground of the curriculum topics and the focus for geographic 
inquiry allow  for more  discussion, application of thinking skills, and transparent assessments. Students are 
required to discuss or evaluate in a way that shows conceptual insight  into the context of the expected 
knowledge and understanding. The application of geographic skills  allow for the synthesis of knowledge and 
ideas , and bring understanding of concepts and context s together through the study of specified or 
appropriate content.  
 
Figure 2  
A conceptual and contextual approach to D iploma P rogramme geography  
 
 
Geography con cepts 
The “Geography concept s” model  (Figure 3)  shows  the six main concepts of the course, with the four key 
concepts of place, process, power, and possibility at the centre and the organi zing concepts of scale and 
spatial interactions  connecting them. Scale has both te mporal and spatial perspectives . 
Places can be identified at a variety of scales, from local territories or locations to the national or state level. 
Places can be compared according to their cultural or physical  diversity, or disparities in wealth or resource 
endowment. The characteristics of a place may be real or perceived, and spatial interactions between 
places can be considered.  
Geography guide           17 Processes are human or physical mechanisms of change,  such as migration or weather ing. They operate 
on varying timescales . Linear  systems, circular systems , and complex systems  are all outcome s of the way 
in which processes operate and interact . 
Power  is the ability to influence and affect change or equilibrium  at different scales . Power is  vested in 
citizens,  governments, institutions and other players, and in physical processes in the natural world. Equity 
and security , both environmental and economic , can be gained or lost as a result of the interaction of powerful 
forces.  
Possibilities are the alternative events, futures and outcomes that geographers can model, project or predict 
with varying degrees of certainty.  Key contemporary  questions include the degree to which human and 
environmental systems are sustainable and resilient, and can adapt or change. 
Figure 3  
Geography concepts  
 
Geography guide           18 The IB learner profile 
The geography syllabus is closely linked to the IB learner profile, which strives to develop internationally 
minded people who recognize their common humanity and shared guardianship of  the planet, and who help 
create a better and more peaceful world. By following the geography syllabus, students will have fulfilled the attributes of the IB learner profile. For example, the requirements of the internal assessment provide 
opportunities for students to develop every aspect of the profile.  
For each attribute of the learner profile, a number of examples selected from the skills and content of the 
geography syllabus are given below.  
Learner profile attribute  Geography syllabus  
Inquirers  Apply ing geographic skills by acting upon a geographic inquiry topic or 
sub-topic and c ollect ing and select ing relevant geographic data, 
including the use of GIS. 
Knowledgeable  Studying the c ontent, especially the interdisciplinary aspects, of  the 
optional themes, the SL/HL core theme, and the HL extension.  
Thinkers  Applying g eographic skills, including r esearch ing, process ing and 
interpret ing data and information, and the subsequent synthesis and 
evaluation of their knowledge and understanding. This may be expanded by systems thinking and approaches to complexity science.  
Communicators  Using geographic skills, such as producing and presenting material , 
including ess ays, reports and case studies or investigations , to fellow 
students. This may i nclude making links to TOK, or communicating 
information graphically —such as through infographics . 
Principled  Applying geographic skills to research, process and interpret data and 
information. In cases where sensitive topics are being dealt with, student s can make and justify decisions by identifying op inions, values 
and perceptions . 
Open -minded  Using geographic skills to e valuate sources of geographic information in 
terms of reliabilit y, bias, relevance and accuracy.  
Caring  Considering content from the  syllabus such as those elements related to 
sustainability and acting on CAS opportunities —especially those related 
to aspects of the UN Sustainable Development Goals.  
Risk-takers  Considering their g eographic skills  in making and justifying decisions.  
Balanced  Collecting p rimary data in fieldwork and the subsequent treatment, 
display and analysis of the information.  
Reflective  Using geographic skills to evaluate methodology, develop clear logical 
arguments and draw conclusions where appropriate. Geography guide           19 Geographic skills  
Geographic skills are essential to the study of geography and reflect the subject’s distinctive methodology 
and approach. Teaching and learning these skills enriches the students’ understanding of geography and 
enables them to apply and use appropriate techniques and terminology. It is essential that the skills should 
be covered throughout the whole  syllabus and that they are introduced and integrated where appropriate, 
depending on the context, in the different themes and the SL/HL core and HL extension. It is essential that 
the skills should be all taught at some stage of the course and are not treated in isolation.  
Students are expected to demonstrate competence in the use of geographic skills in examination papers and internal assessment as appropriate. Those skills indicated below in italics are not  assessed in the externally 
assessed examination papers.  
It is recognized that the ability to us e GIS as a tool is a valuable geographic skill that goes beyond many of 
those listed below. Where GIS is accessible and practical, its use is encouraged.  
Skill Examples  
Locate and differentiate elements of 
the Earth’s surface  Using:  
• direction  
• latitude  
• longitude  
• grid references and area references  
• scale  
• political units.  
Interpret, analyse and, when 
appropriate, construct tables, graphs, 
diagrams, cartographic material and images  All kinds of maps, including:  
o isoline and isopleth maps  
o choropleth maps  
o topological maps  
o dot maps  
o flow maps  
o thematic maps (including mental maps)  
o topographic maps  
• proportional symbols  
• aerial photographs  
• ground- level photographs  
• satellite images  
• graphs, including scatter, line, bar, compound, triangular, logarithmic, bipolar graphs  
• pie charts  
• flow diagrams/charts  
• population pyramids  Geography guide           20 Skill Examples  
• Lorenz curves  
• cross- profiles (sections)  
• rose diagrams  
• development diamonds.  
Undertake statistical calculations to 
show patterns and summarize 
information Such as:  
• totals  
• averages (means, medians, modes)  
• frequencies  
• ranges of data (differences between maximum and minimum)  
• densities  
• percentages  
• ratios.  
Research, process and interpret data 
and information Types of data and information:  
• measures of correlation (including Spearman rank and c hi-squared)  
• measures of concentration and dispersion (including nearest neighbour and location quotients)  
• measures of spatial interactions  
• measures of diversity  
• indices and ratios (including Gini coefficient, ecological footprint, Human Development Index  (HDI), dependency ratio)  
• textual information 
• observations  
• opinions, values and perceptions.  
Processing and interpreting:  
• classify data and information 
• analyse data and information 
• describe patterns, trends and relationships  
• make generalizations and identify anomalies  
• make inferences and predictions  
• make and justify decisions  
• draw conclusions  
• evaluate methodology.  Geography guide           21 Skill Examples  
Collect and select relevant 
geographic information Making:  
• observations , including field sketches and sketch 
maps  
• images.  
Conducting:  
• interviews.  
Taking:  
• measurements.  
Evaluate sources of geographic 
information In terms of:  
• accuracy  
• relevance 
• bias.  
Produce written material (including 
essays, reports and investigations)  Presenting:  
• material in a clear and well -structured way.  
Responding:  
• appropriately to c ommand terms.  Geography guide           22 Further guidance  
Use of case studies and examples 
The recommended teaching approach throughout the course is to focus on the concepts and to use case 
studies and examples, or detailed examples, to illustrate content and to contextualize these concepts (see 
Figure 2).  
A case study is located, detailed and used for discussion or a discursive approach. Ideally, case studies 
selected should be recent; that is, they should have occurred within the student’s lifetime and should not be historica l. For example, using the destruction of Pompeii as an example of volcanic destruction is not 
recommended. If the case studies used are very old, it is likely that they will not offer as much scope for answers as more recent ones. This is because current r esearch and reporting generally produce far more 
data than previous records.  
If case studies are required in a response, this will be stated in the question and students are advised, above all, to match the case study to the demands of the question. However, wherever possible, students are encouraged to develop their extended responses using case studies or detailed examples.  
When examples are used, students should not just provide one- word responses but should offer some 
development. An example is a senten ce or two that enriches an answer; it may include a specific location, 
an amount, or a date, all showing a greater depth of knowledge and understanding. An examination answer may include reference to many different examples to illustrate or support the res ponse.  
Advice on the number of case studies or detailed examples to be studied is given, where appropriate, in the sections of the guide devoted to the optional themes, the SL/HL core theme, and the HL extension.  
Geographic models and theories  
Students can study models to illustrate concepts relevant to particular topics, but examination questions will not require students to have prior knowledge of any specific model or theory.  
Primary and secondary information  
Primary information is material and data coll ected in the field through measurement and observation. It can 
include both qualitative and quantitative information. Secondary information is information that has already been compiled in written, statistical or mapped forms. It can include, for example, material from sources such 
as United Nations  (UN) agencies, non- governmental organizations  (NGOs), government publications, 
statistical yearbooks, telephone directories, censuses or the internet.  
Topics for extended essays in geography  
Almost all areas of the syllabus lend themselves to deeper analysis and investigation in an extended essay. 
Many topics offer a wide range of opportunities for extended essays, although care may be needed to ensure 
that the research question is not too broad to be satisfactor ily answered within the word limit. Also, it is 
important to note that there is a requirement to focus on a narrow area of research in depth, and that an 
extended essay must have a spatial component.  
The global nature of the topics in the core themes means  that they are not always suitable for extended 
essays. However, it should be possible to investigate the underlying concepts in extended essays, provided 
the area of research is at a local scale . As data collection in the field is not required for extended essays, the 
research questions can be more broadly based than those used for fieldwork and can rely on information derived from sources other than direct fieldwork.  Geography guide           23 The online curriculum centre  
All teachers of the geography course are strongly encouraged to access the OCC at regular intervals. The 
OCC is a website on which all teachers can post inquiries, present examples of good practice, ask for advice 
and access exemplar materials. The content of the geography forum on the OCC is provided by geography 
teachers for geography teachers. The website also includes updates on resources and frequently asked 
questions, as well as the subject report following each examination or assessment session.  
 Geography guide           24 Syllabus 
Syllabus outline  
 Diploma Programme 
geography —SL and HL 
curriculum (first teaching 
September 2017)  SL 
teaching 
hours  SL assessment 
(first 
assessment 
May 2019 ) HL 
teaching 
hours  HL 
assessment 
(first 
assessment 
May 2019 ) 
Part one Geographic themes —seven 
options  
Two options are studied at 
SL, and three at HL  
• Freshwater —drainage 
basins  
• Oceans and coastal margins  
• Extreme environments  
• Geophysical hazards  
• Leisure, tourism  and sport  
• Food and health 
• Urban environments  60 hours  Paper 1 
SL weight 35%  
45 minutes per option question  
Total 1 hour 30  
minutes  
Each option has 
a structured question and one extended 
answer question 
from a choice of two. 
20 (10 + 10) marks per option 
 
Total 40 marks  90 hours  Paper 1  
HL weight 35%  
45 minutes per option question  
Total 2 hours 
15 minutes  
Each option 
has a 
structured question and 
one extended 
answer question from a 
choice of two.  
20 (10 + 10) marks per 
option 
Total 60 marks  Geography guide           25  Diploma Programme 
geography —SL and HL 
curriculum (first teaching 
September 2017)  SL 
teaching 
hours  SL assessment 
(first 
assessment 
May 2019 ) HL 
teaching 
hours  HL 
assessment 
(first 
assessment 
May 2019 ) 
Part two SL and HL core 
Geographic perspectives —
global change  
• Population distribution—
changing population  
• Global climate—vulnerability and resilience  
• Global resource 
consumption and security  70 hours  Paper 2  
SL weight 40%  
Total 1 hour 15 
minutes  
Paper 2 Section A  
Three structured questions, based on each SL/HL core unit  
30 marks  
Paper 2 Section B  
Infographic or visual stimulus, with structured questions  
10 marks  
Paper 2 Section C  
One extended 
answer question from a choice of two 
10 marks  
Total 50 marks  70 hours  Paper 2  
HL weight 25%  
Total 1 hour 15 
minutes  
Paper 2 Section A  
Three structured questions, based on each 
SL/HL core unit  
30 marks  
Paper 2 Section B  
Infographic or 
visual stimulus, with structured questions  
10 marks  
Paper 2 Section C  
One extended 
answer question from a 
choice of two  
10 marks  
Total 50 marks  
Part two HL 
core 
extension  HL only  
Geographic perspectives —
global interactions  
• Power, places  and 
networks  
• Human development and 
diversity  
• Global risks and 
resilience    60 hours  Paper 3  
HL weight 20%  
Total 1 hour  
Choice of three 
extended 
answer 
questions, with 
two parts, 
based on each 
HL core unit  
28 marks  
Part A —12 
marks  
Part B —16 
marks  
 
Total examination time   2 hours  45 
minutes   4 hours 30 
mins  Geography guide           26  Diploma Programme 
geography —SL and HL 
curriculum (first teaching 
September 2017)  SL 
teaching 
hours  SL assessment 
(first 
assessment 
May 2019 ) HL 
teaching 
hours  HL 
assessment 
(first 
assessment 
May 2019 ) 
Internal 
assessment  SL and HL  
Fieldwork 
Fieldwork , leading to one 
written report based on a 
fieldwork question, information 
collection and analysis  with 
evaluation 20 hours  Internal 
assessment  
SL weight 25%  
Fieldwork 
ques tion to be 
based on any suitable topic from the syllabus  
Total 25 marks  20 hours  Internal 
assessment  
HL weight  20%  
Fieldwork question to be based on any suitable topic from the syllabus  
Total 25 marks  
Total teaching hours  150 hours   240 hours   Geography guide           27 Approaches to the teaching and learning of geography  
The recommended teaching time is 150 hours at SL, and 240 hours at HL. The syllabus is designed to allow 
sufficient time for in- depth analysis, evaluation and consolidation of learning.  
Teachers are encouraged to find ways of delivering the course that are most relevant to their students’ 
interests and to the school’s resources. The overall aim of the course is to give students a deeper 
understanding of the nature and scope of geography. The different parts of the course should complement 
each other and the geographic skills must be integrated throughout the course.  
While  specific physical or human oriented options are not mandatory , it is strongly advised that teachers in 
different int ernational settings consider any national education system requirements , and progress to higher 
education, in the choices made.  
Structure of the  syllabus 
Each option or unit topic is structured to emphasise the conceptual focus of the geographic inquiry, with 
details relating to the prescribed geographic knowledge and understanding.  
The order of the content is not an indication of how the optional themes, the SL/HL core theme, and the HL extension are to be delivered. Since many topics and sub- topics are i nterrelated, teachers are encouraged 
to adopt a holistic approach to teaching. For example, a single case study may serve to cover several topics or sub- topics.  
Only topics and details in the syllabus will be selected for assessment in the examination papers, although references from the introductory sections of the optional themes, the SL/HL core theme, and the HL extension 
may occasionally be used to set the context for examination questions.  Definitions and a classification of the 
command terms are publi shed in this guide.  
The “Geographic skills ” section lists the skills required in the course that enable students to apply the 
techniques of geography and use appropriate terminology. It is essential that the skills be  covered throughout 
the whole syllabus (at both SL and HL), that they are delivered through the content and context of the optional 
themes (the SL/HL core theme and HL extension, as appropriate), and that they are fully integrated into teaching as opposed to being treated individually. Students  are expected to demonstrate competence in the 
use of these skills in both external assessment examination papers and internal assessment, as and when 
appropriate.  
Reference may be made to topographic maps in any examination question and all students must be familiar 
with them. They are especially relevant to such themes as, for example, “Freshwater ”, “Oceans and coastal 
margins” and “Urban environments”.  Geography guide           28 Syllabus content—Part one: Geographic themes  
Option A: Freshwater  
This optional theme encompasses the physical geography of freshwater in a systems framework, including 
core elements of hydrology (and the factors and processes that give rise to bankfull discharge and flooding) 
and fluvial geomorphology (including river process and landform study).  
It also covers the study of water on the land as a scarce resource requiring careful management, including freshwater bodies such as lakes and aquifers. This includes the ways in which humans respond to the challenges of managing the quantity and quality of freshwater, as well as the consequences (whether intended or unintended, positive or negative) of management within drainage basins.  
The importance of integrated planning is emphasi zed, in addition to the geopolitical consequences of growing 
pressures on internationally  shared water resources.  
Through study of this optional theme, students will develop their understanding of processes, places, power 
and geographical possibilities. They will additionally gain understanding of other concepts including systems  
(the hydrological cycle), flood mitigation  (attempts to tackle flooding) and water security . 
Details  
Geographic 
inquiry  Geographic knowledge and understand ing 
1. Drainage basin hydrology and geomorphology  
Suggested teaching time 6 –8 hours  
How physical 
processes 
influence 
drainage basin systems and landforms  The drainage basin as an open system with inputs (precipitation of varying type and 
intensity), outputs (evaporation and transpiration), flows (infiltration, throughflow,  
overland flow and base flow) and stores (including vegetation, soil, aquifers and the cryosphere)  
River discharge and its relationship to stream flow, channel charac teristics and 
hydraulic radius  
River processes of erosion, transportation and deposition and spatial and temporal 
factors influencing their operation, including channel characteristics and seasonality  
The formation of typical river landforms, including waterfalls, floodplains, meanders, levees and deltas  
2. Flooding and flood mitigation  
Suggested teaching time 6– 8 hours  
How physical 
and human 
factors 
exacerbate and mitigate 
flood risk for 
different 
places Hydrograph characteristics (lag time, peak discharge, base flow) and natural 
influences on hydrographs, including geology and seasonality  
How urbanization, deforestation and channel modifications affect flood risk within a 
drainage basin, including its distribution, frequency and magnitude 
Attempts at flood prediction, including changes in weather forecasting and uncertainty 
in climate model ling 
Flood mitigation, including structural measures (dams, afforestation, channel modification and levee strengthening) and planning (personal insurance and flood 
preparation, and flood warning technology)  
• Two contrasting detailed examples of flood mitigation of drainage basins  Geography guide           29 Geographic 
inquiry  Geographic knowledge and understand ing 
3. Wate r scarcity and water quality  
Suggested teaching time 6– 8 hours  
The varying 
power  of 
different actors 
in relation to water management issues  Physical and economic water scarcity, and the factors that control these including the 
causes and impacts of droughts ; the distinction between water quantity and water 
quality  
Environmental consequences of agricultural activities on water quality, to include pollution (eutrophication) and irrigation (salinization)  
• Detailed examples to il lustrate the role of different stakeholders  
Growing human pressures on lakes and aquifers, including economic growth and 
population migration 
Internationally shared water resources as a source of conflict  
• Case study of one internationally shared water resource and the role of different 
stakeholders in attempting to find a resolution  
4. Water management futures  
Suggested teaching time 6– 8 hours  
Future 
possibilities 
for 
management intervention in drainage basins  The importance of strengthening participation  of local communities to improve water 
management in different economic development contexts, including sustainable water use and efficiency, and ensuring access to clean, safe and affordable water  
Increased dam building for multipurpose water schemes, and their costs and benefits  
• Case study of contemporary dam building expansion in one major drainage 
basin  
The growing importance of integrated drainage basin management (IDBM) plans, and the costs and benefits they bring 
• Case study of one recent IDBM plan 
Growing pressures on major wetlands and efforts to protect them, such as the Ramsar 
Convention  
• Case study of the future possibilities for one wetland area 
Synthesis (Sy), Evaluation (Ev) and Skills (Sk) opportunities  
These 
suggestions aim to synthesi ze the 
learning 
throughout the 
unit. How natural processes or human interference in one part of a drainage basin may 
bring spatial interactions with other parts/places [ Sy] 
How water management actions take place at personal to global scales [Sy/Ev ]  
Different perspectives on the costs and benefits of water management strategies [ Ev] 
How water cycling and water system flows can be represented graphically [ Sk] 
 
  Geography guide           30 Option B: Oceans and coastal margins  
Covering more than  70% of the Earth’s surface, oceans are of great importance to humans in a number of 
ways. This optional theme provides an introduction to the physical characteristics and processes of the 
oceans with particular reference to the atmosphere– ocean linkage concentrating on the important role that 
oceans play in influencing climatic conditions. Issues arising from the oceans as resource bases are also considered and possible way s in which escalating geographic  challenges might be dealt with.  
The dual emphasis of the two sections on coastal margins is their physical geography and management. The 
former deals with processes and landforms. The latter is concerned with the way coastal land and margins 
are valued and used, and by whom. Where appropriate, the coastal margins of inland seas may be studied 
in addition to or instead of ocean margins.  
Through study of this optional theme, students will develop their understanding of processes, places, power and geographical possibilities. They will additionally gain understanding of more speciali zed concepts 
including systems (oceanic conveyor belts and coastal landform systems), territories (exclusive economic 
zones) and the global c ommons . 
Details  
Geographic 
inquiry  Geograph ic knowledge and understanding  
1. Ocean –atmosphere interactions  
Suggested teaching time 6– 8 hours  
How physical 
processes link 
Earth’s 
atmospheric and 
ocean systems  The operation of ocean currents, including their distribution, nutrient and energy 
transfers and the importance of oceanic conveyor belts  
Atmosphere– oceanic interactions associated with El Ni ño–Southern Oscillation 
(ENSO ) and La Niña cycles and their climatic, environmental and economic effects  
• Detailed examples of the geographic impacts of El Niño and La Niña 
The formation, distribution and physical impacts of hurricanes on coastal margins, 
including storm surges  
• Case study of one hurricane and its impacts on coastal places and people  
The changing role of oceans as a store and source of carbon dioxide (CO 2) and the 
impacts of ocean acidification on coral reefs  
2. Interactions between oceans and coastal places  
Suggested teaching time 6-8 hours   
How coastal 
places are 
shaped by their 
interactions with oceans  Physical influences on coastal landscapes, including waves, tides, sediment supply, 
lithology, vegetation, subaerial processes and wave processes (littoral drift, hydraulic action and abrasion)  
The characteristics and formation of coastal landforms of eros ion and deposition, 
including wave cut platform, cliff, stack, spit and beaches  
Advancing and retreating coastlines, including the role of isostatic and eustatic processes, and the associated landforms (relic t cliff, raised beach, fjord)  
The role of coasta l processes, wind and vegetation in sand dune development  
3. Managing coastal margins  
Suggested teaching time 6–8 hours  Geography guide           31 Geographic 
inquiry  Geograph ic knowledge and understanding  
The varying 
power  of different 
stakeholders in 
relati on to coastal 
margin 
management  Coastal erosion and flooding management strategies, including cliff line stabili zation 
and managed retreat  
• One coastal management case study focused on the decision- making process 
and perspectives of different actors  
Conflicting land- use pressures on coastlines, including commercial land uses 
(tourism, industry and housi ng) and conservation measures  
• One case study to illustrate the roles of, and out comes for, coastal 
stakeholders  
Management of coral reefs and mangrove swamps, including different stakeholder perspectives on their use and v alue 
• Detailed examples of both ecosystems and their issues  
Sovereignty rights of nations in relation to territorial limits along coastal margins and 
exclusive economic zones (EEZs)  
4. Ocean management futures  
Suggested teaching time 6–8 hours  
Future 
possibilities for 
managing the 
oceans as a global c ommons  Causes and consequences of increasing demand for the abiotic resources of 
oceans, i ncluding minerals, oil and gas  
Trends in biotic resource use (fish and mammals) and the viability of alternatives t o 
overfishing, including aquaculture, conservation areas and quotas  
Strengths and weaknesses of initiatives to manage ocean pollution, including local and global strategies for radioactive materials, oil and plastic waste  
The strategic value of oceans and sources of international conflict/insecurity, 
including the contested ownership and control of island, canals and transit choke points  
• One contemporary geopolitical case study focusing on a contested ocean 
area 
Synthesis (Sy), Evaluation (Ev) and Skills ( Sk) opportunities  
These 
suggestions can be integrated into 
the study of the 
above. No 
additional 
teaching time is 
required. How changes in one part of an ocean or coastal margin may bring spatial 
interactions with other parts/places [Sy] 
How ocean exploitation and management take place at varying scales [Sy/Ev]  
Varying perspectives on the costs, benefits and effectiveness of management  [Ev] 
How ocean and atmospheric systems, and their interactions, can be represented 
graphically [Sk] 
 
  Geography guide           32 Option C: Extreme environments  
This optional theme considers two different kinds of extreme, terrestrial environment s: 
• cold and high- altitude environments (polar, glacial areas, periglacial areas, high mountains in non- polar  
latitudes)  
• hot, arid environments (hot deserts and semi -arid areas) . 
These environments are relatively inaccessible and tend to be viewed as inhospitable to human habitation. 
Despite this, they provide numerous opportunities for settlement and economic activity. This theme examines 
the essential landscape characteristics of the two kinds of extreme environment s, together with the natural 
processes operating in them; the way in which people have responded to the opportunities they offer, how 
they have adapted to extremes of weather and climate , and the challenges these environments pose for 
management and sustainability.  
Through study of this optional theme, students will develop their understanding of processes, places, power and geographical possibilities. They will additionally gain understanding of more speciali zed concepts 
including glacial systems, risk and adaptation (in relation to climate change) and resource nationalism  
(in relation to land ownership).  
Details  
Geographic inquiry  Geographic knowledge an d understanding  
1. The characteristics  of extreme environments  
Suggested teaching time 6–8 hours  
Why some places  
are considered to be extreme environments
 Global -scale distribution of cold and high altitude environments (polar, glacial 
areas, periglacial areas, high mountains in non- polar places) and hot arid 
environments (hot deserts and semi -arid areas)  
Relief and climatic characteristics that make environments extreme, including 
unreliability and intensity of rainfall in arid environments and the risk of flash 
floods  
How relief, climate, human discomfort, inaccessibility, and remoteness present challenges for human habitation and resource development  
• Detailed examples for illustrative purposes  
The changing distribution of extreme environments over time, including the advance and retreat of glaciers and natural desertification  
2. Physical processes and landscapes  
Suggested teaching time 6–8 hours  
How physical 
processes create 
unique landscapes 
in extreme 
environments  Glacial processes of erosion, transport and deposition, and landscape features in 
glaciated areas, including cirques/corries, lakes, pyramidal peaks/horns, arêtes, 
glacial troughs; lateral, medial and terminal moraine and erratics  
Periglacial processes of freeze- thaw, solifluction and frost heave, and periglacial 
landscape features, including permafrost, thermokarst, patterned ground and pingos  
Physical and chemical weathering in hot arid environments, and erosion, transportation and deposition by wind and water  
Hot, arid landscape features, including dunes, wadis, rock pedestals, mesas and 
buttes  
3. Managing extreme environments  
Suggested teaching time 6–8 hours  Geography guide           33 Geographic inquiry  Geographic knowledge an d understanding  
The varying power  
of different 
stakeholders to extract economic 
value from extreme 
environments
 Agricultural opportunit ies and challenges in arid areas, including the distinction 
between aridity and infertility, irrigation access, salinization risk and land 
ownership 
Human and physical opportunities and challenges for mineral extraction in cold 
environments, including inaccessibility, permafrost and resource nationalism  
• Case study of one cold environment to illustrate the issues  
Human and physical opportunities and challenges for mineral extraction in arid 
environments, including inaccessibility and climatic and politic al factors  
• Case study of one arid environment to illustrate the issues  
Opportunities and challenges for tourism in extreme environments  
• Detailed examples illustrating the involvement of local and global 
stakeholders  
4. Extreme environments futures  
Suggested teaching time 6–8 hours  
Future possibilities  
for managing 
extreme 
environments and 
their communities  The causes, acceleration, consequences and management of desertification, 
including land use, conflict and climate change 
• One case study illustrating the human and physical  dimensions of 
desertification  
Increasing competition for access to resources in extreme environments, including the role of indigenous groups, civil society organizations, transnational 
corporations ( TNCs ) and militia gr oups  
• One case study to highl ight the issues  
New technology and sustainable development in extreme environments, including greater use of solar power and desalination  
The impacts and management of global climate change in extreme environments, including ada ptation by local populations  
Synthesis (Sy), Evaluation (Ev) and Skills (Sk) opportunities  
These suggestions 
can be integrated into the study of the above. No additional 
teaching time is 
required.  How places and people in extreme environments are affected by spatial 
interactions with other places and people [ Sy] 
The varying spatial scale of the processes and challenges associated with 
different kinds of extreme environment [ Sy/Ev ]  
Varying perspecti ves on how and why extreme environments are managed [ Ev] 
How glacial systems and climatic data are best represented graphically [ Sk] 
 
  Geography guide           34 Option D: Geophysical hazards  
This optional theme focuses on geophysical hazard events. This includes internal earth processes, such as 
earthquakes  and volcanic activity. It also encompasses mass movements such as landslides, rockslides, 
debris or mud flows. The theme also includes human impacts and responses. Case studies of contrasting 
geophysical hazard events need to be undertaken (“contrasting” can be interpreted as severity of impacts 
and/or locations with different socio- economic realities):  
• two earthquake hazard events of similar magnitudes but with contrasting human impacts  
• two volcanic hazard events in contrasti ng plate boundary locations  
• two mass movement hazard events with contrasting physical characteristics (fast/slow; solid/loose) . 
Through study of this optional theme, students will develop their understanding of processes, places, power 
and geographic possi bilities. They will additionally gain understanding of more speciali zed concepts including 
risk and vulnerability  (both of which vary according to the local context) and also resilience and adaptation  
(in relation to pre- event and post -event disaster management).  
Details  
Geographic inquiry  Geograph ic knowledge and understanding  
1. Geophysical systems  
Suggested teaching time 6–8 hours  
How geological 
processes give rise 
to geophysical 
events of differing 
type and magnitude Mechanisms of plate movement including internal heating, convection currents, 
plumes, subduction and rifting at plate margins  
Characteristics of volcanoes ( shield, composite and cinder)  forme d by varying 
types of volcanic eruption; and associated secondary hazards ( pyroclas tic flows, 
lahars, landslides)  
Characteristics of earthquakes (depth of focus, epicentre and wave types) 
caused by varying types of plate margin movement and human triggers (dam 
building, resource extraction); and associated secondary hazards (tsunami, 
landslides, liquefaction, transverse faults)  
Classification of mass movement types according to cause (physical and human), liquidity, speed of onset, duration, extent and frequency  
2. Geophysical hazard risks  
Suggested teaching time 6–8 hours  
How geophysical 
systems generate hazard risks for 
different places The distribution of geophysical hazards (earthquake s, volcanoes, mass 
movements)  
The relevance of hazard magnitude and frequency/ recurrence for risk 
management  
Geophysical hazard risk as a product of economic factors (levels of development 
and technology), social factors (education, gender), demographic factors (population density and structure) and political factors (governance)  
Geographic factors affecting geophysical hazard event impacts, including rural/urban location, time of day and degree of isolation  
3. Hazard risk and vulnerability  
Suggested teaching time 6–8 hours  Geography guide           35 Geographic inquiry  Geograph ic knowledge and understanding  
The varying power  
of geophysical 
hazards to affect people in different 
local contexts  • Two contemporary contrasting case studies each  for volcanic hazards, 
earthquake hazards and mass movement hazards (see guidance above)  
• For each geophysical hazard type, the case studies should develop 
knowledge and understanding of:  
– geophysical hazard event profiles, including any secondary hazards  
– varied impacts of these hazards on different aspects of human well -
being 
– why levels of vulnerability varied both between and within communities, 
including spatial variations in hazard perception, personal knowledge 
and preparedness  
4. Future resilience and adaptation  
Suggested teaching time 6–8 hours  
Future possibilities  
for lessening human 
vulnerability to 
geophysical hazards  Global geophysical hazard and disaster trends and future projections, including 
event frequency and population growth estimates  
Geophysical hazard adaptation through increased government planning (land 
use zoning) and personal resilience (increased preparedness, use of insurance 
and adoption of new technology)  
Pre-event management strategies for mass movement (to include slope 
stabili zation), earthquakes and tsunami (to include building design, tsunami 
defences), volcanoes (to include GPS crater monitoring and lav a diversions)  
Post-event management strategies (rescue, rehabilitation, reconstruction), to 
include the enhanced use of communications technologies to map hazards/disasters, locate survivors and promote continuing human development  
Synthesis (Sy), Evaluation (Ev) and Skills (Sk) opportunities  
These suggestions 
can be integrated into the study of the above. No additional teaching time is 
required. How hazard risk is a function of spatial interactions  between different human 
and physical processes [Sy] 
The varying spatial scale of the processes and challenges associated with 
different kinds of geophysical event and their aftermaths [Sy/Ev ] 
Different perspectives on how geophysical hazard risks should be managed [Ev] 
How spatial patterns of risk and vulnerability can be represented graphically [Sk] 
 
  Geography guide           36 Option E: Leisure, tourism and sport  
This optional theme focuses on ways in which people in a growing number of global contexts make use of 
their leisure time. As more people join the “ global middle class ”, they have disposable incomes allowing 
participation in tourism, including international travel and different types of sport. Sport can also be an 
important use of leisure time for people on low incomes who cannot afford to participate in tourism.  
While tourism often has an urban focus, rural areas provide another important geographical sett ing for 
touris tic activities, including walking, enjoying wilderness, doing extreme sports or visiting heritage sites. The 
uses made of places var y greatly , depending on physical geography, history and level of economic 
development.  
Through study of this optional theme, students will develop their understanding of processes, places, power 
and geographical possibilities. They will additionally gain understanding of more speciali zed concepts 
including consumption (of landscapes), carrying capacity  and threshold  (in relation to environmental 
stress) and sustainability  (in relation to long- term management of touristic resources).  
Details  
Geographic inquiry  Geograph ic knowledge and understanding  
1. Changing leisure patterns  
Suggested teaching time 6–8 hours  
How human 
development 
processes give rise 
to leisure activities  The growth and changing purpose of leisure time for societies in different 
geographic and developmental contexts  
The categorization of tourist ic activities (cost, duration, destination) and sporting 
activities (cost, popularity, site)  
The link between economic development and participation in leisure activities  
• Detailed examples to illustrate recent changes in participation for two or 
more societi es at contrasting stages of development  
Factors affecting personal participation in sports and tourism, including affluence, 
gender, stage in lifecycle, personality, place of residence  
2. Tourism and sport at the local and national scale  
Suggested teaching time 6–8 hours  
How physical and 
human factors 
shape places into 
sites of leisure  Human and physical factors explaining the growth of rural and urban touris m 
hotspots including the role of primary and secondary tourist ic resources  
Variat ions in sphere of influence for different kinds of sporting and tourist ic 
facility, including neighbourhood parks and gyms, city stadiums and national 
parks  
Factors affecting the geography of a national sports league, including the 
location of its hierarchy of teams and the distribution of supporters  
• Case study of one national sports league 
Large- scale sporting, musical, cultural or religious festivals as temporary sites of 
leisure and their associated costs and benefits  
• Case study of one festival in a rural location, its site factors and geographic 
impacts  
3. Tourism and sport at the international scale  
Suggested teaching time 6–8 hours  Geography guide           37 Geographic inquiry  Geograph ic knowledge and understanding  
The varying power  
of different countries 
to participate in global tourism and 
sport  Niche national tourism strategies with a global sphere of influence, including 
adventure tourism, movie location tourism and heritage tourism  
The role of TNCs in expanding international tourism destinations, including the 
costs and benefits of TNC involvem ent for different stakeholders  
Costs and benefits of tourism as a national development strategy, including econom ic and social/cultural effects  
Political, economic and cultural factors affecting the hosting of international 
sporting events, including Olympics and  footbal l World Cup events  
• Case study of costs and benefits for one country hosting an international 
event  
4. Managing tourism and sport for the future  
Suggested teaching time 6–8 hours  
Future possibilities  
for management of, 
and participation in, 
tourism and sport at 
varying scales  The consequences of unsustainable tourist ic growth in rural and urban tourism 
hotspots, including the concept of carrying capacity and possible management options to increase site resilience 
The concept of sustainable tourism, including the growth of ecotourism  
• One case study of sustainable tourism in one low -income country  
Factors influencing future international tourism, including greater use of social media, international security and diaspora growth 
The growing importance of political and cultural influences on international sport 
participation, including international agreements, inclusion via changing gender roles and the growing importance of the Paralympics  
 Synthesis  (Sy), Evaluation (Ev) and Skills (Sk) opportunities  
These suggestions 
can be integrated 
into the study of the 
above. N o additional 
teaching time is 
required.  How leisure use of a place is influenced by spatial interactions  with other 
places [ Sy] 
People’s freedom and ability to participate in leisure activities is subject to 
multiple influences from personal/local to global scales [Sy/Ev]  
Different perspectives on the costs and benefits of how places are used for 
leisure activities and who is allow ed to participate [ Ev] 
How trends and changes in visitor and impact data can be shown graphically 
[Sk] 
 
  Geography guide           38 Option F: Food and health  
This optional theme looks at the geography of food and health. Economic development is often accompanied 
by dietary change and an epidemiological transition in which diseases of poverty become less common and 
diseases of affluence more common; however,  this transition does not apply equally to all sectors of society.  
Neither food nor health is easy to “measure”, so alternative indicators of food and health are considered. There are many interactions between, and shared influences on, food and health. The role of gender, TNCs 
and national governments in both food and health provision is considered. This topic considers alternative 
ways of assessing agricultural sustainability alongside possibilities for improving food supplies and global 
health over the long term.  
Through study of this optional theme, students will devel op their understanding of processes, places, power 
and geographic al possibilities. They will additionally gain understanding of more speciali zed concepts 
including some, such as diffusion and barriers, which are applicable to both food production systems and 
the spread of diseases. Sustainability  is considered in relation to long- term food production.  
Details  
Geographic inquiry  Geograp hic knowledge and understanding  
1. Measuring food and health  
Suggested teaching time 6–8 hours  
Ways of measuring 
disparities in food 
and health between 
places Global patterns in food/nutrition indicators, including the food security index, the 
hunger i ndex, calories  per person/capita, indicators of malnutrition 
The nutrition transition, and associated regional variations of food consumption and 
nutrition choices  
Global patterns in health indicators, including health- adjusted life expectancy 
(HALE), infant mortality, maternal mortality, access to sanitation and the ratio 
between doctors/physic ians and people 
The epidemiological transition, the diseases continuum (diseases of poverty to 
diseases of affluence), and the implications of a global ageing population for disease burden  
2. Food systems and spread of diseases  
Suggested teaching time 6–8 hours  
How physical and 
human processes 
lead to changes in 
food production and 
consumption, and 
incidence and 
spread of disease  The merits of a systems approach (inputs, stores, transfers, outputs) to compare 
energy efficiency and water footprints in food production, and relative sustainability 
in different places  
The p hysical and human processes that can lead to variations in food consumption 
The importance of diffusion (including adoption/acquisition, expansion, relocation) in 
the spread of agricultural innovations, and also in the spread of diseases, and the 
role of geographic factors (including physical, economic and political barriers) in t he 
rate of diffusion  
Geographic factors contributing to the incidence, diffusion and impacts 
(demographic and socio- economic) of vector -borne and water -borne diseases  
• One detailed example of a vector -borne disease and one detailed example of a 
water -borne disease 
3. Stakeholders in food and health  
Suggested teaching time 6–8 hours  Geography guide           39 Geographic inquiry  Geograp hic knowledge and understanding  
The power  of 
different 
stakeholders in relation to influence 
over diets and health The roles of international organi zations  (such as the World Food Programme , Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, and World Health Organization), 
governments and NGOs in combating food insecurity and disease  
The influence of TNCs (agribusinesses and the media) in s haping food consumption 
habits  
Gender roles related to food and health, including food production/ac quisition and 
disparities in health  
Factors affecting the severity of famine, including governance, the power of the 
media and access to international aid  
• One case study of the issues affecting a famine- stricken country or area  
4. Future health and food security and sustainability  
Suggested teaching time 6–8 hours  
Future  possibilities  
for sustainable agriculture and 
improved heal th Possible solutions to food insecur ity, including waste reduction  
• One case study of att empts to tackle food insecurity  
Advantages and disadvantages of contemporary approaches to food production, 
including genetically modified organisms ( GMOs ), vertical farming and in vitro meat  
The merits of prevention and treatment in managing disease, including social 
marginalization issues, government priorities, means of infection and scientific 
intervention 
Managing pandemics, including the epidemiology of the disease, prior local and 
global awareness, international action and the role of media 
• One case study of a contemporary pandemic and the lessons learned for 
pandemic management in the future 
Synthesis (Sy), Evaluation (Ev) and Skills (Sk) opportunities  
These suggestions 
can be integrated into the study of the above. No additional 
teaching time is 
required. The spatial interaction  between geographies of health and food/nutrition  [Sy] 
Contrasts in the scale of causes and solutions to food and health challenges  [Sy/Ev ] 
Perspectives of stakeholders on the priorities for health care and food security [ Ev] 
How patterns in health and the diffusion of disease can be represented graphically 
[Sk] 
 
  Geography guide           40 Option G: Urban environments  
More than 50 % of the world’s population now lives  in urban environments, with many  living  in megacities. 
This optional theme considers the hierarchy of cities and other urban places as sites of intense social 
interaction and as focal points of production, wealth generation and consumption. They exhibit diversity in 
patterns of wealth and deprivation, which can result in conflict. They may share common characteristics and 
processes irrespective of the national level of economic development.  
Transport improvements have led to rapid growth and shifts in population and economic activities, producing 
stresses and challenges for  urban planners. The theme also considers issues of sustainability , wherein  cities  
need to be managed to minimize harmful social and environmental impacts.  
Through study of this optional theme, students will develop their understanding of processes, places, power 
and geographical possibilities. They will additionally gain understanding of more speciali zed concepts 
including hierarchies (of settlements), systems  (in relation to movements of  people and the management 
of transport and waste flows) and sustainability . 
Details  
Geographic inquiry  Geograph ic knowledge and understanding  
1. The variety of urban environments  
Suggested teaching time 6–8 hours  
The characteristics 
and distribution of 
urban places, 
populations and 
economic activities  Characteristics of urban places, including site, function, land use, hierarchy of 
settlement (including megacities) and growth process (planned or spontaneous)  
Factors affecting the pattern of urban economic activities (retail, commercial, industrial), including physical factors, land values, proximity to a central business district (CBD) and planning  
Factors affecting the pattern of residential areas within urban areas, including 
physical factors, land values, ethnicity and planning  
The incidence of poverty, deprivation and informal activity (housing and industry) 
in urban areas at varying stages of development  
2. Changing urban systems  
Suggested teaching time 6–8 hours  
How economic and 
demographic 
processes bring 
change over time to 
urban systems  Urbani zation, natural increase and centripetal population movements, including 
rural–urban migration in industriali zing cities, and inner city gentrification in post-
industrial cities  
Centrifugal population movements, including suburbanization and counter -
urbanization 
Urban system growth including infrastructure improvements over time, such as 
transport, sanitation, water, waste disposal and telecommunications  
• Case study of infrastructure growth over time in one city  
The causes of urban deindustrialization and its economic, social and demographic consequences  
3. Urban environmental and social stresses  
Suggested teaching time 6–8 hours  Geography guide           41 Geographic inquiry  Geograph ic knowledge and understanding  
The varying power  
of different 
stakeholders in relation to the 
experience of, and 
management of, 
urban stresses  Urban microclimate modification and management, including the urban heat 
island effect, and air pollution patterns and its management  
• Case study of air pollution in one city and its varying impact on people  
Traffic congestion patterns, trends and impacts  
• Case study of one affected city and the management response 
Contested land use changes, including slum clearances, urban redevelopment 
and the depletion of green space 
• Detailed contrasting examples of two affected neighbourhoods and their 
populations  
Managing the impacts of urban social deprivation, including the cycle of 
deprivation and geographic patterns of crime 
4. Building sustainable urban systems for the future  
Suggested teaching time 6–8 hours  
Future possibilities  
for the sustainable management of urban systems  Urban growth projections for 2050, including regional/continental patterns and 
trends of rural –urban migration and changing urban population sizes and 
structures  
Resilient city design, including strategies to manage escalating climatic and geopolitical risks to urban areas  
• Two detailed examples to illustrate possibl e strategies  
Eco city design, including strategies to manage the urban ecological footprint  
• Two detailed examples to illustrate pos sible environmental strategies  
Smart city design and the use of new technology to run city services and systems, including purpose- built settlements and retrofitting technology to older 
settlements  
Synthesis (Sy), Evaluation (Ev) and Skills (Sk) opportunities  
These suggestions 
can be integrated into the study of the above. No additional teaching time is 
required. How urban changes over time are affected by a place’s economic and 
demographic spatial interactions with other places [ Sy] 
Contrasts in the scale of changes and challenges facing different urban areas 
[Sy/Ev ] 
Varying perspectives of different social groups on the costs and benefits of different urban strategies, and priorities for action [ Ev] 
How urban patterns , movements, flows and trends/temporal changes can best 
be represented graphically [ Sk] Geography guide           42 Syllabus content —Part two: SL and HL c ore 
Geographic perspectives —global change 
The core theme provides an overview of the geographic foundation for the key global issues of our time. The 
purpose is to provide a broad factual and conceptual introduction to the geography of population dynamics, 
climate change and resource consumption issues.  
The content is underpinned by the four key concepts of the c ourse: places, power, processes and 
possibilities. Each unit examines issues at different scales from local to global, as well as the interaction 
between different places.  
Attention should be given to the positive aspects of change (not only the negative ones) , to the need to accept 
responsibility for seeking solutions to the demographic, economic and environmental issues —and, where 
appropriate, to the management strategies adopted to meet  the challenges.  
It is not intended for the units to be taught sequentially. The approach to teaching is not prescribed, and the content can be taught with flexibility according to the interests of the learners.  
Each section of a unit is allocated 7– 8 hours of teaching time, which includes time to develop A O3 
(synthesis/evaluation) and AO4 (mapping/graphical) skills.  
Unit 1: Changing population  
Geographic inquiry  Geograph ic knowledge and understanding  
1. Population and economic development patterns  
Suggested teaching time 7–8 hours  
How population 
varies between 
places Physical and human factors affecting p opulation distribution at the global scale  
Global patterns and classification of economic development:  
• low-income countries  
• middle- income countries and emerging economies  
• high-income countries  
Population distribution and economic development at the national  scale , 
including voluntary internal migration, core -periphery patterns  and megacity 
growth  
• Two detailed and contrasting examples of uneven population distribution 
Synthesis, evaluation and skills opportunities  
The relative importance of different influences on where people live and spatial 
interaction s between places at varying scales 
2. Changing populations and places  
Suggested teaching time 7–8 hours  Geography guide           43 Geographic inquiry  Geograph ic knowledge and understanding  
Processes  of 
population change 
and their effect on people and places  Population change and demographic transition over time, including natural 
increase, fertility rate, life expectancy , population structure and dependency 
ratios  
• Detailed examples of two or more contrasting countries  
The consequences of m egacity growth for individuals and societies  
• One case study  of a contemporary megacity experiencing rapid growth  
The causes and consequences of f orced migration and internal displacement  
• Detailed examples of two or more forced movements , to include 
environmental and political push factors , and consequences for people and 
places  
Synthesis, evaluation and skills opportunities  
How the impacts of population change and spatial interactions between places 
can be categorized and represented graphically  
3. Challenges and opportunities  
Suggested teaching time 7– 8 hours  
Population 
possibilities and power  over the 
decision- making 
process  Global and regional/ continental trends in family size, sex ratios, and 
ageing/ greying 
Policies associated with managing population change, focusing on:  
• policies related to ageing societies  
• pro-natalist or anti -natalist policies  
• gender equality policies and anti -trafficking policies  
The demographic dividend and the ways in which population could be considered a resource when contemplating possible futures  
• One case study of a country benefiting from a demographic dividend  
Synthesis, evaluation and skills  opportunities  
How population change may affect  the power balance between groups of people 
at local, national and international scales  
 
  Geography guide           44 Unit 2: Global climate —vulnerability and resilience  
Geographic inquiry  Geograph ic knowledge and understanding  
1. Causes of global climate change  
Suggested teaching time 7– 8 hours  
How natural and 
human processes 
affect the global 
energy balance The a tmospheric system, including  the natural greenhouse effect  and energy 
balance ( incoming shortwave radiation and outgoing longwave radiation)  
Changes in the global energy balance, and the role of feedback loops, resulting from:  
• solar radiation variations , including global dimming due to volcanic 
eruptions  
• terrestrial albedo changes  and feedback loops  
• methane gas release and feedback loops  
The enhanced greenhouse effect and i nternational variations in greenhouse gas 
sources and emissions, in relation to economic development, globalization and 
trade 
Synthesis, evaluation and skills  opportunities  
The complexity of the dynamic climate system and the spatial interactions of 
different processes and feedback mechanisms  
2. Consequences of global climate change  
Suggested teaching time 7– 8 hours  
The effects of global 
climate change on 
places, societies 
and environmental 
systems  Climate change and the hydrosphere , atmosphere and biosphere , including : 
• water stored in ice and oceans, and changing sea levels  
• carbon stored in ice, oceans and the biosphere 
• incidence and severity of extreme weather events, including drought  
• spatial changes in biomes, habitats  and animal migration patterns  
• changes to agricultur e, including crop yields, limits of cultivation , soil 
erosion 
Impacts of climate change on people and places , including health hazards, 
migration and ocean transport routes  
Synthesis, evaluation and skills  opportunities  
The unev en spatial distribution of effects  and uncertainty about their timing, scale 
and impacts  for individuals and societies  
3. Responding to global climate change  
Suggested teaching time 7– 8 hours  Geography guide           45 Geographic inquiry  Geograph ic knowledge and understanding  
Possibilities  for 
responding to 
climate change and 
power  over the 
decision- making 
process  Disparities in exposure to  climate change  risk and vulnerability , including  
variations  in people’s location, wealth,  social differences (age, gender, 
education) , risk perception  
• Detailed examples of two or more societies w ith contrasting vulnerability  
Government -led adaptation and mitigation strategies for  global climate change:  
• global geopolitical efforts, recogni zing that the source/s of greenhouse gas 
emissions may be spatially distant  from the countries most impacted 
• carbon emissions offsetting and trading 
• technology, including geo- engineering 
Civil society and corporate strategies  to address global climate change  
• Case study of the response to climate change in one country focusing on 
the actions of non- governmental stakeholders  
Synthesis, evaluation and skills  opportunities  
Why perspectives and viewpoints may be different about the need for, 
practicality and urgency of action on global climate change 
Unit 3: Global resource consumption and security  
Geographic inquiry  Geograph ic knowledge and understanding  
1. Global trends in consumption  
Suggested teaching time 7– 8 hours  
How global 
development processes affect 
resource availability 
and consumption Global and regional/continental progress towards poverty reduction, including the 
growth of the “new global middle class ” 
Measuring trends in resource consumption, including individual, national and global ecological footprints  
An overview of global patter ns and trends in the availability and consumption of:  
• water, including embedded water in food and manufactured goods  
• land/food, including changing diets in middle- income countries  
• energy, including the relative and changing importance of hydrocarbons, 
nuclear  power , renewables, new sources of modern energy  
Synthesis, evaluation and skills  opportunities  
How different patterns and trends are interrelated and involve spatial 
interactions between different places  
2. Impacts of changing trends in resource consumption  
Suggested teaching time 7– 8 hours  Geography guide           46 Geographic inquiry  Geograph ic knowledge and understanding  
How pressure on 
resources affects 
the future security of 
places The water –food–energ y “nexus ” and how its complex interactions affect:  
• national w ater security, including access to safe water  
• national f ood security, including food availability  
• national energy security, including energy pathways and geopolitical issues  
The implications of global climate change for the water –food– energy nexus  
• Detailed examples of two countries with contrasting levels of resour ce 
security   
The disposal and recycling of consumer items , including international flows of 
waste 
Synthesis, evaluation and skills  opportunities  
How perspectives on, and priorities for, national resource security v ary between 
places and at different scales 
3. Resource stewa rdship  
Suggested teaching time 7–8 hours  
Possibilities  for 
managing resources 
sustainably and 
power  over the 
decision- making 
process  Divergent thinking  about population and resource consumption trends:  
• pessimistic views, including neo-Malthusian views  
• optimistic views, including Boserup 
• balanced views, including resource stewardship  
Resource stewardship strategies, including:  
• the value of the circular economy as a systems approach for effective 
cycling of materials and energy  
• the role of the UN Sustainable Development Goals and progress made toward meeting them  
Synthesis, evaluation and skills
 opportunities  
Different perspectives on global resource use and the likely effectiveness of management actions at varying scales Geography guide           47 Syllabus content—Part two: HL core extension 
Geographic  perspective s—global interactions  
Rationale and conceptual framework  
This study of global interactions  has a broader perspective than a more conventional study of globalization 
that emphasizes a linear process involving the domination and the imposition of Western culture on the world. 
In the context of this syllabus, global interaction suggests a two- way and complex process whereby cultural 
traits and commodities may be adopted, adapted or resisted by societies. The process is neither inevitable 
nor universal.  
The HL extension theme focuses on the global interactions, flows and exchanges arising from the disparities 
that exist between places. It presents important and contestable geographi c issues of change in space and 
time for the HL student to question. This part of the syllabus is divided into three units relating to global 
interactions and global development.  
Teaching and learning guidance  
This sequence of units in the HL core extension is not fixed and may be modif ied, although it is recommended 
that unit 4.1 be taught as an introduction. 
The time allocation provides a rough guide to the depth of study and emphasis required for each. It should 
also be r ecognized that there is overlap between concepts, content  and contexts, and that these links should 
be emphas ized to give a holistic view of the course. This course allows for student -centred activities including 
research, presentations and group work. All  units  must be covered and be illustrated through the use of case 
studies and local examples where relevant.  
Unit 4: Power, places and networks  
Geographic 
inquiry  Geographic knowledge and understandin g 
1. Global interactions and global power  
Suggested teaching time 6– 7 hours  
How global power  
and influence 
varies spatially  Globalization indices showing how countries participate in global interactions  
Global superpowers and their economic, geopolitical and cultural influence  
• Detailed examples of at least  two actual or potential global superpowers  
Powerful organi zations and global groups:  
• G7/8, G20 and Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD ) groups  
• Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries’ ( OPEC ) influence over 
energy policies  
• global lending institutions, including the International Monetary Fund ( IMF) 
and New Development Bank (NDB)  
Synthesis, evaluation and skills opportunities  
How wealthy and powerful places exist at varying scales, and how the global map 
is complex and subject to change Geography guide           48 Geographic 
inquiry  Geographic knowledge and understandin g 
2. Global networks and flows  
Suggested teaching time 6– 7 hours  
How different 
places become 
interconnected by 
global interactions  An overview of contemporary global networks and flows:  
• global trade in materials, manufactured goods and services  
• an overview of international aid, loans and debt relief  
• international remittances from economic migrants  
• illegal flows, such as trafficked people, counterfeit goods and narcotics  
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) and outsourcing by transnational corporations 
(TNCs), and ways in which this networks places and markets  
• Two contrasting detailed examples of TNCs and their global strategies and 
supply chains  
Synthesis, evaluation and skills  opportunities  
The relative importance of different flows, and t he suitability of different methods 
for graphically representing flows and interactions  
3. Human and physical influences on global interactions  
Suggested teaching time 6– 7 hours  
How political, 
technological and physical 
processes 
influence global 
interactions  Political factors that affect global interactions:  
• multi -governmental organi zations (MGOs) and free trade zones  
• economic migration controls and rules  
Our “ shrinking world”  and the forces driving technological innovation:  
• changing global data f low patterns and trends  
• transport developments over time  
• patterns and trends in communication infrastructure and use 
The influence of the physical environment on global interactions:  
• natural resource availability  
• the potentially limiting effect of geographic isolat ion, at varying scales  
Synthesis, evaluation and skills  opportunities  
How processes that influence spatial  interactions a re interlinked in complex 
ways that  accelerate globalization 
 
  Geography guide           49 Unit 5: Human development and diversity  
Geographic 
inquiry  Geographic knowledg e and understanding  
1. Development opportunities  
Suggested teaching time 6– 7 hours  
Ways of 
supporting the 
processes of 
human 
development  The multidimensional process of human development and ways to measure it:  
• UN Sustainable Development Goals criteria  
• validity and reliability of development indicators and indices, including the 
human development index (HDI) and gender inequality index (GII)  
• empowering women and indigenous or minority groups  
• Detailed illustrative examples of affirmative action to close the development gap 
The importance of social entrepreneurship approaches for human development:  
• the work of microfinance organizations and their networks  
• alternative tradi ng networks such as “Fairtrade”  
• TNC corporate social responsibility f rameworks and global agreements  
Synthesis, evaluation and skills  opportunities  
How actions to support human development involve spatial interactions from local 
to global scales  
2. Changing identities and cultures  
Suggested teaching time 6– 7 hours  
How global 
interactions 
bring cultural influences and changes to 
places The global spectrum of cultural traits, ethnicities and identities, and ways in which the 
spectrum of diversity is widening or narrowing at different scales  
The effects of global interactions on cultural diversity in different places:  
• the diffusion of cultural traits, and cultural imperialism  
• glocali zation of branded commodities, and cultural hybridity  
• cultural landscape changes in the built environment  
How diasporas influence cult ural diversity and identity at both global and local scales  
• Case study of a global diaspora population and its cultures(s)  
Synthesis, evaluation and skills  opportunities  
Differing evidence and perspectives on how diversity is changing at local, national 
and global scales 
3. Local responses to global interactions  
Suggested teaching time 6– 7 hours  Geography guide           50 Geographic 
inquiry  Geographic knowledg e and understanding  
The varying 
power  of local 
places and 
actors to resist 
or accept 
change Local and civil society res istance to global interactions:  
• rejection of globalized production, including campaigns against TNCs and in 
favour of local sourcing of food and goods by citizens  
• rise of anti -immigration movements  
Geopolitical constraints on global interactions:  
• government and militia controls on personal freedoms to participate in global 
interactions  
• national trade restrictions, including protectionism and resource nationalism  
The role of civil society in promoting international -mindedness and participating in 
global interactions, including social media use and campaigning for  internet freedom  
• Two detailed examples of places where restricted freedoms have been 
challenged  
Synthesis, evaluation and skills  opportunities  
How acceptance of, or resistance to, global interactions takes different forms and 
occurs at different scales  
Unit 6: Global risks and resilience  
Geographic inquiry  Geographic knowledge and understanding  
1. Geopolitical and economic risks  
Suggested teaching time 6– 7 hours  
How technological 
and globalizing processes create 
new geopolitical and 
economic risks for 
individuals and 
societies  Threats to individuals and businesses:  
• hacking, identity theft and the implications of sur veillance for personal 
freedoms  
• political, economic and physical risks to global supply chain flows  
New and emerging threats to the political and economic sovereignty of states:  
• profit repatriation and tax avoidance by TNCs and wealthy individuals  
• disruptive technological innovations, such as drones and 3D printing 
The correlation between increased globalization and renewed nationalism/tribali zation  
• Two detailed examples to illustrate geopolitical tension/conflict  
Synthesis, evaluation and skills  opportunities  
How the advantages of global ization must be weighed against heightened 
possibilities of new geopolitical and economic risks  
2. Environmental risks  
Suggested teaching time 6– 7 hours  Geography guide           51 Geographic inquiry  Geographic knowledge and understanding  
How global 
interactions create 
environmental risks 
for particular places 
and people Transboundary pollution (TBP) affecting a l arge area /more than one country  
• One TBP case study including the consequences and possible responses  
Environmental impacts of global flows at varying scales:  
• localized pollution, including impacts along shipping lanes  
• carbon footprints for global flows of food, goods and people 
Environmental issues linked with the global shift of industry:  
• polluting manufacturing industries  
• food production systems for global agribusiness  
Synthesis, evaluation and skills  opportunit ies 
How global interactions  affect the physical environment by varying degrees at 
different scales  
3. Local and global resilience  
Suggested teaching time 6– 7 hours  
New and emerging 
possibilities for 
managing global 
risks The success of international civil society organizations in attempting to raise 
awareness  about,  and find solutions for , environmental and social risks 
associated with global interactions  
• Detailed examples of one environmental and one social civil society 
organization action 
Strategies to build resilience:  
• re-shoring of economic activity by TNCs  
• use of crowd- sourcing technologies to build resilience by government and 
civil society  
• new technologies for the management of global flows of data and people, including cybersecurity and e-passports  
Synthesis, evaluation and skills
 opportunities  
How perspectives vary on the severity of different risks and priorities for action  Geography guide           52 Assessment  
Assessment  in the Diploma Programme  
General 
Assessment is an integral part of teaching and learning. The most important aims of assessment in the 
Diploma Programme are that it should support curricular goals and encourage appropriate student learning. Both external and internal assessments are used in the Diploma Programme. IB  examiners mark work 
produced for external assessment, while work produced for internal assessment is marked by teachers and 
externally moderated by the IB.  
There are two types of assessment identified by the IB : 
• Formative assessment informs both teaching and learning. It is concerned with providing accurate and helpful feedback to students and teachers on the kind of learning taking place and the nature of students’ strengths and weaknesses in order to help develop students’ understanding and capabilities. 
Formative assessment can als o help to improve teaching quality, as it can provide information to 
monitor progress towards meeting the course aims and objectives.  
• Summative assessment gives an overview of previous learning and is concerned with measuring 
student achievement.  
The Diploma Programme primarily focuses on summative assessment designed to record student achievement at, or towards the end of, the course of study. However, many of the assessment instruments can also be used formatively during the course of teaching and learning, and teachers are encouraged to do 
this. A comprehensive assessment plan is viewed as being integral with teaching, learning and course 
organization. For further information, see the IB Programme standards and practices  document.  
The approach to assessment used by the IB is criterion- related, not norm -referenced. This approach to 
assessment judges students’ work by their performance in relation to identified levels of attainment, and not 
in relation to the work of other students. For further information on assessment within the Diploma Programme please refer to the publication Diploma Programme assessment: principles and practice.  
To support teachers in the planning, delivery and assessment of the Diploma Programme courses, a variety of resources can be found on the OCC or purchased from the IB  store ( store.ibo.org).  Additional publications 
such as specimen papers and markschemes, teacher support materials, subject reports and grade 
descriptors can also be found on the OCC. Past examination papers as well as markschemes can be 
purchased from the IB store.  
Methods of assessment  
The IB uses several methods to as sess work produced by students.  
Assessment criteria  
Assessment criteria are used when the assessment task is open- ended. Each criterion concentrates on a 
particular skill that students are expected to demonstrate. An assessment objective describes what students 
should be able to do, and assessment criteria describe how well they should be able to do it. Using 
assessment criteria allows discrimin ation between different answers and encourages a variety of responses. 
Each criterion comprises a set of hierarchically ordered level descriptors. Each level descriptor is worth one 
or more marks. Each criterion is applied independently using a best -fit model. The maximum marks for each 
criterion may differ according to the criterion’s importance. The marks awarded for each criterion are added together to give the total mark for the piece of work.  Geography guide           53 Markbands  
Markbands  are a comprehensive statement of expected performance against which responses are judged. 
They represent a single holistic criterion divided into level descriptors. Each level descriptor corresponds to 
a range of marks to differentiate student performance. A best -fit approach is used to ascertain which 
particular mark to use from the possible range for each level descriptor . 
Analytic markschemes  
Analytic markschemes are prepared for those examination questions that expect a particular kind of response 
and/or a given final answer from students. They give detailed instructions to examiners on how to break down 
the total mark for each question for different parts of the response.  
Marking notes 
For some assessment components marked using assessment criteria, ma rking notes are provided. Marking 
notes give guidance on how to apply assessment criteria to the particular requirements of a question.  
Inclusive assessment arrangements  
Inclusive assessment arrangements are available for candidates with assessment access 
requirements.   These arrangements enable candidates with diverse needs to access the examinations and 
demonstrate their knowledge and understanding of the constructs being assessed.  
The IB document Candidates with assessment access requirements provides details on all the inclusive assessment arrangements available to candidates with learning support requirements. The IB document Learning diversity and inclusion in IB programmes  (January 2016)  outlines the position of the IB with regard 
to candidates with diverse learning needs in the IB programmes. For candidates affected by adverse circumstances, the IB documents General regulations: Diploma Programme and the Handbook of procedures 
for the Diploma Programme provide details on access consideration.
 
Responsibilities of the school  
The school is required to ensure that equal access arrangements and reasonable adjustments are provided to candidates with learning support requirements that are in line with the IB documents Candidates with assessment access require ments and Learning diversity and inclusion in IB programmes . Geography guide           54 Assessment outline —SL 
First assessment 2019  
Assessment component  Weighting  
External assessment  (2 hours  45 minutes ) 
 
Paper 1  (1 hour  30 minutes ) 
Geographic themes —two options (40 marks)  75% 
 
 
35% 
Paper 2 (1 hour 15 minutes ) 
Geographic perspectives —global change (50 marks)   
40% 
Internal assessment  (20 hours)  
This component is internally assessed by the teacher and externally moderated by the IB at 
the end of the course.  
Fieldwork  (20 hours)  
Written report  (25 marks)  25% Geography guide           55 Assessment outline —HL 
First assessment 2019  
Assessment component  Weighting  
External assessment (4 hours  30 minutes ) 
 
Paper 1 (2 hours  15 minute s) 
Geographic themes —three options (60 marks)  80% 
 
 
35% 
Paper 2 (1 hour 15 minutes ) 
Geographic perspectives —global change (50 marks)   
25% 
Paper 3 (1 hour)  
Geographic perspectives —global interactions (28 marks)   
20% 
Internal assessment (20 hours)  
This component is internally assessed by the teacher and externally moderated by the IB at 
the end of the course.  
Fieldwork (20 hours)  
Written report (25 marks)  20% Geography guide           56 External assessment  
External assessment markbands—SL and HL  
Paper 1 SL and HL part b) (optional themes) and paper 2 SL and HL part b 
Maximum mark 10 (2 marks per band ) 
The level descriptors per markband below describe characteristics of a typical response appropriate to a 
specific mark  range. Verbs in bold in the criteria refer to the command terms. For the full definition, please 
refer to the “Glossary of command terms”  section.  
Marks  Level descriptor  
 AO1: Knowledge  and 
understanding of specified 
content  
AO2: Application  and analysis 
of knowledge and understanding  AO3: Synthesis and 
evaluation  AO4: Selection, use and 
application of a variety of 
appropriate skills and 
techniques  
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below . 
1–2 The r esponse is too brief, list s unconnected information, is not focused on the question 
and lacks structure.  
• The response is very brief or descriptive, listing  a series 
of unconnected comments or 
largely irrelevant information. 
The knowledge and 
understanding presented is very general with large gaps or errors in interpretation. Examples or case studies 
are not included or only 
listed . 
• There is no evidence of 
analysis.  
• Terminology is missing, not 
defined, irrelevant or used 
incorrectly.  • No evidence of  evaluation 
or conclusion is expected 
at this level.  • Information presented 
is not grouped logically 
(in paragraphs or 
sections).  
• Maps, graphs or diagrams are not 
included, are irrelevant 
or difficult to decipher (only if appropriate to the question).  
3–4 The r esponse is too general, lacks detail, is not focused on the question and is largely 
unstructured.  Geography guide           57 Marks  Level descriptor  
 AO1: Knowledge  and 
understanding of specified 
content  
AO2: Application  and analysis 
of knowledge and 
understanding  AO3: Synthesis and 
evaluation  AO4: Selection, use and 
application of a variety of 
appropriate skills and 
techniques  
• The response is  very 
general . The knowledge and 
understanding presented 
outlines  examples, 
statistics, and facts that are 
both relevant and irrelevant . 
Links to the question are 
listed . 
• The argument or analysis 
presented is not relevant to the question.  
• Basic terminology is defined and used but with errors in understanding or used inconsistently.  • If appropriate to the 
question, the conclusion is irrelevant.  
• There is no evidence of critical evaluation of 
evidence (examples, 
statistics and case 
studies).  • Most of the information 
is not grou ped logically 
(in paragraphs or 
sections).  
• Maps, graphs or 
diagrams included lack 
detail, are incorrectly or only partially 
interpreted without 
explicit connections to 
the question (only if 
appropriate to the 
question) . 
5–6 The r esponse partially addresses the question, but with a narrow argument , an 
unsubstantiated conclusion, and limited evaluation.  
• The response describes 
relevant supporting evidence (information, examples, case 
studies  et cetera), outlining 
appropriate link(s) to the 
question.  
• The argument or analysis 
partially addresses the 
question or elaborates one 
point repeatedly.  
• Relevant terminology is 
defined and used with only 
minor errors in 
understanding or is used 
inconsistently.  • If appropriate to the 
question, the conclusions are general, not aligned 
with the evidence 
presented and/or based on an incorrect interpretation of the evidence.  
• Other perspectives on 
evidence (examples, 
statistics and case 
studies) and/or strengths 
and weaknesses of 
evidence are listed . • Logically related 
information is grouped 
together  (in sections or 
paragraphs) but not consistently.  
• Maps, graphs or 
diagrams included do 
not follow conventions,  
and include relevant 
and irrelevant interpretations in the 
text (only if appropriate 
to the question).  
7–8 The r esponse addresses the whole question, the analysis is evaluated and the 
conclusion is relevant but lacks balance.  Geography guide           58 Marks  Level descriptor  
 AO1: Knowledge  and 
understanding of specified 
content  
AO2: Application  and analysis 
of knowledge and 
understanding  AO3: Synthesis and 
evaluation  AO4: Selection, use and 
application of a variety of 
appropriate skills and 
techniques  
• The response describes 
relevant supporting evidence 
correctly (information, examples and case studies) that covers all the main points of the question, 
describing appropriate links 
to the question.  
• The argument or analysis is 
clear and relevant to the question but one- sided or 
unbalanced.  
• Complex terminology is defined and used correctly but not consistently.  • If appropriate to the 
question, the conclusion is relevant to the 
question, aligned with the 
evidence but unbalanced.  
• Other perspectives on evidence (examples, statistics and  case 
studies) and/or strengths and weaknesses of 
evidence are described.  • Logically related 
information is grouped 
together (in sections) 
consistently.  
• Maps, graphs or diagrams included contribute to/support the argument or 
analysis (only if 
appropriate t o the 
question).  
9–10 The r esponse is in -depth and question -specific (topic and command term) ; analysis and 
conclusion are justified through well -developed evaluation of evidence and 
perspectives.  
• The response explains 
correct  and relevant 
examples, statistics and 
details that are integrated in 
the response, explaining the 
appropriate link to the 
question.  
• The argument or analysis is 
balanced, presenting 
evidence that is discussed , 
explaining  complexity, 
exceptions and comparisons.  
• Complex and relevant 
terminology is used correctly 
throughout the response.  • If appropriate to the 
question, the conclusion is relevant to the question, balanced and 
aligned with the evidence.
 
• Evaluation includes a 
systematic and detailed 
presentation of ideas, 
cause and effect 
relations, other 
perspectives; strengths and weaknesses of evidence are discussed; (if appropriate) includes 
justification of the 
argument and conclusion.
 • Response is logically 
structured with discussion (and if appropriate to the 
question, 
a conclusion) 
focusing on the 
argument or points made, making it easy to follow.  
• Maps, graphs or diagrams are annotated following conventions and their 
relevance is explained 
and support the argument or analysis (only if appropriate to the question).  
 
  Geography guide           59 External assessment markbands—HL 
Please see the “ External assessment markbands —SL and HL”  section for the markbands for papers  1 and 
2. 
Paper 3 HL part a 
Maximum mark 12 ( 3 marks per band ) 
The level descriptors per markband below describe characteristics of a typical response appropriate to a 
specific mark range. Verbs in bold in the criteria refer to the command terms. For the full definition, please 
refer to the “G lossary of command terms ” section. 
Marks  Level descriptor  
 AO1: Knowledge and understanding 
of specified content  
AO2: Application  and analysis of 
knowledge and understanding  AO3: Synthesis 
and evaluation  AO4: Selection, use and 
application of a variety of 
appropriate skills and 
techniques  
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below . 
1–3 The r esponse is general, not focused on the question, and lacks detail and structure.  
• The response is very brief or 
general, listing  a series of 
unconnected comments or largely 
irrelevant information. Evidence is 
general or relevant to the topic, but 
not to the question.  
• Evidence ( that is,  facts, statistics, 
examples or theories) is listed , 
lacks detail, and the relevance to 
the question is unclear.  
• Evidence is not used to formulate an argument or an analysis.  
• Everyday language is used; there 
is little use of geographical 
terminology or it is used with errors 
in understanding.  • No evidence 
of synthesis 
or evaluation is expected.  • Information is listed  but is  
not grouped together in paragraphs , 
or paragraphing 
is erratic.  
• If present, the conclusion is 
brief, does not summarize 
the argument and/or does 
not address the question.  
4–6 The r esponse only partially addresses the question ; evidence is both relevant and 
irrelevant and is largely unstructured.  Geography guide           60 Marks  Level descriptor  
• The r esponse partially addresses 
the question and/or does not meet 
the requirements of the command 
term. Key evidence is not included.  
• A mix of relevant and irrelevant evidence is outlined ( that is,  facts, 
statistics, examples or theories) and any links to the question are 
only listed . 
• The evidence presented supports 
only one element or interpretation 
of the question.  
• Key geographical terms are 
defined briefly. T he terminology 
used is both relevant and 
irrelevant to the question.  • No evidence 
of synthesis 
or evaluation 
is expected.  • Paragraphs do not reflect grouping of information that 
address es a specific 
element of the question.  
• If present, the conclusion is 
one-sided, addres sing only 
part of the question.  
7–9 The r esponse addresses most parts of the question  and outlines an analysis supported 
by relevant evidence but may lack clear links between paragraphs.  
• The question is broken down into 
parts and most parts of the 
question are addressed in the response, with supporting 
evidence for each aspect of the 
question. The r esponse meets the 
requirements of the command term.  
• Relevant evidence ( that is,  facts, 
statistics, examples or theories) is 
described , focused on the 
question and mostly correct. Links 
with the question are described . 
• The analysis outlines  a two -sided 
argument briefly (if appropriate) 
and is mostly descriptive, using examples as explanation.  
• Correct definitions are given,  and 
relevant and irrelevant specialist 
geographical terms are used with 
occasional errors ; or everyday 
language is used . • No evidence 
of synthesis 
or evaluation is expected.  • A series of standalone 
paragraphs each address ing 
a spec ific element of the 
question but lack ing clear 
links connecting them all into 
a coherent whole.  
• The conclusion repeats and summarizes the analysis or 
argument, but may contain 
new information as well.  
10–12 The r esponse addresses all aspects of the question ; the analysis is explained using 
evidence integrated in the paragraphs, and it is well structured.  Geography guide           61 Marks  Level descriptor  
• All aspects of the question are 
addressed and the response 
meets the requirements of the 
command term.  
• Detailed evidence ( that is, facts, 
statistics, examples or theories) are integrated in sentences and paragraphs , and links made 
between evidence and the 
question are explained  and 
relevant.  
• The response explains how the 
two sides of the argument (if 
appropriate) are supported by detailed evidence that is integrated in sentences.  
• Clear, correct definitions and use 
of geographical language is 
integrated in the sentences and 
throughout the response.  • No evidence 
of synthesis 
or evaluation is expected.  • Paragraphs focus on a relevant point of the 
argument and integrate the 
supporting evidence. Paragraphs are linked and support the logical flow of the argument and response.  
• The conclusion summarizes 
the evidence and argument , 
and links all back to the 
question.  
 
  Geography guide           62 Paper 3 HL part b) 
Maximum mark 16 (4 marks per band ) 
The level descriptors per markband below describe characteristics of a typical response appropriate to a 
specific mark range. Verbs in bold in the criteria refer to the command terms. For the full definition, please 
refer to the “Glossary of command terms” section.  
Marks  Level descriptor  
 AO1: Knowledge and 
understanding of specified 
content  
AO2: Application  and analysis 
of knowledge and 
understanding  AO3: Synthesis and evaluation  AO4: Selection, use and 
application of a variety of 
appropriate skills and 
techniques  
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below . 
1–4 The r esponse is general, not focused on the question, and lacks detail and structure . 
• The response is very brief 
or general, listing  a series 
of unconnected comments 
or largely irrelevant 
information. Evidence is 
general or relevant to the 
topic, but not the question.  
• Evidence ( that is,  facts, 
statistics, examples or  
theories) is listed , lack s 
detail , and the relevance to 
the question is unclear.  
• Evidence is not used to formulate an argument or an analysis.  
• Everyday language is 
used; there is  little use of 
geographical terminology 
or it is used with errors in 
understanding.  • No synthesis or evaluation 
is expected at this level . 
• No links are presented 
between the response and (sub)topics in the guide.  
• No valid opinion or 
perspective on the issue is 
formulated.  • Information is listed  
but is  not grouped 
together in paragraphs , or 
paragraphing is erratic.  
• If present, the conclusion is brief, does not summarize the argument and/or 
does not address the 
question.  
5–8 The r esponse only partially addresses the question with limited links to the guide ; 
evidence is both relevant and irrelevant and is largely unstructured.  Geography guide           63 Marks  Level descriptor  
• The r esponse partially 
addresses the question 
and/or does not meet the 
requirements of the command term. Key evidence is not included.  
• A mix of relevant and 
irrelevant evidence is 
outlined ( that is,  facts, 
statistics, examples or 
theories) and any links to 
the question are only 
listed . 
• The evidence presented 
supports only one element or interpretation of the question.  
• Key geographical terms 
are defined briefly. 
Terminology used is both 
relevant and irrelevant to 
the question.  • No synthesis or evaluation is expected at this level . 
• The link(s) between the 
response and the guide 
focus on one topic ; other 
potential links are listed . 
• A valid but limited opinion or perspective on the issue is formulated.  • Paragraphs do not reflect grouping of 
information that 
address es a specific 
element of the question.  
• If present, the 
conclusion is one-
sided, addres sing only 
part of the question.  
9–12 The r esponse addresses most parts of the question with  developed links to the guide 
and outlines an analysis supported by relevant evidence but may lack clear links 
between paragraphs . 
• The question is broken down into parts and most parts of the question are addressed in the response, 
with supporting evidence 
for each aspect of the question. The r esponse 
meets the requirements of the command term.  
• Relevant evidence ( that is,  
facts, statistics, examples 
or theories) is described , 
focused on the question 
and mostly correct. Links with the question are 
described . 
• The analysis outlines  a 
two-sided argument briefly 
(if appropriate) and is 
mostly descriptive,  using 
examples as explanation.  
• Correct definitions are given,  and relevant and 
irrelevant specialist geographical terms are 
used with occasional errors ; or everyday 
language is used . • Synthesis or evaluation is 
required at this level.  
• Links between the 
response and the guide 
refer to multiple topics  and 
are described.  
• Opinion or perspective 
presented is aligned with the response but the links 
are not made expl
icit or the 
link is a general statement. 
Other perspectives or 
interpretations are listed  
without details.  • A series of standalone 
paragraphs  each 
address ing a specific 
element of the 
question but lack ing 
clear links connect ing 
them all into a 
coherent whol e. 
• The conclusion 
repeats and 
summarizes the 
analysis or argument, 
but may contain new 
information as well.  
13–16 The r esponse addresses all aspects of the question ; the analysis is explained and 
evaluated using evidence integrated in the paragraphs , and it is well structured . Geography guide           64 Marks  Level descriptor  
• All aspects of the question 
are addressed and the 
response meets the 
requirements of the 
command term.  
• Detailed evidence ( that is, 
facts, statistics, examples or theories) are integrated 
in sentences and 
paragraphs, and links 
made between evidence and the question are 
explained  and relevant.  
• The response explains 
how the two sides of the 
argument (if appropriate) 
are supported by detail ed 
evidence that is integrated 
in sentences . 
• Clear, correct definitions 
and use of geographical 
language is integrated in 
the sentences and throughout the response.  • Synthesis and evaluation is 
required at this level.  
• Links between the 
response and (sub)topics 
from the guide are 
explained  and supported 
by the evidence in the 
response.  
• The opinion or perspective 
presented is explicitly 
linked to the range of 
evidence included in the response, including critical analysis of the relative certainty of evidence used, describing other perspectives or interpretations of evidence.  • Paragraphs focus  on a 
relevant point of the argument and 
integrate the 
supporting evidence. 
Paragraphs are linked 
and support the logical 
flow of the argument 
and response.  
• The conclusion 
summarizes the 
evidence and 
argument , and links all 
back to the question.  Geography guide           65 Internal assessment  
Purpose of internal assessment  
Internal assessment is an integral part of the course and is a compulsory component for both SL and HL 
students. It enables students to demonstrate the application of their skills and knowledge, and to pursue their  
personal interests, without the time limitations and other constraints that are associated with examination papers. The internal assessment should, as far as poss ible, be woven into normal practice and classroom 
teaching, and not be a separate activity conducted after a course has been taught.  
The internal assessment requirements at SL and at HL are the same. The time allowed is 20 hours, and the weightings are 25% at SL and 20% at HL. Students are required to undertake fieldwork collecting primary information and produce one written report that is based on a fieldwork question.  
Guidance and authenticity  
The SL and HL written reports submitted for internal assessment must be the student’s individual work. However, it is not the intention that students shoul d decide upon a title or topic and be left to work on the 
internally assessed component without any further support from the teacher. The teacher should play an important role during both the planning stage and the period when the student is working on the internally 
assessed work. It is the responsibility of the teacher to ensure that students are familiar with:  
• the requirements of the type of work to be internally assessed, including the methods of information collection, regulations on group work and the format of the written report  
• the ethical guidelines and risk assessment advice given under the internal assessment requirements in this syllabus  
• the assessment criteria—students must understand that the work submitted for assessment must 
address these criteria effectively.  
Teachers and students must discuss the internally assessed work. Students should be encouraged to initiate 
discussions with the teacher to obtain advice and information, and students must not be penalized for seeking guidance. As part  of the learning process, teachers can give advice to students on a first draft of the internally 
assessed work. This advice should be in terms of the way the work could be improved, but this first draft 
must not be heavily annotated or edited by the teacher. The next version handed to the teacher after the first 
draft must be the final one. However, if a student could not have completed the work without substantial 
support from the teacher, this should be recorded.  
It is the responsibility of teachers to ensure that all students understand the basic meaning and significance 
of concepts that relate to academic honesty, especially authenticity and intellectual property. Teachers must 
ensure that all student work for assessment is prepared according to the requirements and must explain clearly to students that the internally assessed work must be entirely their own.  Where collaboration between 
students is permitted, it must be clear to all students what the difference is between collaboration and collusion.  
All work submitted to the IB for moderation or assessment must be authenticated by a teacher, and must not 
include any known instances of suspected a cademic misconduct.  Authenticity may be checked by discussion 
with the student on the content of the work, and scrutiny of one or more of the following . 
• The student’s initial proposal  
• The first draft of the written work  
• The references cited  
  Geography guide           66 • The style of writing compared with work known to be that of the student  
•  The analysis of the work by a web- based plagiaris m detection service such as www.turnitin.com.  
For further details refer to the IB publication Academic honesty in the IB educational context ,, The Diploma 
Programme: From principles into practice  and the relevant articles in General regulations: Diploma 
Programme.  
The same piece of work cannot be submitted to meet the requirements of both the internal as sessment and 
the extended essay.  
Group work  
Group work may be undertaken by students as described below but the written report must be the students’ 
individ ual work.  
The fieldwork topic, fieldwork question and methods of information collection may be chosen by the teacher, the whole class, small groups or individuals. In the early stages of the investigation, students may collect fieldwork information in groups and collaborate on these findings and suitable methods of presentation.  
Once the research is completed and the necessary fieldwork information and possible methods of presentation exchanged, the emphasis must be on individual work. The writing of the report, the justification of methods, the analysis and the conclusion must be entirely the work of the individual student.  
Time allocation  
Internal assessment is an integral part of the geography course, contributing 25% to the final assessment in the SL course and 20% in the HL course. This weighting should be reflected in the time that is allocated to teaching the knowledge, skills and understanding required to undertake the work, as well as the total time allocated to carry out the work.  
It is recommended that a total of approximately 20 hours of teaching time for both SL and HL should be 
allocated to the work. This should include:  
• time for the teacher to explain to students the requirements of the internal assessment  
• time to review the geography course ethical guidelines and risk assessment advice  
• time at the survey or fieldwork site  
• class time for students to work on the internal assessment component   
• time for consultation between the teacher and each student  
• time to review and monitor progress, and to check authenticity.  
Requirements and recommendations  
Rationale  
The purpose of the internally assessed fieldwork is to amplify, reinforce and extend principal geographic concepts and skills taught in class. Fieldwork is intended to enrich the study of parti cular themes within the 
course. It adds to the student’s knowledge, understanding and awareness and helps to make learning more engaging and relevant. It provides opportunities for learning through practical work and fosters the skills of cooperation, organization, investigation and presentation. It also presents opportunities for leadership.  
Fieldwork involves the collection of primary data in the field and the subsequent treatment, display and analysis of this information using appropriate skills. The mat erial is presented in a written report.  Geography guide           67 Fieldwork activities allow students to practise many of the skills listed for internal assessment in the 
“Geographic skills” section of the guide and to develop specific skills appropriate to the chosen fieldwork question.  
Choice of fieldwork investigation  
Scale and site  
Many types of investigation are possible, and the choice depends on the opportunities offered by the local 
environment. The investigation must be manageable and the site accessible. The topic chosen f or 
investigation must be on a local  scale but it does not need to be undertaken near the school. If necessary, 
when there are logistical or security concerns, for example, the school site may be used and can provide several fieldwork possibilities.  
Maps 
It is strongly recommended that maps are student -generated, either by being hand drawn or 
computer -derived, and they must be made relevant to the study. Maps that are downloaded or photocopied 
should be adapted to the student’s own information. Normal map conventions must be followed.  
Risk assessment  
Schools are advised to follow health and safety guidelines (risk assessment) in fieldwork, observing standard regulations as appropriate. Each school is ultimately responsible for the health and safety of its students.  
Ethical guidelines  
Students should consider whether there are any ethical implications involved in collecting fieldwork information, such as respect for the views of individuals expressed during interviews, respect for the environment and the integr ity of the information. Further details are given in the Ethical practice in the 
Diploma Programme poster, available on the OCC . 
Using assessment criteria for internal assessment  
For internal assessment, a number of assessment criteria have been identified. Each assessment criterion has level descriptors describing specific levels of achievement together with an appropriate range of marks. The level descriptors concentrate on positive achievement, although for the lower levels failure to achieve 
may be incl uded in the description.  
Teachers must judge the internally assessed work at SL and at HL against the criteria using the level descriptors.  
• The same assessment criteria are provided for both SL and HL.  
• The aim is to find, for each criterion, the descriptor  that conveys most accurately the level attained by 
the student, using the best -fit model. A best -fit approach means that compensation should be made 
when a piece of work matches different aspects of a criterion at different levels. The mark awarded 
should be one that most fairly reflects the balance of achievement against the criterion. It is not 
necessary for every single aspect of a level descriptor to be met for that mark to be awarded.  
• When assessing a student’s work, teachers should read the level des criptors for each criterion until 
they reach a descriptor that most appropriately describes the level of the work being assessed. If a 
piece of work seems to fall between two descriptors, both descriptors should be read again and the one that more appropri ately describes the student’s work should be chosen.  
• Where there are two or more marks available within a level, teachers should award the upper marks if the student’s work demonstrates the qualities described to a great extent. Teachers should award the lower marks if the student’s work demonstrates the qualities described to a lesser extent.  Geography guide           68 • Only whole numbers should be recorded; partial marks  (fractions and decimals ) are not acceptable.  
• Teachers should not think in terms of a pass or fail boundary, but should concentrate on identifying the 
appropriate descriptor for each assessment criterion.  
• The highest level descriptors do not imply faultless performance but should be achievable by a student. Teachers should not hesitate to use the extremes if they are appropriate descriptions of the work being 
assessed.  
• A student who attains a high level of achievement in relation to one criterion will not necessarily attain high levels of achievement in relation to other criteria. Similarly, a student who attains a low level of achievement for one criterion will not necessarily attain low achievement levels for the other criteria. 
Teachers should not assume that the overall assessment of the students will produce any particular 
distribution of marks.  
• It is recommended that the assessment criteria be available to students.  
Internal assessment details —SL/HL 
Duration: 20  hours  
Weighting: SL 25%, HL 20%  
Relationship to the syllabus  
The fieldwork study for both HL and SL students m ust be related to material in a geographic inquiry topic or 
sub-topic and its development in the syllabus, whether it is from the optional themes, the core theme, or the 
HL extension. It can combine two or more topics or themes.  
The fieldwork must be on a local  scale and involve the collection of pr imary  information. The chosen topic 
may be environmental, physical or human, or may integrate approaches.  
Global issues are unsuitable for study unless they can be adapted to the local scale. For example, the SL/HL 
core theme u nit 3 “ Global resource consum ption and security ”, sub-topic  3 on the development of resource 
stewardshi p strategies could be applied at the local scale.  
The following topics within the core theme, the optional  themes B, C, D, E and F, and the HL extension are 
unlikely  to be suitable f or fieldwork investigation.  
Part of course  Topics and sub -topics  
Part one: Geographic themes  Option  B: Oceans and coastal margins  
Topic 1: Ocean– atmosphere interactions  
Option C : Extreme environments  
Topic  1: The characteristics of extreme environments  
Option D : Geophysical h azards 
Topic  1: Geophysical systems  
Option E : Leisure,  tourism and sport  
Topic  3: Tourism and sport at the international level  
Option F : Food and health  
Topic  1: Measuring food and health (global patterns)  Geography guide           69 Part of course  Topics and sub -topics  
Part two: SL and HL core  
Geographic perspectives —global 
change Unit 1 : Changing population  
Unit 2: Global climate—vulnerability and resilience  
Part two: HL extension  
Geographic perspectives —global 
interactions  All topics are unsuitable except : 
Unit 5: Human development and diversity , sub- topic 3: Local 
responses to global interactions  
Unit 6: Global risks and resilience, sub- topic 3: Local and global 
resilience . 
Types of information for collection  
Primary information  
This information must come from the student’s own observations and measurements collected in the field. 
This “primary information” must form the basis of each investigation. Fieldwork must provide sufficient 
information to enable adequate interpretation and analysis.  
Fieldwork investigations may involve the collection of both qualitative and quantitative  primary information. 
The type of information collected should be determined by the aim and fieldwork question.  
Quantitative information is collected through measurement and may be processed using statistical and other 
techniques.  
Qualitative information is collected though observation or subjective judgment and does not involve 
measurement. Qualitative information may be processed and coded or quantified where appropriate, or it 
may be presented through images or as text. (Students are advised to remember the word limit when presenting qualitative information as text only.)  
The nature of qualitative data should provide sufficient  information for analysis and conclusion.  
Secondary information  
This research involves gathering information from sources that have already been compiled in written, statistical or mapped forms. Secondary information may supplement primary information but must only play a small part in the investigation.  
All secondary information must be referenced, using a standard author –date system, such as the Harvard 
system. This includes information from the internet, where references should include titles, URL addresses 
and dates when sites were visited. All sources of secondary information must be referenced. Footnotes may 
be used to reference material and will not be included in the word count  provided that they are brief (up to 
15 words as noted below) . 
  Geography guide           70 Written reports  
Students should produce one report of their investigation. The report must not exceed 2,500 words.  
Word limit  
The following are not included in the word count.  
• Title page 
• Acknowledgments  
• Contents page 
• Titles and subtitles  
• References  
• Footnotes —up to a maximum of 15 words each 
• Map legends and/or keys  
• Labels —of 10 words or less  
• Tables —of statistical or numerical data, or categories, classes or group names  
• Calculations  
• Appendices —containing only raw data and/or calculations  
All the main text is included in the word count, including the research question, analysis,  conclusion and 
evaluation, as well as all annotations over 10 words and any footnotes over 15 words.  
A very limited use of appendices is acceptable and, if appendices are used, these should contain only 
examples of materials that have been used or are representative of the material used, such as a data sheet 
or a translation of a questionnaire. It should not include all materials used, for example, every survey or questionnaire completed. Further, it should not include secondary information.  
Where work is over the limit, teachers and moderators are advised to stop reading  and students are 
likely to not gain as many marks under criteria such as  E and F.  
Emphasis 
The emphasis of the written report must be analytical  and include focus on the method(s) and technologies 
(if any) employed for information collection, its treatment and analysis. A purely descriptive report and/or a long theoretical introduction must be avoided.  
Format  
Students are advised to use the following guidelines to format their reports, whic h will ensure that the reports 
fulfill the requirements of the criteria.  
The fieldwork written report must meet the following requirements of organization and presentation.  
• The work is concise and within the 2,500- word limit.  
• Overall presentation is well structured, with pages numbered.  
• All illustrative material is fully integrated into the body of the report and is not relegated to an appendix.  Geography guide           71 • Figures such as maps, diagrams and tables are numbered and referenced in the text.  
• References used for background information follow standard conventions. (Guidance on referencing is 
given in the earlier section on secondary information.)  
Internal assessment criteria —SL/HL   
The purpose of this assessment, which is common to SL and HL, is to assess students’ ability to demonstrate the following in relation to the fieldwork research question.  
• Knowledge and understanding (assessment objective 1) —criteria  A and D  
• Application and analysis (assessment objective 2) —criteria  A and D  
• Synthesis and evaluation (assessment objec tive 3)—criteria  D, E and F  
• Select, use and apply a variety of appropriate skills and techniques (assessment objective 4) —criteria  B 
and C  
There are six internal assessment criteria for the fieldwork  written report . 
The criteria should be applied systematically against the relevant parts of the written report using a best -fit 
approach. Verbs in bold in the criteria refer to the command terms . For the full definition, please refer to the 
“Glossary of command terms ” section.  
Report section  Criterion  Marks allocated 
out of  25 Suggested word 
limit within 
2,500 words  
Fieldwork question and geographic context  A 3 300 
Method(s) of investigation  B 3 300 
Quality and treatment of information 
collected  C  6 500 
Written analysis  D 8 850 
Conclusion  E 2 200 
Evaluation  F 3 300 
Total   
25 ~2,450  
 
The suggested breakdown of the word limit is offered as guidance  and is not prescriptive. Students will not 
be penalized if they write more or less for each section provided the work remains within the total word limit 
of 2,500 words.  
  Geography guide           72 Internal assessment criteria for the fieldwork  
The details below  explain the requirements for each section, how each must be related to the assessment 
criteria and how the marks are allocated for each.  
The level descriptions  within each criterion below describe characteristics of a typical response appropriate 
to a spe cific mark. Verbs in bold in the criteria refer to the command terms. For the full definition, please refer 
to the “Glossary of command terms” section.  
Criterion A: Fieldwork question and geographic context  
The fieldwork question (the precise inquiry) guides the fieldwork investigation. It must be focused, appropriate 
and stated as a question that can be answered through the collection of primary information in the field. 
Where appropriate, students can make a brief preliminary judgment or prediction answer ing the fieldwork 
question. This prediction may be formulated as a hypothesis.  
Students must also comment briefly  on the geographic context, explaining why and where the fieldwork 
investigation is to be carried out. This can include relevant spatial, physi cal, socio -economic conditions and 
other background information, concepts or characteristics. A map  of the research area and/or the locations 
used in the fieldwork investigation is essential to provide the necessary spatial element.  
Students must also stat e the area(s) of the syllabus to which the study relates, which geographic inquiry topic 
or sub- topic in the syllabus, whether it is from the optional themes, the core theme, or the HL extension. It 
can be drawn from a combination of two or more topics or themes.  
This criterion assesses the focus and geographic context of the fieldwork and to what extent the link between 
the fieldwork question and the geographic context (that is,  material in the syllabus, a relevant syllabus topic 
or geographical theory ) is made clear. The fieldwork question should be specifically geographical.  
Marks  Level  descriptor  
0 The work does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.  
1 The fieldwork question is not formulated as a question  or is not appropriately linked to the 
relevant syllabus topic or geographical theory . 
The fieldwork question does not allow for the collection of primary data, does not include a 
location or is too broad to address within the limits of the internal assessment. 
No locational map is included or the map is inappropriate for the fieldwork question.  
2 The fieldwork question is geographical, identifying  an appropriate link to the relevant syllabus 
topic, the syllabus or geographical theory.  
The fieldwork question identifies a specific location allowing for the collection of primary data 
and a question that can be addres sed within the limits of an internal assessment . 
The locational map is a copy of an existing map ( for example,  internet or satellite map) with too 
many unnecessary  details or lacking mapping conventions.  
3 The li nk between the fieldwork question and the relevant syllabus  topic , the syllabus or 
geographical theory is described . The link made to geographical theory allows for the possible 
formulation of  hypotheses and predictions.  
The fieldwork question is geographical and focused, clearly  identifying  a precise location 
allowing for primary data collection within the limits of the internal assessment . 
One or more locational maps are presented and follow mapping conventions, providing clear 
information and details of the fieldwork location.  Geography guide           73 Criterion B: Method(s) of investigation  
Students must describe the method(s) used to collect information. The description may include technologies 
employed, sam pling techniques, time, location and circumstances of information collection where relevant.  
The method(s) used must be justified and must enable a sufficient  quality and quantity of primary data to 
be produced to allow the fieldwork question to be investi gated.  
This criterion assesses the description, justification and appropriateness of the method or methods including sampling and surveying techniques, primary or secondary data collection as appropriate used to investigate the question formulated.  
Marks  Level descriptor  
0 The work does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.  
1 The method(s) used for information and data collection are listed  or outlined , but are too 
general or vague or do not allow for the collection of enough information and data that are 
relevant to address the question formulated or the hypotheses.  
Data collection technologies/instruments and sampling/surveying techniques are listed  or 
outlined but are not correctly used.  
2 The method(s) used for information and data collection are described , outlining how the data 
collected is relevant to the quest ion formulated and hypotheses.  
The method(s), data collection instruments/technologies  and sampling/surveying techniques 
are used correctly and allow for sufficient data for quantitative and/or qualitative analysis, but it 
may be minimal or only one or two variables are collected.  
3 The method(s) used for information and data collection ar e described , explaining clearly and 
accurately  how the combination of data collected is relevant to the theory, question formulated  
or the hypotheses for the internal assessment . They m ay describe statistical tests if 
appropriate.  
The m ethod( s), data collection instruments /technologies  and sampling/surveying techniques 
are used correctly, resulting in reliable and good quality primary data supporting a relevant 
quantitative and/or qualitative analysis.  
 
  Geography guide           74 Criterion C: Quality and treatment of information collected  
Students should treat and display the information collected using the most appropriate techniques. These 
techniques must be the most effective way of representing the type of information collected and must be well 
used. The precise techniques employed will differ depending on the nature of the fieldwork question but may 
include statistical tests (including confidence limits), graphs, diagrams, maps, annotated photographs and 
images, matrices and field sketches . 
Students must also refer to the geographic context, information collected and the ways in which the material 
has been treated and presented.  
This criterion assesses the quality of information and data collected and its suitability for analysis in criteri on 
D, whether it is appropriate and a sufficient range of techniques have been used for the presentation of information, and whether the presentation follows accepted conventions (that is,  the numbering, labelling,  
and annotating of tables, graphs and diagrams ). 
Marks  Level  descriptor  
0 The work does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.  
1–2 The information and data collected is mostly not relevant, or not sufficient, to address the 
ques tion or hypotheses formulated.  
The information and data have mostly been presented in such a way that is either not 
appropriate for what has been collected or does not allow for analysis of the question 
formulated.  
The graphs, tables, diagrams  or other illustrations  do not follow conventions (labelling, titles, 
and so on) or contain frequent errors.  
3–4 Most of the information and data collected is relevant to the question formulated or the 
hypotheses, allowing for partial analysis or answering of the question formulated.  
The information and data have been presented in ways  appropriate for the data type.  
The graphs, tables, diagrams or other illustrations follow conventions (labelling, titles, and so 
on), with occasional errors.  
5–6 The information and data collected is all directly rel evant to the question formulated or the 
hypotheses , and is sufficient in quantity and quality to allow for analysis or answering of the 
question formulated.  
The most appropriate techniques have been used effectively for the presentation of i nformation 
and data collected.  
The graphs, tables, diagrams or other illustrations follow conventions (labelling, titles, and so 
on). 
 
  Geography guide           75 Criterion D : Written analysis  
In the written analysis, students must demonstrate their knowledge and understanding of the fieldwork 
investigation by interpreting and explaining the information they have collected in relation to the fieldwork 
question. This includes recognizing any trends and spatial patterns found in the information collected. Where 
appropriate, an attempt should be made to identify and explain any anomalies.  
The treatment and display of material and the written analysis must be integrated within this section.  
This criterion assesses the quality of the analys is of the results, referring to:  
• links to the question and hypotheses formulated  
• geographic context  (that is, geographical theory, the syllabus, or the relevant syllabus topic ) 
• information collected  
• statistics used (descriptive techniques —that is,  graphs, charts, histograms and so on; a s well as  
statistical techniques —that is,  correlations, regression and so on)  
• illustrative material.  
Marks  Level  descriptor  
0 The work does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.  
1–2 The written analysis includes descriptive techniques that are not all appropriate to the dat a and 
the question formulated.  
The data or information presented is outlined without explicit link to the question or 
hypotheses formulated. Obvious trends and patterns are listed . 
3–4 The written analysis includes descriptive techniques that are appropriate to the data and the 
question formulated. Any statistical techniques used either are not relevant to the question 
formulated or contain errors.  
The data and information, trends and patterns presented are described  and linked explicitly to 
the ques tion or hypotheses formulated.  
The written analysis allows for answering the question f ormulated in a descriptive way.  
5–6 The written analysis includes descriptive and statistical techniques (if appropriate to the 
question formulated) that are appropriate to the dat a and the question formulated.  
The data and information, trends, patterns and statistics are described and linked explicitly to 
the question or hypotheses formulated. Outliers and anomalies in the data, if present, are 
listed.  
The written analysis allows for answering the question formulated, although there are gaps in 
the supporting evidence.  
7–8 The written analysis includes descriptive and statistical techniques (with confidence levels if 
appropriate) that are appropriate to the dat a and the question formulated.  
The trends, patterns and statistics found, including outliers and anomalies if present, are 
explained and linked to the question formulated, hypotheses, geographical theory, the 
fieldwork location and methods used.  
The written analysis allows for answering the question formulated, with no or only minor gaps 
in the supporting evidence.  Geography guide           76 Criterion E: Conclusion  
Students should summarize the findings of the fieldwork investigation. There should be a clear, concise 
statement answering the fieldwork question. It is acceptable for the conclusion to state that the findings do 
not match the student’s preliminary judgment or prediction.  
This criterion assesses the ability of the student to summarize the findings of the fieldwork investigation and draw a supported conclusion.  
Marks  Leve l descriptor  
0 The work does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.  
1 A conclusion to the fieldwork question is formulated, which is partially supported by the 
analysis.  
2 There is a clear conclusion to the fieldwork question, which is supported by the analysis . 
Criterion F: Evaluation  
Students should review their investigative methodology, including methods of collecting primary information. Within this, they should consider any factors that may have affected the validity of the data, including personal bias and unpredicted external circumstances such as the weather.  
Students should suggest specific and plausible ways in which the study might have been improved and could be extended in the future.  
This criterion assesses the student’s ability to review the investigative methodology, by weighing up the strengths and/or weaknesses of the chosen method, and suggest improvements.  
Marks  Level  descriptor  
0 The work does not reach  the standard described by the descriptors below.  
1 Strengths and/or weaknesses of the data collection methods and suggestions for improvement 
are listed , but these are mostly superficial, not appropriate, or not relevant to the study.  
2 Strengths and/or  weakness es of the data collection methods and suggestions for improvement 
are outlined , and these are mostly appropriate and relevant to the study.  
3 The most appropriate and relevant strengths and/or weakness es are explained  regarding the 
data collection methods , the formulation of the fieldwork research question, the presentation of 
data/information and the choice of location. Suggestions for improvement are outlined  and the 
potential impact of these improvements is explained . 
Moderation of internal assessment reports  
Details on how to present the reports for moderation are available in the Handbook of procedures for the Diploma Programme.  Geography guide           77 Appendix 
Glossary of command  terms 
Command terms with definitions  
Students should be familiar with the following key terms and phrases used in examination questions, which 
are to be understood as described below. Although these terms will be used frequently in examination questions, other terms may be used to direct students to present  an argument in a specific way.  
Analyse  AO2 Break down in order to bring out the essential elements or 
structure.  
Annotate  AO4 Add brief notes to a diagram or graph.  
Classify  AO1 Arrange or order by class or category.  
Compare  AO3 Give an account of the similarities between two (or more) items 
or situations, referring to both (all) of them throughout.  
Compare and contrast  AO3 Give an account of similarities and differences between two (or 
more) items or situations, referring to both (all) of them 
throughout.  
Construct  AO4 Display i nformation in a diagrammatic or logical form.  
Contrast  AO3 Give an account of the differences between two (or more) items 
or situations, referring to both (all) of them throughout.  
Define  AO1 Give the precise meaning of a word, phrase, concept or 
physical quantity.  
Describe  AO1 Give a detailed account.  
Determine  AO1 Obtain the only possible answer.  
Discuss  AO3 Offer a considered and balanced review that includes a range 
of arguments, factors or hypotheses. Opinions or conclusions 
should be presented clearly and supported by appropriate 
evidence.  
Distinguish  AO2 Make clear the differences between two or more concepts or 
items.  Geography guide           78 Draw  AO4 Represent by means of a labelled, accurate diagram or graph, 
using a pencil. A ruler (straight edge) should be used for straight 
lines. Diagrams should be drawn to scale. Graphs should have 
points correctly plotted (if appropriate) and joined in a straight 
line or smooth curve.  
Estimate  AO1 Obtain an approximate value.  
Evaluate  AO3 Make an appraisal by weighing up the strengths and limitations.  
Examine  AO3 Consider an argument or concept in a way that uncovers the 
assumptions and interrelationships of the issue.  
Explain  AO2 Give a detailed account including reasons or causes.  
Identify  AO1 Provide an answer from a number of possibilities.  
Justify  AO3 Give valid reasons or evidence to support an answer or 
conclusion.  
Label  AO4 Add labels to a diagram.  
Outline  AO1 Give a brief account or summary.  
State  AO1 Give a specific name, value or other brief answer without 
explanation or calculation.  
Suggest  AO2 Propose a solution, hypothesis or other possible answer.  
To what extent  AO3 Consider the merits or otherwise of an argument or concept. 
Opinions and conclusions should be presented clearly and 
supported with empirical evidence and sound argument.  
 