N22/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




BUSINESS MANAGEMENT
HIGHER LEVEL
PAPER 1


Practice examination 2022 – ELE PLC


1 hour 15 minutes




INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES
▪   Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
▪   A clean copy of the IB Business Management case study – ELE PLC is required for this
    examination paper.
▪   Read the case study carefully.
▪   A clean copy of the IB Business Management formulae sheet is required for this examination
    paper.
▪   Section A: answer two questions.
▪   Section B: answer question 4.
▪   A calculator is required for this examination paper.
▪   The maximum mark for this examination paper is [40 marks].
        IB Business Management Higher Level Paper 1 Examination
                    IB Business Management: www.BusinessManagementIB.com


                                            SECTION A

Answer two questions from this section.


QUESTION ONE



a. Explain why productivity (line 28) is important in ELE’s Zeat division.          [4 marks]


b. With reference to ELE, examine using retained profits (line 53) as a source of finance to grow
   a business.                                                                        [6 marks]




QUESTION TWO



a. Outline one advantage and one disadvantage to using internal recruitment to fill
   vacancies at ELE’s rental car division.                            [4 marks]


b. With reference to ELE, explain two advantages and two disadvantages of using takeovers
   (line 15) as a strategy for growth.                                       [6 marks]




QUESTION THREE



a. With reference to ELE, outline one internal stakeholder group and one external stakeholder
   group.                                                                        [4 marks]


b. With reference to ELE’s Zeat division, explain reasons why the change in production
   methods from batch production to cellular manufacturing (lines 33 and 34) made the
   division more profitable.                                               [6 marks]




                                                                                 Page 2|5
       IB Business Management Higher Level Paper 1 Examination
                   IB Business Management: www.BusinessManagementIB.com


                                           SECTION B

Answer the compulsory question from this section.


QUESTION FOUR



In May 2022, ELE’s board of directors requested that the Finance Department supply
forecasted financial information for the car rental division which would help them analyse the
various investment projects that the company needs to consider over the next ten years.
The Finance Department is confident forecasted costs are accurate given the quality of the
research and available data, but less certain about the forecasted revenues as revenues will
depend on:
1. ELE’s ability to attract new customers and shift existing customers in the EU across to the
   new brand In3T.
2. ELE’s ability to penetrate the Indian car rental market. Further, sales revenues in India would
   fluctuate as exchange rates have been volatile. For example, in 1995 one euro purchased
   42 Indian rupees, whereas in 2021 one euro purchased 89 rupees.
The Operations Management Department were asked to produce a report on operations
management practices and strategies for economic, social (in terms of human resources) and
ecological sustainability for ELE’s current and future projects.
A summary of that financial and non-financial information is presented below.


Zeat Division (line 95): Expected to be profitable for a maximum of 20 years, subject to the
external environment. A case can be made for ecological sustainability because as long as
the world produces electric engine cars, these cars will still need air in their tyres. However,
in the long-term gas stations are likely to become a thing of the past as more car owners
recharge their electric batteries at home and work.



Develop new Indian market (line 102): €2.5 billion to establish operations across India,
including the purchase of a new fleet of rental cars. There is much growth potential in India,
however, India does not have sufficient infrastructure for electric vehicles yet, especially
outside of its megacities such as New Delhi – population 27 million. Most of its rental fleet
would need to be petrol engines or hybrid technology. However, the government has set a
target to have at least 30% of new vehicles being electric vehicles by 2030. Thus, a new
Indian rental car division would be able to shift to electric vehicles over time, aligning with
the company’s green objectives. This division would employ many people locally but also
force many local car rental companies to close.




                                                                                  Page 3|5
          IB Business Management Higher Level Paper 1 Examination
                      IB Business Management: www.BusinessManagementIB.com



New brand In3T (line 118): €2 billion required to build the technology, market the new brand
and, most expensively, purchase a new electric vehicle fleet for its European operations. This
option is expected to be increasingly profitable across time as demand for green energy
products continues to grow and European carbon emissions become increasingly more
regulated. This option aligns well with environmental goals at ELE but there is a substantial
social cost as many employees would be made redundant.


The board of directors believes basing its rental fleet on electric cars should be a strategic
priority for the company but is concerned about the high cost of achieving economies of
scale, problems associated with obtaining finance, and future technologies that may make
rental cars obsolete. However, there are two main advantages ELE would have with both of
its rental car strategic options:
▪     Barriers to entry are high in the car rental industry with the cost of financing a large fleet of
      vehicles being especially prohibitive. Where barriers to entry are high, competition is low
      and profit margins high.
▪     There would be a good degree of product differentiation with either option; a recognised
      and global car rental brand in the case of India; in the case of In3T, a rental car brand with
      cutting edge technology that has truly green credentials.


a. Outline why economies of scale are important in the rental car market.                [2 marks]


b. Outline why high product differentiation increases the pricing power of rental car
   companies.                                                            [2 marks]




Summarised financial information for developing a new Indian car rental division and
launching the new In3T European brand are as follows.


                                         Table 1: Financial information


                                                                          Europe         India

    Cost of investment (€ million)                                         2,000         2,500

    Expected life expectancy                                              30 years     20 years

    Forecast annual average profitability (€ million)                       180           240




                                                                                      Page 4|5
           IB Business Management Higher Level Paper 1 Examination
                   IB Business Management: www.BusinessManagementIB.com


c. Using the information in Table 1 above to:

      i.      Calculate the payback period for both projects and comment on your results.
                                                                             [3 marks]

      ii.     Calculate the average rate of return for both locations and comment on your
              result.                                                         [3 marks]


d.    Using information from the case study, additional information above and your results
      from part (c), discuss whether ELE PLC should expand into India.       [10 marks]




                                                                             Page 5|5
