M18/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                     May / Mai / Mayo 2018


                   English / Anglais / Inglés B


                          Higher level
                        Niveau supérieur
                         Nivel superior


                   Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2




16 pages/páginas
                              –2–           M18/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use
of examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Global Centre, Cardiff.



Ces remarques pour la notation sont confidentielles. Leur
usage est réservé exclusivement aux examinateurs participant
à cette session.

Ces remarques sont la propriété du Baccalauréat International.
Toute reproduction ou distribution à de tierces personnes sans
l’autorisation préalable du centre mondial de l’IB à Cardiff
est interdite.



Estas notas para la corrección son confidenciales y para el uso
exclusivo de los examinadores en esta convocatoria de
exámenes.

Son propiedad del Bachillerato Internacional y no deben
reproducirse ni distribuirse a ninguna otra persona sin la
autorización del centro global del IB en Cardiff.
                                             –3–              M18/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The following are the annotations available to use when marking responses.

       Annotation                                    Explanation

                        Caret – indicates omission


                        Incorrect point


                        Ellipse that can be expanded


                        Horizontal wavy line that can be expanded


                        Highlight tool that can be expanded


                        On page comment – justifies application of assessment criteria


                        Unclear content or language


                        SEEN - every scanned page must be annotated or marked as SEEN


                        Good Response/Good Point


                        Vertical wavy line that can be expanded


You must make sure you have looked at all pages. Please put the        annotation on any blank
page, to indicate that you have seen it.

When using the On page Comment annotation, please keep the following in mind:
  • Avoid covering the candidate’s own writing. This can be done by writing your comments in
    the margins then running the arrow attached to the “On page comment” annotation to the
    appropriate place.
  • Provide all comments in the target language.
  • You may provide summative comments at the end of the script, but please do NOT record
    numerical marks on the scripts.
                                              –4–             M18/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


General marking instructions

  Assistant Examiners (AEs) will be contacted by their team leader (TL) through RM™ Assessor,
  by email or telephone – if through RM™ Assessor or by email, please reply to confirm that you
  have downloaded the marking notes from IBIS. The purpose of this initial contact is to allow
  AEs to raise any queries they have regarding the marking notes and their interpretation. AEs
  should contact their team leader through RM™ Assessor or by email at any time if they have
  any problems/queries regarding marking. For any queries regarding the use of RM™ Assessor,
  please contact emarking@ibo.org.



Instructions générales pour la notation

  Les chefs d’équipe se mettront en rapport avec les examinateurs assistants de leur équipe par
  l’intermédiaire de RMTM Assessor, par courriel ou par téléphone. S’ils s’adressent à vous par
  RMTM Assessor ou par courriel, veuillez répondre et confirmer que vous avez téléchargé les
  remarques pour la notation à partir d’IBIS. L’objectif de cette première prise de contact est de
  permettre aux examinateurs assistants de soulever toutes les questions qu’ils ont concernant les
  remarques pour la notation et leur interprétation. Les examinateurs assistants doivent contacter
  leur chef d’équipe par l’intermédiaire de RMTM Assessor ou par courriel à tout moment s’ils
  éprouvent des difficultés ou s’ils ont des questions concernant la notation. Pour toute question
  concernant l’utilisation de RMTM Assessor, veuillez envoyer un courriel à emarking@ibo.org.


Instrucciones generales para la corrección

  El jefe de equipo se pondrá en contacto con los examinadores asistentes mediante
  RM™ Assessor, correo electrónico o por teléfono. Si se pone en contacto mediante
  RM™ Assessor o correo electrónico, conteste para confirmar que ha descargado las notas para
  la corrección de IBIS. El propósito de este primer contacto es permitir al examinador asistente
  plantear todas las consultas que tenga respecto a las notas para la corrección y su
  interpretación. El examinador asistente deberá ponerse en contacto con el jefe de equipo
  mediante RM™ Assessor o correo electrónico si tiene problemas o consultas sobre la
  corrección. Si tiene alguna consulta respecto al uso de RM™ Assessor, envíe un correo
  electrónico a emarking@ibo.org.
                                                –5–              M18/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                            Section A
Criterion A: Language

• How effectively and accurately does the student use language?

  Marks    Level descriptor
    0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
           Command of the language is limited and generally ineffective.
   1–2     A limited range of vocabulary is used, with many basic errors.
           Simple sentence structures are sometimes clear.
           Command of the language is generally adequate, despite many inaccuracies.
   3–4     A fairly limited range of vocabulary is used, with many errors.
           Simple sentence structures are usually clear.
           Command of the language is effective, despite some inaccuracies.
   5–6     A range of vocabulary is used accurately, with some errors.
           Simple sentence structures are clear.
           Command of the language is good and effective.
   7–8     A wide range of vocabulary is used accurately, with few significant errors.
           Some complex sentence structures are clear and effective.
           Command of the language is very effective.
   9–10    A wide range of vocabulary is used accurately and effectively, with very few errors.
           Complex sentence structures are clear and effective.


Clarification

Word count
At HL, students are required to write a minimum of 250 words in section A and 150 words in
section B. Failure to write the minimum number of words will result in a [1 mark] penalty under
criterion A. There is no penalty for exceeding 400 words in section A or 250 words in section B:
the whole text should be taken into consideration in the award of marks.

Language
Not all errors have the same importance, and examiners should bear this in mind. Some errors
affect the communication of meaning significantly, and others do not. Also, some errors indicate a
fundamental lack of command of the language, while others may simply indicate a moment of
forgetfulness.

SLIPS – mistakes at all levels of difficulty, but erratic and occasional – eg the candidate normally
forms past tenses well, but occasionally forgets “-ed”.

FLAWS – errors occur more regularly, particularly in certain structures – eg past tenses are formed
correctly quite often, but are not really reliable, and there may be basic confusions (eg past simple
versus present perfect).

GAPS – some structures are rarely correct, or simply don’t appear – eg the past tenses are
needed, but do not appear.

A good answer will have very few language gaps, if any, and slips or flaws very rarely affect
meaning.
                                              –6–             M18/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B: Message

• How clearly can the student develop and organize relevant ideas?

  Marks   Level descriptor
    0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
          The message has not been communicated.
          The ideas are irrelevant and/or repetitive.
   1–2
          The development of ideas is confusing; supporting details are limited and/or not
          appropriate.
          The message has been partially communicated.
          The ideas are relevant to some extent.
   3–4
          The development of ideas is evident at times; supporting details are sometimes
          appropriate.
          The message has been communicated fairly well.
   5–6    The ideas are mostly relevant.
          The development of ideas is coherent; supporting details are mostly appropriate.
          The message has been communicated well.
   7–8    The ideas are relevant.
          The development of ideas is coherent and effective; supporting details are appropriate.
          The message has been communicated very well.
          The ideas are relevant and effective.
   9–10
          The development of ideas is coherent and thorough; supporting details are highly
          appropriate.


 NOTE: When marking candidate responses, keep in mind that neither the accuracy of the
 information presented, nor the validity of the candidates’ personal opinions, are being assessed.
 Therefore, scripts that are factually inaccurate should not be marked down, provided they meet
 the requirements of the task, and the ideas are sufficiently developed.
                                              –7–              M18/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Question 1: Cultural diversity
You recently read a book that discussed how acceptance of different ethnicities in a community
can strengthen that community. You want to recommend the book to a friend who you know is
interested in this topic. Write an email to this friend telling him or her about the book and
expressing your opinion about its main argument(s).

       • makes little or no reference to the book’s relevance to the friend’s interest in the topic
       • provides no clear summary of the book, and does not really recommend it
       • explains in very basic or unclear ways an opinion about the book’s main argument(s),
3–4      with little or no support
       • focuses poorly on the task: there is much irrelevant ‘e-mail chat’
       • uses few paragraphs or cohesive devices to structure the development of ideas

       • makes only vague reference to the book’s relevance to the friend’s interest in the topic
       • provides a limited summary of the book, and recommends it in vague terms
       • explains to some extent an opinion about the book’s main argument(s), including a little
5–6      basic support
       • focuses adequately on the task, despite quite a lot of irrelevant ‘e-mail chat’
       • uses paragraphing and cohesive devices to a limited extent to structure the
         development of ideas
       • makes fairly clear reference to the book’s relevance to the friend’s interest in the topic
       • provides a simple summary of the book, and recommends it
       • explains a clear opinion about the book’s main argument(s), including some support
7–8    • focuses quite well on the task: there is not much irrelevant ‘e-mail chat’
       • uses paragraphing and cohesive devices fairly effectively to structure the development
         of ideas
     • makes clear reference to the book’s relevance to the friend’s interest in the topic
     • provides an effective summary of the book (mentioning its name), and recommends it
       enthusiastically
     • explains a clear and coherent opinion about the book’s main argument(s), including
9–10   detailed support
     • focuses well on the task: there is little irrelevant ‘e-mail chat’
     • uses paragraphing and cohesive devices effectively to structure the development of
       ideas
                                               –8–              M18/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Question 2: Customs and traditions
You read an article that argued that the way you dress influences what others think about you.
Write a blog entry in which you discuss to what extent you agree or disagree with this claim and
give reasons for your views.

     • mentions unclearly, or not at all, the article’s claim that dress influences others’
       opinions
     • does not really focus on the extent of agreement with the claim; no clear point of view
 3–4   is provided. (Opposing viewpoints for rebuttal purposes are probably not mentioned at
       all)
     • gives few, or confused, reasons for the views expressed
     • uses few paragraphs or cohesive devices to structure the development of ideas
     • mentions vaguely the article’s claim that dress influences others’ opinions
     • focuses vaguely on the extent of agreement with the claim; a point of view may be
       suggested, but not very clearly. (Opposing viewpoints for rebuttal purposes may be
 5–6   little used or unclear)
     • gives some basic reasons for the views expressed, if not always clearly
     • uses paragraphing and cohesive devices to a limited extent to structure the development
       of ideas
     • refers to the article’s claim that dress influences others’ opinions
     • focuses fairly competently on the extent of agreement with the claim; and provides a
       point of view. (Opposing viewpoints may be used for rebuttal purposes, in limited
 7–8   ways)
     • gives reasonably clear and coherent reasons for the views expressed
     • uses paragraphing and cohesive devices fairly effectively to structure the development
       of ideas
     • refers clearly to the article’s claim that dress influences others’ opinions
     • focuses methodically on the extent of agreement with the claim; and provides a clear
       point of view. (Opposing viewpoints may be used for rebuttal purposes, effectively)
9–10
     • gives detailed, lucid reasons for the views expressed
     • uses paragraphing and cohesive devices effectively to structure the development of
       ideas

Note: Accept references to tattoos, piercings, etc as falling within ‘dress’ - provided that the
candidate states more or less clearly that this is a deliberate extension of the concept of ‘dress’ to
include ‘image’ in general. If the candidate simply wanders off into tattoos, piercings etc, penalise
under the reference to ‘relevance’ in the criteria (in proportion - ie a one-sentence mention would
not really require any penalty).
                                             –9–             M18/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Question 3: Health
An exhibition focusing on alternative medicine, such as herbal medicines and aromatherapy,
was held in your town. As a junior editor of your town’s newspaper, write a news report in which
you describe the event and the promoted benefits of the alternative medicine methods displayed.

       • provides very limited factual information about the event: when, where, who was
         involved, etc
       • describes little about the atmosphere and public at the event
3–4    • explains unclearly any perceived benefit(s) of the alternative medicine methods on
         display; or fails to explain any perceived benefit of the alternative medicine methods on
         display
       • uses few paragraphs or cohesive devices to structure the development of ideas
       • provides limited factual information about the event: when, where, who was involved,
         etc
       • describes in vague terms the atmosphere and public at the event
       • explains imprecisely more than one perceived benefit of the alternative medicine
5–6
         methods on display; or explains only one perceived benefit of the alternative medicine
         methods on display
       • uses paragraphing and cohesive devices to a limited extent to structure the development
         of ideas
       • provides some useful factual information about the event: when, where, who was
         involved, etc
       • describes reasonably clearly the atmosphere and public at the event
7–8    • explains in general terms more than one perceived benefit of the alternative medicine
         methods on display
       • uses paragraphing and cohesive devices fairly effectively to structure the development
         of ideas.
     • provides useful factual information about the event in some detail: when, where, who
       was involved, etc
     • describes clearly yet concisely the atmosphere and public at the event
9–10 • explains methodically more than one perceived benefit of the alternative medicine
       methods on display
     • uses paragraphing and cohesive devices effectively to structure the development of
       ideas
                                            – 10 –           M18/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Question 4: Leisure
Your school is planning to organize a summer camp that centres around the most popular
activities amongst teenagers and is looking for ideas for the camp. Write a proposal to your
school board in which you suggest activities for the camp, and explain why they will be engaging
for teenagers.

       • refers little or not at all the context of the suggested camp
       • describes only one activity, very vaguely; or refers to more than one, but unclearly
3–4    • explains poorly or not at all why the proposed activities will appeal to
       • uses few paragraphs or cohesive devices to structure the development of ideas.
       •
       • refers vaguely to the context of the suggested camp
       • describes only one activity, if clearly; or refers to more than one, but superficially
5–6    • explains in vague, simple terms why the proposed activities will appeal to teenagers
       • uses paragraphing and cohesive devices to a limited extent to structure the
         development of ideas
     • refers simply to the context of the suggested camp
     • describes more than one activity, quite clearly but without much detail
7–8 • explains in general terms why the proposed activities will appeal to teenagers
     • uses paragraphing and cohesive devices fairly effectively to structure the development
       of ideas
     • refers directly to the context of the suggested camp
     • describes two or more proposed activities methodically and in detail
9–10 • explains clearly why the proposed activities will appeal to teenagers
     • uses paragraphing and cohesive devices effectively to structure the development of
       ideas
                                           – 11 –           M18/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Question 5: Science and technology
As your school’s newspaper editor, you interviewed the creator of a new social network and
asked him / her about the difference between the newly-created social network and the ones that
we currently use. Write an article based on this interview to be published in your school
newspaper. Do not simply write the exact words (transcript) of the interview.

     • focuses poorly or unclearly on the features provided in the new social network (and
       may digress at length into irrelevant background about interviewee and context)
     • describes very little or unclearly the difference(s) between the current networks and the
 3–4   new one
     • may not mention at all the interviewee’s enthusiasm about the new social network
     • links quotations by the author poorly to the progression of ideas
     • uses few paragraphs or cohesive devices to structure the development of ideas
     • focuses to some extent on the features provided in the new social network (but may
       digress significantly at times into irrelevant background about interviewee and context)
     • describes in simple general terms the difference(s) between the current networks and
       the new one
 5–6
     • may mention the interviewee’s enthusiasm about the new social network
     • links quotations by the author vaguely to the progression of ideas
     • uses paragraphing and cohesive devices to a limited extent to structure the development
       of ideas
     • focuses in general on the features provided in the new social network (but may provide
       a little too much background about interviewee and context)
     • describes quite methodically the difference(s) between the current networks and the
       new one
 7–8
     • may describe the interviewee’s enthusiasm about the new social network
     • links quotations by the author competently to the progression of ideas
     • uses paragraphing and cohesive devices fairly effectively to structure the development
       of ideas
     • focuses principally and clearly on the features provided in the new social network (but
       may provide some relevant background about interviewee and context)
     • explains methodically and in detail the difference(s) between the current networks and
       the new one
9–10
     • may convey vividly the interviewee’s enthusiasm about the new social network
     • links quotations by the author skilfully to the progression of ideas
     • uses paragraphing and cohesive devices effectively to structure the development of
       ideas
                                                 – 12 –            M18/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion C: Format

• How correctly does the student produce the required text type?
• To what extent are the conventions of text types appropriate?

  Marks     Level descriptor
    0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
            The text type is not recognizable.
     1
            Conventions appropriate to the text type are not used.
            The text type is hardly recognizable or is not appropriate.
     2
            Conventions appropriate to the text type are very limited.
            The text type is sometimes recognizable and appropriate.
     3
            Conventions appropriate to the text type are limited.
            The text type is generally recognizable and appropriate.
     4
            Conventions appropriate to the text type are evident.
            The text type is clearly recognizable and appropriate.
     5
            Conventions appropriate to the text type are effective and evident.

To gain maximum marks [5], all of the bulleted conventions must be applied.
To gain [3], more than half of the conventions must be applied.

Note: Examiners are reminded that Criterion C bullet points are marking notes, not mark schemes.
Therefore, where one or more bullet points are only partially fulfilled (eg appropriate register
generally used but not consistently, there is an opening salutation but no closing salutation etc),
some credit/recognition may still be given. In such cases, examiners should consider the work
holistically and use their professional judgements, with reference to the criteria, to arrive at the final
marks.

Expected conventions of the text type are as follows:

Question 1: Email
• will adopt a consistently informal register
• will adopt a lively, engaging style, perhaps with some “youth-speak” eg “I’m good”,
  “Can’t wait” etc
• will maintain clear sense of address to a specific person
• will have opening salutations
• will have closing salutations.

N.B.: Some limited use of textese (eg “4” for “four/for” and “u” for “you”) and/or emoticons is
permissible.

Question 2: Blog entry
• will adopt a semi-formal to informal register
• will have an engaging title for the entry itself – ie not just a general name for the blog overall
• will include first person statement and/or narration
• will show awareness of the reader, eg through direct address, a lively and interesting style etc
• will have a closing statement, eg invitation to comment, a conclusion drawn etc.
                                                  – 13 –            M18/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Question 3: News report
• will adopt a semi-formal to formal register
• will have a relevant title/headline
• will use a neutral/objective style eg presents ideas and facts without embellishment
• will have a conclusion or recommendation
• will have a clearly structured layout eg a clear introduction, sub-headings, short brief
  paragraphs/sections, etc.

Question 4: Proposal
• will adopt a formal register
• will use a style aimed to persuade a specified audience
• will have a title summarizing the overall subject
• will set out the text clearly using format features such as headings, short clear paragraphs,
  sections identified by numbers/letters/bullets, insetting etc
• will have an introduction and a conclusion.

N.B.: It is acceptable for the proposal to be presented within the framework of a letter / email,
provided the features above are present. The handling of such a ‘framework’ should not affect the
mark.

Question 5: Interview
• will adopt a semi-formal register
• will have a relevant headline/title
• will have an introduction and conclusion
• will use a style aimed at involving and interesting the reader
• will refer to the interview, including direct quotations; it will not be a verbatim transcript.
                                                – 14 –           M18/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                            Section B
Criterion A: Language

• How effectively and accurately does the student use language?

  Marks    Level descriptor
    0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
           Command of the language is limited and generally ineffective.
   1–2     A limited range of vocabulary is used, with many basic errors.
           Simple sentence structures are sometimes clear.
           Command of the language is generally adequate, despite many inaccuracies.
   3–4     A fairly limited range of vocabulary is used, with many errors.
           Simple sentence structures are usually clear.
           Command of the language is effective, despite some inaccuracies.
   5–6     A range of vocabulary is used accurately, with some errors.
           Simple sentence structures are clear.
           Command of the language is good and effective.
   7–8     A wide range of vocabulary is used accurately, with few significant errors.
           Some complex sentence structures are clear and effective.
           Command of the language is very effective.
   9–10    A wide range of vocabulary is used accurately and effectively, with very few errors.
           Complex sentence structures are clear and effective.


Clarification

Word count
At HL, students are required to write a minimum of 250 words in section A and 150 words in
section B. Failure to write the minimum number of words will result in a [1 mark] penalty under
criterion A. There is no penalty for exceeding 400 words in section A or 250 words in section B:
the whole text should be taken into consideration in the award of marks.

Language
Not all errors have the same importance, and examiners should bear this in mind. Some errors
affect the communication of meaning significantly, and others do not. Also, some errors indicate a
fundamental lack of command of the language, while others may simply indicate a moment of
forgetfulness.

SLIPS – mistakes at all levels of difficulty, but erratic and occasional – eg the candidate normally
forms past tenses well, but occasionally forgets “-ed”.

FLAWS – errors occur more regularly, particularly in certain structures – eg past tenses are formed
correctly quite often, but are not really reliable, and there may be basic confusions (eg past simple
versus present perfect).

GAPS – some structures are rarely correct, or simply don’t appear – eg the past tenses are
needed, but do not appear.

A good answer will have very few language gaps, if any, and slips or flaws very rarely affect
meaning.
                                              – 15 –          M18/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B: Argument

• How skillfully does the student develop ideas?
• How clear and convincing is the argument?
• To what extent does the student react to the stimulus?

  Marks    Level descriptor
    0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
           The development of ideas is very poor, and the argument is unclear and
           unconvincing.
   1–2
           The structure of the argument is vague and confusing.
           The ideas are irrelevant.
           The development of ideas is poor, and the argument is rarely clear and
           convincing.
   3–4
           The structure of the argument is sometimes apparent.
           The ideas are sometimes relevant.
           The development of ideas is sometimes good, and the argument has some clarity
           and is sometimes convincing.
   5–6
           The structure of the argument is evident.
           The ideas are generally relevant.
           The development of ideas is good and methodical; the argument is clear and
           fairly convincing.
   7–8
           The structure of the argument is coherent and organized.
           The ideas are well expressed and relevant.
           The development of ideas is very good and methodical; the argument is
           convincing.
   9–10
           The structure of the argument is consistently coherent and organized.
           The ideas are very well expressed, relevant and engaging.


 NOTE: When marking candidate responses, keep in mind that neither the accuracy of the
 information presented, nor the validity of the candidates’ personal opinions, are being assessed.
 Therefore, scripts that are factually inaccurate should not be marked down, provided they meet
 the requirements of the task, and the ideas are sufficiently developed.
                                                   – 16 –           M18/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


6.      “Walking with a friend in the dark is better than walking alone in the light.”

                                                                                            Helen Keller

            • addresses poorly or not at all the central issue of sharing experiences, even bad ones,
              with friends, versus going through happy times alone (even if the words “light” and
              “dark” are interpreted literally)
            • provides little or no explanation of what a “friend” is taken to mean. Any related ideas,
              such as sharing difficult experiences (the unknown, family situations, and the like), are
     3–4      not clearly linked to the interpretation of “a friend”
            • presents an unclear or contradictory view of the statement: whether agreeing or
              disagreeing, or considering pros and cons of both sides
            • provides reasons for the viewpoint that are not developed clearly
            • links arguments very poorly or not at all
            • addresses in loose general terms the central issue of sharing experiences, even bad
              ones, with friends, versus going through happy times alone (even if the words “light”
              and “dark” are interpreted literally)
            • provides a vague attempt at explanation of what a “friend” is taken to mean. Related
              ideas, such as sharing difficult experiences (the unknown, family situations, and the
     5–6      like), are only vaguely linked to the interpretation of “a friend”
            • presents an imprecise or confused view of the statement: whether agreeing or
              disagreeing, or considering pros and cons of both sides
            • provides reasons for the viewpoint that are only developed clearly in part
            • links arguments unclearly and ineffectively at times
            • addresses broadly the central issue of sharing experiences, even bad ones, with
              friends, versus going through happy times alone (even if the words “light” and “dark”
              are interpreted literally)
            • provides some explanation of what a “friend” is taken to mean. Related ideas, such as
              sharing difficult experiences (the unknown, family situations, and the like), are linked to
     7–8      some extent to the interpretation of “a friend”
            • presents quite a clear view of the statement: whether agreeing or disagreeing, or
              considering pros and cons of both sides
            • provides reasons for the viewpoint that are generally developed fairly clearly
            • links arguments reasonably clearly and effectively
          • addresses directly the central issue of sharing experiences, even bad ones, with
            friends, versus going through happy times alone (even if the words “light” and “dark”
            are interpreted literally)
          • provides an effective explanation of what a “friend” is taken to mean. Related ideas,
            such as sharing difficult experiences (the unknown, family situations, and the like), are
     9–10   explicitly linked to the interpretation of “a friend”
          • presents a clear and coherent view of the statement: whether agreeing or disagreeing,
            or considering pros and cons of both sides
          • provides reasons for the viewpoint that are clearly developed and well-supported
          • links arguments clearly and effectively
