M18/2/ABITA/HP2/ITA/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                     May / Mai / Mayo 2018


                   Italian / Italien / Italiano B


                          Higher level
                        Niveau supérieur
                         Nivel superior


                   Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2




11 pages/páginas
                              –2–             M18/2/ABITA/HP2/ITA/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use
of examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Global Centre, Cardiff.



Ces remarques pour la notation sont confidentielles. Leur
usage est réservé exclusivement aux examinateurs participant
à cette session.

Ces remarques sont la propriété du Baccalauréat International.
Toute reproduction ou distribution à de tierces personnes sans
l’autorisation préalable du centre mondial de l’IB à Cardiff
est interdite.



Estas notas para la corrección son confidenciales y para el uso
exclusivo de los examinadores en esta convocatoria de
exámenes.

Son propiedad del Bachillerato Internacional y no deben
reproducirse ni distribuirse a ninguna otra persona sin la
autorización del centro global del IB en Cardiff.
                                             –3–                M18/2/ABITA/HP2/ITA/TZ0/XX/M


The following are the annotations available to use when marking responses.

                Annotation                         Explanation

                                 Caret – indicates omission


                                 Incorrect point


                                 Ellipse that can be expanded


                                 Horizontal wavy line that can be expanded


                                 Highlight tool that can be expanded


                                 On page comment – justifies application of
                                 assessment criteria


                                 Unclear content or language


                                 SEEN - every scanned page must be annotated
                                 or marked as SEEN


                                 Good Response/Good Point


                                 Vertical wavy line that can be expanded


You must make sure you have looked at all pages. Please put the        annotation on any blank
page, to indicate that you have seen it.

When using the On Page Comments annotation, please keep the following in mind:
  • Avoid covering the candidate’s own writing. This can be done by writing your comments in
    the margins then running the arrow attached to the ‘on-page comment’ annotation to the
    appropriate place.
  • Provide all comments in the target language.
  • You may provide summative comments at the end of the script, but please do NOT record
    numerical marks on the scripts.
                                               –4–                M18/2/ABITA/HP2/ITA/TZ0/XX/M


General marking instructions
 These notes to examiners are intended as guidelines to assist marking. However, they are not
 offered as a fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must rigidly adhere.
 Good ideas or angles not offered in the notes, but which are still relevant to the task as worded,
 should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate.

 Assistant Examiners should contact their team leader through RM™ Assessor or by email at any
 time if they have any problems/queries regarding marking. For any queries regarding the use of
 RM™ Assessor, please contact emarking@ibo.org.


Instructions générales pour la notation
  Ces notes sont destinés à aider les examinateurs lors de la notation. Elles ne peuvent en aucun
  cas être considérées ni comme un ensemble de réponses fixe et exhaustif, ni comme des
  approches de notations auxquelles les réponses doivent strictement correspondre. Les idées ou
  angles valables qui n’ont pas été proposés ici, mais qui sont toujours pertinents pour la tâche,
  doivent être reconnus et récompensés de manière appropriée.

  Les examinateurs assistants doivent contacter leur chef d’équipe par l’intermédiaire de
  RMTM Assessor ou par courriel à tout moment s’ils éprouvent des difficultés ou s’ils ont des
  questions concernant la notation. Pour toute question concernant l’utilisation de
  RMTM Assessor, veuillez envoyer un courriel à emarking@ibo.org


Instrucciones generales para la corrección
  Estas notas para los examinadores están diseñadas como guías para ayudar a corregir. Sin
  embargo, no son una lista de respuestas fijas o enfoques a los que todas las respuestas deben
  ajustarse rígidamente. Habrá buenas ideas o perspectivas que no se aparezcan en las notas,
  pero que serán pertinentes a la tarea tal como están redactadas y deben ser reconocidas y
  recompensadas según corresponda.

  El examinador asistente deberá ponerse en contacto con el jefe de equipo mediante RM™
  Assessor o correo electrónico si tiene problemas o consultas sobre la corrección. Si tiene
  alguna consulta respecto al uso de RM™ Assessor, envíe un correo electrónico a
  emarking@ibo.org
                                                –5–                M18/2/ABITA/HP2/ITA/TZ0/XX/M


                                            Section A
Criterion A: Language

• How effectively and accurately does the student use language?

  Marks    Level descriptor
    0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
           Command of the language is limited and generally ineffective.
   1–2     A limited range of vocabulary is used, with many basic errors.
           Simple sentence structures are sometimes clear.
           Command of the language is generally adequate, despite many inaccuracies.
   3–4     A fairly limited range of vocabulary is used, with many errors.
           Simple sentence structures are usually clear.
           Command of the language is effective, despite some inaccuracies.
   5–6     A range of vocabulary is used accurately, with some errors.
           Simple sentence structures are clear.
           Command of the language is good and effective.
   7–8     A wide range of vocabulary is used accurately, with few significant errors.
           Some complex sentence structures are clear and effective.
           Command of the language is very effective.
   9–10    A wide range of vocabulary is used accurately and effectively, with very few errors.
           Complex sentence structures are clear and effective.


Clarification

Word count
At HL, students are required to write a minimum of 250 words in section A and 150 words in
section B. Failure to write the minimum number of words will result in a [1 mark] penalty under
criterion A. There is no penalty for exceeding 400 words in section A or 250 words in section B:
the whole text should be taken into consideration in the award of marks.

Language
Not all errors have the same importance, and examiners should bear this in mind. Some errors
affect the communication of meaning significantly, and others do not. Also, some errors indicate a
fundamental lack of command of the language, while others may simply indicate a moment of
forgetfulness.

SLIPS – mistakes at all levels of difficulty, but erratic and occasional – eg the candidate normally
forms past tenses well, but occasionally forgets “-ed”.

FLAWS – errors occur more regularly, particularly in certain structures – eg past tenses are formed
correctly quite often, but are not really reliable, and there may be basic confusions (eg past simple
versus present perfect).

GAPS – some structures are rarely correct, or simply don’t appear – eg the past tenses are
needed, but do not appear.

A good answer will have very few language gaps, if any, and slips or flaws very rarely affect
meaning.
                                                 –6–                 M18/2/ABITA/HP2/ITA/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B: Message

• How clearly can the student develop and organize relevant ideas?

  Marks    Level descriptor
    0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
           The message has not been communicated.
           The ideas are irrelevant and/or repetitive.
   1–2
           The development of ideas is confusing; supporting details are limited and/or not
           appropriate.
           The message has been partially communicated.
           The ideas are relevant to some extent.
   3–4
           The development of ideas is evident at times; supporting details are sometimes
           appropriate.
           The message has been communicated fairly well.
   5–6     The ideas are mostly relevant.
           The development of ideas is coherent; supporting details are mostly appropriate.
           The message has been communicated well.
   7–8     The ideas are relevant.
           The development of ideas is coherent and effective; supporting details are appropriate.
           The message has been communicated very well.
           The ideas are relevant and effective.
   9–10
           The development of ideas is coherent and thorough; supporting details are highly
           appropriate.


  Compito 1: “Se stai vivendo in una nazione straniera, devi dimenticare la tua cultura e devi
  adattarti alle regole e abitudini del Paese che ti ospita”. Questo è il soggetto del tuo prossimo
  dibattito nella tua classe. Scrivi il tuo discorso introduttivo, presentando la tua opinione riguardo
  questa affermazione.



  Il compito prevede che il candidato:
   • esprima la sua opinione, a favore o contraria, riguardo l’idea che una persona debba
  dimenticare la propria cultura per adattarsi al paese dove vive.
  • tratti il soggetto dettagliatamente, presentando una serie di diverse argomentazioni, o
  analizzandone una in profondità
  • supporti le argomentazioni con esempi appropriati, spiegazioni e/o giustificazioni
  • dia struttura allo sviluppo e progressione delle idee, per esempio attraverso l’uso di paragrafi,
  strutture connettive, ecc.




  Compito 2: Il tuo dipartimento di italiano ha recentemente organizzato un evento in cui gli
  studenti hanno cucinato e presentato esempi di cibo tipico italiano. Hai trovato straordinaria la
  varietà dei cibi e molto interessanti le informazioni su questi. Considerando entrambi questi
  aspetti, scrivi una recensione dell’evento da pubblicare sul tuo giornale scolastico.


  Il compito prevede che il candidato:
  • produca una recensione che introduca e contestualizzi quest’evento
  • descriva i cibi presenti, concentrandosi dettagliatamente sulle informazioni che erano fornite su
  questi
                                              –7–                 M18/2/ABITA/HP2/ITA/TZ0/XX/M


•spieghi le ragioni per cui un evento simile, organizzato dagli studenti per promuovere la cultura
italiana, possa essere considerato positivo e utile
• dia struttura allo sviluppo e progressione delle idee, per esempio attraverso l’uso di paragrafi, o
strutture connettive, ecc.



Compito 3: Per promuovere uno stile di vita sano, vuoi creare un club di giardinaggio con lo
scopo di produrre frutta e verdure genuine in spazi inutilizzati del tuo quartiere. Scrivi un
opuscolo per la comunità locale dando informazioni sul club e sui benefici che potrebbe offrire
alla comunità.


Il compito prevede che il candidato:
• produca un opuscolo presentando e promuovendo questo progetto.
• dia i dettagli riguardanti l’organizzazione di questo club
• elenchi e spieghi i benefici che questo progetto potrebbe portare alla comunità
• supporti l’argomentazione con esempi appropriati
• dia struttura allo sviluppo e progressione delle idee, per esempio con l’uso di paragrafi,
strutture connettive, ecc.



Compito 4: Molti dei tuoi amici scaricano musica illegalmente da Internet. Scrivi un articolo sul
giornale della scuola in cui denunci la situazione, spiegando le conseguenze negative di questa
attività e proponendo modi alternativi per ascoltare musica online.

Il compito prevede che il candidato:
• produca un articolo che introduca la situazione ai suoi compagni di scuola
•descriva le conseguenze dello scaricare la musica illegalmente
•supporti l’argomentazione con esempi appropriati
 •proponga soluzioni alternative
• dia struttura allo sviluppo e progressione delle idee, per esempio con l’uso di paragrafi,
strutture connettive, ecc



Compito 5: Recentemente hai letto un articolo in cui l’autore sostiene l’idea che le scienze
naturali (come chimica, biologia e fisica) non sono così utili quanto le scienze sociali (come
economia o storia) nel ventunesimo secolo. Scrivi un blog in cui discuti questa idea e argomenti
la tua opinione.

Il compito prevede che il candidato:
• produca un blog in cui viene spiegata questa affermazione
• esprima la sua opinione a favore o contraria all’affermazione data
• giustifichi la sua opinione approfonditamente
•supporti le sue idee con esempi, spiegazioni e /o giustificazioni
•dia struttura e progressione alle idee, per esempio con l’uso di paragrafi, strutture connettive,
ecc.
                                                –8–                 M18/2/ABITA/HP2/ITA/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion C: Format

• How correctly does the student produce the required text type?
• To what extent are the conventions of text types appropriate?

  Marks       Level descriptor
    0         The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
              The text type is not recognizable.
       1
              Conventions appropriate to the text type are not used.
              The text type is hardly recognizable or is not appropriate.
       2
              Conventions appropriate to the text type are very limited.
              The text type is sometimes recognizable and appropriate.
       3
              Conventions appropriate to the text type are limited.
              The text type is generally recognizable and appropriate.
       4
              Conventions appropriate to the text type are evident.
              The text type is clearly recognizable and appropriate.
       5
              Conventions appropriate to the text type are effective and evident.

Per ottenere il massimo dei voti [5], tutte le convenzioni nella lista devono essere applicate.
Per ottenere [3], più della metà delle convenzioni deve essere applicata,
Nota: Si ricorda agli esaminatori che la lista del Criterio C è un’insieme di note, non uno schema
rigido. Perciò, nel caso in cui uno o più punti della lista siano solo parzialmente rispettati (per
esempio registro appropriato ma usato in modo inconsistente, saluti iniziali ma non finali ecc),
alcuni crediti/riconoscimenti possono essere comunque dati. In questi casi, gli esaminatori
dovrebbero considerare il lavoro olisticamente e usare il loro giudizio professionale, riferendosi ai
criteri, per arrivare al voto finale.
Le convenzioni previste per i vari tipi di testo sono le seguenti:




Compito 1: Discorso
  • Saluti iniziali al pubblico
  • Presentazione di se stesso
  • Artifici retorici quali ripetizioni o domande retoriche
  • conclusione chiara (che potrà contenere dei ringraziamenti al pubblico)
  • saluti conclusivi
  • Il registro sarà semi-formale
  • Si userà la forma di cortesia con il “Voi” se si parla all’insieme delle persone o con il “Lei” se
     ci si rivolge a una sola persona adulta o a un professore cui si dà del “Lei”, con il “Tu” se ci
     si rivolge a un compagno.
  • Il tono sarà persuasivo e coinvolgente



Compito 2: Recensione

   •       Titolo del giornale
   •       Titolo della recensione
   •       Una formula introduttiva
   •       Una formula conclusiva
   •       Saluti iniziali
   •       Saluti finali
                                               –9–               M18/2/ABITA/HP2/ITA/TZ0/XX/M


   •   La firma
   •   Il registro sarà semi-formale



Compito 3: Opuscolo

   •   Registro semi-formale/informale
   •   Titolo e sottotitoli
   •   Suddivisione in parti relative alle diverse funzioni comunicative (informativa programma,
       persuasiva, esemplificativa degli obiettivi, ecc)
   •   Tono informativo e persuasivo


Compito 4: Articolo

   •   Titolo del Giornale della scuola
   •   registro semi-formale
   •   tono persuasivo e diretto
   •   titolo e sottotitolo
   •   introduzione distinta, sviluppo e conclusione


Compito 5: Blog

   •   Titolo del blog e sottotitolo
   •   Data
   •   Registro informale
   •   Tono persuasivo
   •   Saluti introduttivi e conclusivi
                                                – 10 –             M18/2/ABITA/HP2/ITA/TZ0/XX/M


                                            Section B
Criterion A: Language

• How effectively and accurately does the student use language?

  Marks    Level descriptor
    0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
           Command of the language is limited and generally ineffective.
   1–2     A limited range of vocabulary is used, with many basic errors.
           Simple sentence structures are sometimes clear.
           Command of the language is generally adequate, despite many inaccuracies.
   3–4     A fairly limited range of vocabulary is used, with many errors.
           Simple sentence structures are usually clear.
           Command of the language is effective, despite some inaccuracies.
   5–6     A range of vocabulary is used accurately, with some errors.
           Simple sentence structures are clear.
           Command of the language is good and effective.
   7–8     A wide range of vocabulary is used accurately, with few significant errors.
           Some complex sentence structures are clear and effective.
           Command of the language is very effective.
   9–10    A wide range of vocabulary is used accurately and effectively, with very few errors.
           Complex sentence structures are clear and effective.


Clarification

Word count
At HL, students are required to write a minimum of 250 words in section A and 150 words in
section B. Failure to write the minimum number of words will result in a [1 mark] penalty under
criterion A. There is no penalty for exceeding 400 words in section A or 250 words in section B:
the whole text should be taken into consideration in the award of marks.

Language
Not all errors have the same importance, and examiners should bear this in mind. Some errors
affect the communication of meaning significantly, and others do not. Also, some errors indicate a
fundamental lack of command of the language, while others may simply indicate a moment of
forgetfulness.

SLIPS – mistakes at all levels of difficulty, but erratic and occasional – eg the candidate normally
forms past tenses well, but occasionally forgets “-ed”.

FLAWS – errors occur more regularly, particularly in certain structures – eg past tenses are formed
correctly quite often, but are not really reliable, and there may be basic confusions (eg past simple
versus present perfect).

GAPS – some structures are rarely correct, or simply don’t appear – eg the past tenses are
needed, but do not appear.

A good answer will have very few language gaps, if any, and slips or flaws very rarely affect
meaning.
                                             – 11 –        M18/2/ABITA/HP2/ITA/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B: Argument

• How skillfully does the student develop ideas?
• How clear and convincing is the argument?
• To what extent does the student react to the stimulus?

  Marks    Level descriptor
    0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
           The development of ideas is very poor, and the argument is unclear and
           unconvincing.
   1–2
           The structure of the argument is vague and confusing.
           The ideas are irrelevant.
           The development of ideas is poor, and the argument is rarely clear and
           convincing.
   3–4
           The structure of the argument is sometimes apparent.
           The ideas are sometimes relevant.
           The development of ideas is sometimes good, and the argument has some clarity
           and is sometimes convincing.
   5–6
           The structure of the argument is evident.
           The ideas are generally relevant.
           The development of ideas is good and methodical; the argument is clear and
           fairly convincing.
   7–8
           The structure of the argument is coherent and organized.
           The ideas are well expressed and relevant.
           The development of ideas is very good and methodical; the argument is
           convincing.
   9–10
           The structure of the argument is consistently coherent and organized.
           The ideas are very well expressed, relevant and engaging.
