m&n15/4/COMSC/HP3/eng/TZ0/XX/CS




Computer science
Case study: electronic banking


For use in May 2015 and November 2015




Instructions to candidates
 Case study booklet required for higher level paper 3.




     6 pages                                              © International Baccalaureate Organization 2015
                                                 –2–           m&n15/4/COMSC/hP3/eng/TZ0/XX/cs

Introduction

Banking in the modern sense began in Italy in the 14th century when farmers borrowed money in order to
finance the sowing of their crops, with the value of their crops being held against the loan. The people
arranging these credits carried out their business on benches in the agricultural markets – the word
“bank” derives from banca, the Italian word for “bench”. Similar banking practices spread throughout
Europe with the banks taking up residence in more permanent establishments, where they have since
become the central pillar underpinning financial transactions, first between businesses, and then
individuals.

    Preferred Banking Method               The last twenty years have seen a dramatic change in the
                                           way that banks interact with their customers, with the advent
             US 2013                       of online banking made possible by the development of the
                                           internet.

               Don’t                       The consequence is that banks are gradually moving their
               Know                        business transactions from the physical world of their city
                                           branches to the virtual world1. The innovations in technology
     Telephone
                           Internet        have revolutionized the banking industry with transactions
                           Banking         now being made almost instantaneously from any point on
     Mail                                  Earth that is within reach of an internet connection.
                             39%
    Mobile                                 The cost advantages for the banks and the convenience
                                           factors for the customers are clear, but there is a downside
                                           to this. Security and authenticity are the fundamental
         ATMs                              cornerstones of all financial transactions and the entire
                   Branches                banking system is dependent upon the secure transmission
                                           of data. Revelations reported by The Guardian newspaper
                                           in September 2013 that the encryption standards used for
                                           these transactions may no longer be safe are therefore a
                                           cause for considerable concern2.

The last few years have seen further changes with a strong move towards mobile banking and mobile
payments as the ownership of smartphones and tablets has increased. Customers using these devices
expect their banking services to be available when they are on the move, demanding both security and
ease of use; a difficult compromise for the IT personnel at these banks.

This Case Study looks at the operations of the fictious bank, TransEuropa. The focus is on the computer
science underpinning both the operations and the security aspects of banking transactions.




1
    http://www.aba.com
2
    http://www.theguardian.com/…/nsa-gchq-encryption-codes-security
                                                  –3–            m&n15/4/COMSC/hP3/eng/TZ0/XX/cs

TransEuropa

TransEuropa is based in a European country where it has been established for many years. It also has
a presence in some developing countries where its branches are confined to the major cities.

In an interview with Michael, the Head of IT Operations, he explained how security was a top priority in
their banking operations. He described some of the procedures currently in place.

            “Even though our internet banking operations in Europe have been in place for
            several years, we continually have to address the security issues surrounding our
            operations. For customers to have confidence in our company, it is essential that
            they are satisfied that the possibility of fraud is minimized.

            “Two main areas of attention are authentication and secure transmission of data.
            Our login process used to be based on the entry of a username and password,
            but this has been changed to 2-factor authentication. Now the customer replies
            to a security question and then enters a TAN (transaction authentication number),
            which is a type of one-time password. Each of our online customers has been
            sent a special keypad device which is able to generate the TAN, after the user
            has typed in a code known only to themselves and the bank. They are able to
            continue with their transaction or enquiry only after the answer to the security
            question and the TAN have been verified by the bank’s server.”

Michael then addressed the security of transmissions. He explained that, as the online operations are
carried out over the internet, the security was based on the SSL protocol, which makes use of both
asymmetric and symmetric encryption. An extended validation digital certificate issued by a Certificate
Agency is sent from the bank’s server to the client’s computer.

Recent developments have suggested that this encryption can in fact be broken, which is of great
significance to any business wishing their data transmissions to be secure. Michael questioned whether
the current encryption key length of 2048 bits might now be breakable by brute-force decryption methods
or whether certain agencies had made use of backdoor methods in decrypting the transmissions3. Either
way, he said, there was a constant need to review the bank’s security procedures.

Threats from malware are also a permanent concern to the banking industry. Michael highlighted both
phishing exploits and the Man-in-the-Browser Trojan as particular dangers that customers should be
aware of. He suggested that further measures would be considered by the bank, such as out-of-band
verification, to minimize the risks posed by these threats.




3
    http://www.computerweekly.com/news/…/US-acts-to-restore-...




                                                               Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                   –4–            m&n15/4/COMSC/hP3/eng/TZ0/XX/cs

Mobile Banking

Internet banking was originally restricted to personal computers, but the explosion in mobile technology
and the ability of smartphones and tablets to access the internet has led to an increasing demand for
mobile banking.

This increase is shown by the following statistics which were taken from the 2013 Annual Mobile Banking
and Commerce Summit4:

      • This year, 590 million mobile phone users globally will use their device for banking
        purposes. In 2017, that number will exceed 1 billion.
      • Worldwide, banks will spend $118 billion on technology and mobile banking in 2013.
      • 81 of the top 100 US financial institutions currently offer some form of mobile banking.

TransEuropa has already taken two different approaches to this area. When questioned on this topic,
Michael explained that the approach in the developing countries differed from that used in Europe due to
the differences in the available technology of the customer base. He went on:

            “In Europe, we want to offer our mobile customers the same range of services
            available to our PC users. However, mobile devices come in all shapes, sizes
            and specifications, so we need to try to tailor the content to the specific device.
            To achieve this, we employ mobile device detection technology to the HTTP
            requests arriving at our servers. This detection is based on reading the user
            agent header field and correlating the data held there with the different models
            described in the Device Description Repositories. We provide a combination of
            push and pull technologies and try to persuade our customers to download apps
            that are specific to their device. We also offer certain SMS banking facilities.”

He went on to describe how the level of security of mobile phone transmissions varied depending upon
the type of connection.

            “Customers may be using WiFi, where the connection might be controlled by
            either WPA or WEP protocols, or they might be using an unsecured service.
            If they were connected through their phone company they would be using GSM
            protocols.”

He continued by explaining that mobile banking in the developing world has taken a radically different
approach.

            “Our customer base in our European operation is completely different from that
            in the developing countries. In Europe, most of our customers are connected
            to the internet and require internet banking facilities. They expect to be able to
            conduct all of their financial operations online. Compare that to the developing
            countries where our operations are limited to cities and where most customers
            still physically come to the bank to conduct their business. The majority of the
            rural population don’t have access to the internet. In fact, the majority don’t have
            a bank account. However, the majority do own mobile phones.”




4
    https://blog.compete.com/…/mobile-banking-today-highlights-from-mcs2013/
                                                   –5–            m&n15/4/COMSC/hP3/eng/TZ0/XX/cs

He went on to explain how TransEuropa had entered into a partnership with a local telecommunications
company in one of the developing countries in order to provide basic financial services to the rural
population, even though they had no bank accounts. They were basing their operations on the success
of the M-PESA system in Kenya, where mobile phone owners are able to make certain payments, either
for services, such as utility bills, or to transfer money to another person or even between countries.
Credit can be added to each phone (or cashed in) at any of the mobile phone operators’ offices which
are scattered throughout the country.

“People are able to use their air-time credit as a mobile bank account”, continued Michael. “It works
because the majority of the adult population own mobile phones which can send SMS messages. Part
of our role is to develop the STK (SIM Application Toolkit), which provides the interface with the user.”

New Developments

The first was the development of a Mobile Wallet app which the bank’s customers could download onto
their smartphones. This app would allow them to use their smartphones to pay for goods with either
store cards or with credit/debit cards at stores that had the necessary technology installed. Michael
referred to Starbucks as a chain in which a significant percentage of sales were conducted in this
way, and to Pingit and Zapp as two mobile payment services that were already in operation with other
companies. The same app would also allow customers to access ATMs without the need for a bank
card.

            “This idea of a Mobile Wallet is one which we expect most of our customers to
            eventually embrace, as people look for quicker and easier ways of making their
            purchases. We believe that it is a market we should enter, as customers are
            more likely to trust technology that is provided by the banks. The choice we have
            is to either make use of ‘contactless’ technology using NFC or to use QR codes
            as part of the payment process. In either case the safeguarding of sensitive
            information will be a priority.”

He pointed out that Visa Europe predicts that, by 2020, more than half of its transactions will be carried
out on a mobile device5.

The second development was the investigation into the use of biometrics in providing even more secure
authentication and verification. Biometrics has been used as part of multi-factor authentication in areas
such as immigration for some time, but for various reasons its incorporation into banking services has
been slower.

Michael concluded by summarizing the main issues concerning modern banking from the technology
point of view with a look towards the future.

            “The main areas that are essential for maintaining and increasing our customer
            base are authentication, data security and user interface. For authentication, we
            will increasingly be looking towards the use of biometrics. For data security, we
            will need to continuously monitor the encryption standards used on the internet
            (SSL/TLS) and for mobile phone transmissions (WiFi and GSM protocols).
            Although some traditional services will have to be maintained, the majority of
            our customers increasingly want services such as internet banking and mobile
            payments to be a seamless part of normal life where the quality of the service is
            often more important than the provider. If we are to survive we must adapt to the
            ever-changing landscape.”
5
    http://www.bankingtech.com/...-payments-play-with-first-data/...


                                                                Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                     –6–         m&n15/4/COMSC/hP3/eng/TZ0/XX/cs

Challenges Faced

Michael and TransEuropa’s challenges for the immediate future are:

      • to prepare a report on the different encryption protocols currently being used and how
        they might change in the future;

      • to design the user interface that will work with the STK for their developing world
        mobile project;

      • to complete the research necessary for developing the Mobile Wallet project;

      • to review the authentication procedures in order to increase the security of banking
        operations.


Additional Terminology To The Guide

Apps
Asymmetric / symmetric encryption
Authentication / 2-factor / multi-factor authentication
Backdoor methods
Brute-force decryption
Contactless technology
Device Description Repository (DDR)
Extended validation digital certificate
Global System for Mobile communication (GSM)
HTTP(S)
Man-in-the-Browser (MitB) Trojan
Mobile Wallet
M-PESA
NFC
One-time password
Out-of-band verification
Phishing
Pingit
Push / Pull technology
QR codes
SMS
SSL/TLS
STK (SIM Application Toolkit)
Transaction authentication number (TAN)
Trojan
User agent header field
WEP
WPA
Zapp


Some companies, products, or individuals named in this case study are fictitious and any
similarities with actual entities are purely coincidental.
