No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
http://www.ibo.org/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-
publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat
ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur,
des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des
gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs
d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit préalable de
l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre
pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse http://www.ibo.org/fr/contact-the-
ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-
to-apply-for-a-license.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de
apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de
aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan
recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido y estará
sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este enlace
encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia: http://www.ibo.org/es/
contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-
providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.
N19/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




English A: literature – Standard level – Paper 1
Anglais A : littérature – Niveau moyen – Épreuve 1
Inglés A: literatura – Nivel medio – Prueba 1

Thursday 7 November 2019 (afternoon)
Jeudi 7 novembre 2019 (après-midi)
Jueves 7 de noviembre de 2019 (tarde)

1 hour 30 minutes / 1 heure 30 minutes / 1 hora 30 minutos


Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y Write a guided literary analysis on one passage only. In your answer you must address both of
  the guiding questions provided.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [20 marks].

Instructions destinées aux candidats
y N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
y Rédigez une analyse littéraire dirigée d’un seul des passages. Les deux questions d’orientation
  fournies doivent être traitées dans votre réponse.
y Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est de [20 points].

Instrucciones para los alumnos
y No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
y Escriba un análisis literario guiado sobre un solo pasaje. Debe abordar las dos preguntas de
  orientación en su respuesta.
y La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [20 puntos].




                                                                                              8819 – 0059
     4 pages/páginas                                      © International Baccalaureate Organization 2019
                                                     –2–                   N19/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Write a guided literary analysis on one passage only. In your answer you must address both of the
guiding questions provided.

1.

          I remember the ashram1 very well although I cannot remember a single thing about what was
          around it. Were there mountains or tall buildings? Were there shops or houses nearby? Did a
          road go past it? Could we hear any traffic sounds when we were inside? In my head the ashram
          is in the middle of nowhere, it is the only building on earth. Sometimes I wonder how much of
      5   what I remember is true. I have read that your memories can be concrete and detailed even
          about things that never happened to you and places you have never been to. Like fungus that
          takes birth in warm and wet places, memories ooze from the crevices of your brain: spawned
          there, living and dying there, unrelated to anything in the world outside, the slime can coat
          everything until you can’t tell the real from the imagined.
     10          I remember clearly, though, how enormous the ashram was and dark with trees. At night
          we were scared to be out alone especially because we had heard that five dogs were let loose
          every night to patrol the place. There were cottages in the grounds that were set at a distance
          from ours, in which Guruji’s disciples stayed. They came and went. There were many, from
          everywhere in the world. In our part we had Guruji’s cottage and a few other cottages, our
     15   dormitory building, a dining room, a puja2 hall and our school.
                 Many years later, my new foster mother would ask, after another long silence at the dinner
          table: “Tell me about your school there, tell me about your friends, tell me about the building,
          tell me something.” And I would wonder what to say, where to start. I could tell her my very first
          school, at the ashram, was in a yellow building – that was easy. It made her look hopeful. She
     20   waited for more. I said nothing. We both listened to the sound of a neighbour clipping his hedge.
          A boy cycling outside shouted to a friend. Still I found nothing to say. Then her sister phoned
          and my foster mother gave up waiting for me to speak.
                 Outside, I could see a blue and white bird and the hedge that went around her tiny lawn
          and, across the road, white houses with red roofs. Each house was exactly like the one next to
     25   it. The sun was like a moon in this country, and in its light I felt as if I was looking at everything
          through a pearl. It was cold and the trees had no leaves. I had never seen a leafless tree
          before. My foster mother dropped her voice, speaking fast and softly, even though I could not
          understand what she was saying to her sister.
                 What else could I tell her?
     30          Of course she knew I had been in orphanages before I came to her, and when I spoke
          about the ashram I made it sound like yet another orphanage. I told her the school was not far
          from the dormitory where we slept. We went there after our morning’s milk and banana. I told
          her the school had a courtyard with a jamun tree. I got stuck trying to explain what a jamun was:
          was it sour or sweet or bitter? How to explain its strange taste, and the way our tongues went
     35   purple and fat after eating them? And wondering how to explain jamuns, I would be distracted
          remembering how all day we did our lessons or our chores as if we boat girls were like other
          girls, but at night I would hear one girl grind her teeth fiercely enough to set mine on edge and
          another girl sob. Only when I felt my pillow wet with tears and spit would I know I had been
          listening to myself crying. How could I tell my foster mother this? I would begin to tear tiny
     40   shreds out from the paper napkin she never forgot to set beside my bowl of cereal. I dipped my
          spoon into the cereal and tried to count how many raisins there were in it, and how many bits of
          nut, and this way, by examining the cereal hard enough, I dissolved the lump that had somehow
          appeared in my throat. My foster mother watched me and waited for a while, then sighed and
                                                       –3–                  N19/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

             got up and began to wash dishes at the sink. I hunched over the shreds of tissue, unaware
    45       of her, the room, or the cereal I kept stirring around in its bowl uneaten, and in my head the
             rasping calls of crows grew deafening and I was back in that hot classroom, the bench hard
             and narrow under me.

                                            From: Anuradha Roy, Sleeping on Jupiter. © Anuradha Roy 2015.
                                                    Reproduced by permission of Quercus Editions Limited.



1
    ashram: facility used by a spiritual community in Indian religions
2
    puja: act of worship in Hinduism


       (a)      What do we learn about the narrator’s situation?

       (b)      How does the author reveal the narrator’s feelings towards her past experiences?




                                                                   Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                   –4–                  N19/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

2.
                                               Good Measure

                                 We left this house, the dog, the garden.
                                 We broke the vows, the hearth, the marriage.
                                 We left behind for good measure1
                                 dust, debt, sediment. Left the ash,
                             5   the keys, cushions to the futon
                                 in the crawl space2. A cracked tank
                                 emptied of fish. We left
                                 discards at the curb. Left the fights,
                                 the separate beds, the separate loves, the place
                            10   our daughter learned to walk
                                 and run.

                                 We left this house. We left
                                 the built-in vacuum, the neighbor’s leaf blower
                                 a man who edged his lawn with scissors. We left
                            15   the picket fence3, white lilac. Left
                                 a double-wide garage, a stack of bricks
                                 fire with a switch left off.
                                 The years left lines upon our faces.

                                 Each false start, ash of the dog under bleeding hearts.
                            20   Poppies, orange and gold. A stack of textbooks.
                                 Those years blew through us. You took a hit of sadness
                                 blew smoke in my mouth. I held it in
                                 until I saw stars.

                                 There was a fire, dog’s grit and bone, cold tea
                            25   in a cold mug, gold ring returned.
                                 We left a forwarding address
                                 pencil marks in the doorframe:
                                 the height they were at different times
                                 though we’d stopped growing long since.

                                                    “Good Measure” by Rachel Rose, Marry & Burn, 2015,
                                                         Harbour Publishing, www.harbourpublishing.com

1
     good measure: an addition to ensure completion or success
2
     crawl space: small storage space
3
     picket fence: decorative fence


       (a)   What do we learn about the speaker’s attitude towards leaving the house?

       (b)   How does the poet’s use of detail contribute to our understanding of the relationships
             portrayed?
