N17/3/BUSMT/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS




Business management
Case study: Mikumi Secondary School


For use in November 2017




Instructions to candidates
yy Case study booklet required for higher level paper 1 and standard level paper 1 business
   management examinations.




                                                                                              8817 –5001
     3 pages                                              © International Baccalaureate Organization 2017
                                               –2–              N17/3/BUSMT/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

                               Mikumi Secondary School (MSS)

     Jacob Wendo had always wanted to put something back into the community. He had become
     very wealthy owning a safari business in East Africa.

     Jacob realised his dream four years ago when he set up a school for girls near to Tanztown
     in Central Tanzania. He called the school Mikumi Secondary School (MSS). In rural areas
 5   of Tanzania girls do not always receive good secondary schooling. Tanztown is in a remote
     area with mainly subsistence farming and many small villages. Per capita income is low for
     East Africa. The average income for the whole country is about $1000 per year, and much
     lower in rural areas. For many girls, continuing their education is very difficult, even though
     equal rights are enshrined in the constitution of Tanzania. Many girls have to work on small
10   farms rather than receive schooling. Jacob’s school tries to provide secondary education for
     girls, with residential places (a boarding school). The girls’ parents pay fees that contribute
     towards the operating costs of the school. Often, the parents raise money for their contribution
     by selling their livestock.

     MSS is run as an educational charity. Jacob is the chair of trustees and takes the leading role
15   in all aspects of the management of the school. The head teacher, Mrs Kashinga (Mrs K),
     is responsible for the day-to-day running of the school, managing both revenue and capital
     expenditure. Mr Jones, the general manager, is responsible for non-teaching employees.

                                  Figure 1: Organization chart for MSS


                                       Chair of
                                       trustees



                    Other
                  trustees                                Head teacher




                                                                                 General
                                       Teachers
                                                                                 manager


                                                                               Non-teaching
                                                                                employees



     MSS is now in its fifth year. Jacob donated the land and some buildings. The current
     government is supportive of the school and has provided grants. There are further donations
20   from charities, both in Tanzania and overseas. The school and Jacob have recently received
     a global humanitarian award for their contribution to the development of girls’ education in the
     developing world.

     Books for the library and some other equipment were provided by a Swedish university. The
     supply of electricity to the school is unreliable.
                                                   –3–              N17/3/BUSMT/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

   25   Jacob wants the students to do a lot more than just study. They are very active in sports and
        engage in varied activities, such as singing, debating, community service and putting on drama
        performances. They also grow some of their own food on land that the school owns, which
        helps with economic and ecological sustainability. Jacob is also keen that the students are
        taught a strong sense of ethical values, and the whole school is managed based on ethical
   30   considerations. Results of national tests have been very good and many of the students are
        excited to continue their education beyond school.

        Starting MSS from nothing was difficult and Jacob recognized the need for expansion in the
        early years to break-even. Initially, recruiting students was straightforward, but now the school
        needs to be marketed to a wider area, including Dodoma, the capital city. The school will have
   35   to attract girls away from some of the schools in Dodoma, and could attract students from
        neighbouring countries. This could achieve economies of scale. Jacob thinks that the school
        should produce mission and vision statements and capitalize on the very positive word-of-
        mouth promotion that has come from the humanitarian award. Based on some primary market
        research, he believes that city people will be attracted by the rural location of the school and the
   40   fees, which are about 20 % less than fees for schools in cities.

        MSS pays teachers according to the standard government pay scales. However, the school
        is finding it difficult to recruit and retain teachers. There is high labour turnover of about 30 %.
        Some of the teachers who left said that they enjoyed teaching at the school and agreed with its
        vision, but that the teachers’ living accommodation, which is essential because of the remote
   45   location of the school, was of poor quality. Others said that they found it difficult teaching only
        in English, as required for the national examinations, rather than sometimes using Ki-Swahili,
        which is spoken by most of the students. Some also said that there were no possibilities for
        career and professional development because the only possible promotion post is held by
        Mrs K. The school has a flat organizational structure.

   50   Until now, MSS has had no IT facilities, but it has recently received ten laptops from
        Africa Infinity, a UK-based organization that recycles laptops for use in developing countries.
        The head teacher sees this as an opportunity to convert one of the classrooms into an IT
        centre. Few local schools have any IT facilities and an IT centre could be included in the
        marketing mix and become a unique selling point (USP), at least locally. The conversion of
   55   the classroom would be expensive. If only the school could get internet access…




Companies, products, or individuals named in this case study are fictitious and any similarities with
actual entities are purely coincidental.
