N17/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                        November 2017


                 Business management


                           Higher level


                               Paper 2




25 pages
                          –2–            N17/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is the property of the International
Baccalaureate and must not be reproduced or distributed
to any other person without the authorization of the IB
Global Centre, Cardiff.
                                         –3–               N17/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The markbands and assessment criteria on pages 5–7 should be used where indicated in
the markscheme.

    Marks     Level descriptor

      0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

     1–2         Little understanding of the demands of the question.
                 Few business management tools (where applicable), techniques and
                  theories are explained or applied, and business management
                  terminology is lacking.
                 Little reference to the stimulus material.

     3–4         Some understanding of the demands of the question.
                 Some relevant business management tools (where applicable),
                  techniques and theories are explained or applied, and some
                  appropriate terminology is used.
                 Some reference to the stimulus material but often not going beyond
                  the name of a person(s) and/or the name of the organization.

     5–6         Understanding of most of the demands of the question.
                 Relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques
                  and theories are explained and applied, and appropriate terminology
                  is used most of the time.
                 Some reference to the stimulus material that goes beyond the name
                  of a person(s) and/or the name of the organization.
                 Some evidence of a balanced response.
                 Some judgments are relevant but not substantiated.

     7–8         Good understanding of the demands of the question.
                 Relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques
                  and theories are explained and applied well, and appropriate
                  terminology is used.
                 Good reference to the stimulus material.
                 Good evidence of a balanced response.
                 The judgments are relevant but not always well substantiated.

     9–10        Good understanding of the demands of the question, including
                  implications, where relevant.
                 Relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques
                  and theories are explained clearly and applied purposefully, and
                  appropriate terminology is used throughout the response.
                 Effective use of the stimulus material in a way that significantly
                  strengthens the response.
                 Evidence of balance is consistent throughout the response.
                 The judgments are relevant and well substantiated.
                                                   –4–                N17/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Assessment criteria for Section C

Criterion A: Knowledge and conceptual understanding
This criterion addresses the extent to which the candidate demonstrates knowledge and
understanding of the given concepts and relevant business management content (theories,
techniques or tools, depending on the requirements of the question).

 Marks    Level descriptor
   0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
   1      Superficial knowledge of the given concepts is demonstrated. Business
          management content is not selected or the content selected is irrelevant.
    2     Satisfactory understanding of one or both of the given concepts is demonstrated.
          Some business management content selected is relevant. The relevant content is
          satisfactorily explained.
    3     Good understanding of one or both of the given concepts is demonstrated.
          The business management content selected is relevant, though it may not be
          sufficient. The relevant content is generally well explained, though the explanation
          may lack some depth or breadth.
    4     Good understanding of both of the given concepts is demonstrated. The business
          management content selected is relevant, sufficient and well explained.


Criterion B: Application
This criterion addresses the extent to which the candidate is able to apply the given concepts
and the relevant business management content (theories, techniques or tools, depending on
the requirements of the question) to his or her chosen real-world organization(s). The real-
world organization(s) must not be the organization featured in the prescribed case study
for paper 1.

 Marks     Level descriptor
   0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
   1       The given concepts and/or any relevant business management content are
           connected to the real-world organization(s), but this connection is inappropriate or
           superficial.
    2      The given concepts and/or relevant business management content are connected
           appropriately to the real-world organization(s), but this connection is not developed.
    3      The given concepts and relevant business management content are generally well
           applied to explain the situation and issues of the real-world organization(s), though
           the explanation may lack some depth or breadth. Examples are provided.
    4      The given concepts and relevant business management content are well applied to
           explain the situation and issues of the real-world organization(s). Examples are
           appropriate and illustrative.
                                                    –5–                N17/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion C: Reasoned arguments
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate makes reasoned arguments. This
includes making relevant and balanced arguments by, for example, exploring different
practices, weighing up their strengths and weaknesses, comparing and contrasting them or
considering their implications, depending on the requirements of the question. It also
includes justifying the arguments by presenting reasonable evidence or other support for the
claims made.

    Marks   Level descriptor
      0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
      1     Statements are made but these are superficial.
      2     Relevant arguments are made but these are mostly unjustified.
      3     Relevant arguments are made and these are mostly justified.
      4     Relevant, balanced arguments are made and these are well justified.


Criterion D: Structure
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate organizes his or her ideas with
clarity, and presents a structured piece of writing comprised of:

    an introduction
    a body
    a conclusion
    fit-for-purpose paragraphs.

    Marks   Level descriptor
      0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
      1     Two or fewer of the structural elements are present, and few ideas are clearly
            organized.
      2     Three of the structural elements are present, or most ideas are clearly organized.
      3     Three or four of the structural elements are present, and most ideas are clearly
            organized.
      4     All of the structural elements are present, and ideas are clearly organized.


Criterion E: Individuals and societies
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate is able to give balanced
consideration to the perspectives of a range of relevant stakeholders, including individuals
and groups internal and external to the organization.

    Marks   Level descriptor
      0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
      1     One individual or group perspective is considered superficially or inappropriately.
      2     One relevant individual or group perspective is considered appropriately, or two
            relevant individual or group perspectives are considered superficially or
            inappropriately.
      3     At least two relevant individual or group perspectives are considered appropriately.
      4     Balanced consideration is given to relevant individual and group perspectives.
                                                    –6–                N17/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                           Section A
1.   (a)   Describe one reason why brand loyalty would be important to PP.                          [2]

           Brand loyalty would be important to PP given that they operate in a local market
           with a number of competitors and that the prices they charge are higher. Given
           this fact, it would be critical for PP to have brand loyalty or their sales could fall
           (although not on the stimulus, sharp-eyed candidates may spot that PP’s pies are
           price inelastic given the additional information for 2018).

           Accept any other relevant description.

           Award [1] for a theoretical reason of the importance of brand loyalty.

           Award [1] for application to PP.

     (b)   Construct a profit and loss account for PP for the year ending 30 April 2017
           based on the figures in Table 1 (show all your working).                                 [4]

           Profit and loss account for PP for year ended 30 April 2017:

                                                                $
           Sales (8000 × $4)                               32 000
           Cost of goods sold (8000 × 1.75)                14 000
           Gross profit                                    18 000

           Expenses

           Electricity (12 × 200)                           2400
           Rent (4 × 1000)                                  4000
           Promotional                                      1000
                                                            7400
           Net profit before interest and tax              10 600

           8 % of $40 000                                    3200

           Net profit before tax                             7400

           Tax @25 % on net profit                           1850

           Net profit after interest and tax                 5550

           Award [1] if there is some understanding of how to construct a profit and loss
           account. The figures may be inaccurate and there are a number of errors in
           presentation and calculations.

           Award [2] if there are two or more errors which includes omission of working,
           formatting error, mathematical error, presentation eg net profit before interest and
           net loss before tax are not clearly labelled.

           Award a maximum of [3] if the profit and loss account is correct and
           well-presented but there are no full supporting calculations.
                                             –7–                 N17/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


      Award [3] if there is one error which includes omission of working, a formatting
      error or a mathematical error etc. Do not double penalize a candidate if they
      have made only one error earlier in the profit and loss account.

      Award [4] for a completely correct profit and loss account, which conforms to the
      IB suggested format. Headings are clear, well-presented.

      Candidates may not term each item under expenses.

      The IBO format does not specify different items therefore, working of electricity,
      and rent per year are not expected.

      Supporting working is expected with the calculation of total revenue/costs/
      interest/tax are given.

(c)   Construct a forecasted profit and loss account for PP for the year ending
      30 April 2018 based on the figures in Table 2 (show all your working).                 [4]

      Profit and loss account for PP for year ended 30 April 2018:

                                                          $
      New sales quantity = 8000 × 1.2                  9600
      New price ($4 – 30 %) = $4 – 1.2 = $2.8

      Sales (8000 × 1.20 × $2.8)                     26 880
      Cost of goods sold (9600 × 1.75)               16 800

      Gross profit                                   10 080

      Expenses

      Electricity (12 × 200)                           2400
      Rent (4 × 1000)                                  4000
      Promotional                                      3000
                                                       9400

      Net profit before interest and tax                680

      Interest of 8 % of $50 000                       4000
      Net loss before tax                              3320

      Accept Net profit before tax                    (3320)
      Accept “retain profit”.

      N.B. Do not double penalize candidates if they use the same incorrect format
      from part (b).

      Award [1] if there is some understanding of how to construct a profit and loss
      account. The figures may be inaccurate and there are a number of errors in
      presentation.

      Award [2] if there are two or more new errors which includes omission of working,
      formatting error, mathematical error, presentation eg net profit before interest and
      net loss before tax are not clearly labelled.
                                      –8–                 N17/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Award a maximum of [3] if the profit and loss account is correct and
well-presented but there are no full supporting calculations.


Award [3] if there is one error which includes omission of working, a formatting
error or a mathematical error etc.
Please do not double penalize a candidate if they have made only one error
earlier in the profit and loss account.


Award [4] for a completely correct profit and loss account, which conforms to the
IB suggested format. Headings are clear, well presented and supporting working
to calculate figures of total revenue/costs /interest are given.

Please note:

If the candidate was penalised for inappropriate structure or headings/format in
part (b) and repeats the same in part (c) provided that the workings are correct
and shown, do not double penalise and award full marks.

Generally, do not double penalise again any wrong headings/ omissions
presented in part (b) and repeated in part (c). Question (c) is more about the
manipulation/ calculation of the old figures.

Working is expected in part (b) and (c) and if there is no working in (c) as
well as in (b), it is an omission.
                                                      –9–                 N17/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



2.     (a)     State two features of a partnership.                                                 [2]

               Possible features include:
                more than one partner up to around 20
                share profits/risk
                unlimited liability.

               Accept any other relevant feature.

               Do not accept shares – they cannot be sold on the stock market as there are no
               shares.

               Accept shares cannot be issued.

               Award [1] for each correct feature stated. Award a maximum of [2].
               Application is not expected.

       (b)     Prepare a monthly cash-flow forecast for TC for the first six months of operation.   [6]

                         January      February        March       April        May          June

     Opening
                           3000        (3350)         (850)       2250        (1150)        1950
     balance
     Cash inflows
       Cash sales          4550         5950          5950        5950         5950         5950
       Cash in from
                                        1950          2550        2550         2550         2550
       credit sales
       Total inflows       4550         7900          8500        8500         8500         8500
     Outflows
       Rent                6500                                   6500
       Labour                750          750          750         750          750          750
       Raw
                           3250         4250          4250        4250         4250         4250
       materials
       Overheads             400          400          400         400          400          400
       Total
                          10 900        5400          5400      11 900         5400         5400
       outflows
     Net cash flow        (6350)        2500          3100       (3400)        3100         3100
     Closing balance      (3350)        (850)         2250       (1150)        1950         5050


               N.B. Allow candidate own figure rule (OFR): if a candidate makes an error in one
               row and carries it through the remainder of the forecast that is only one error.
               This provision includes both mathematical errors and conceptual errors (for
               example, if a candidate has the rent in the incorrect month then candidates
               should only lose [1] for that error.
                                              – 10 –               N17/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


      Award [1] if the candidate conveys some understanding of what a cash flow
      forecast is, but otherwise the forecast is largely inaccurate, incomplete,
      or illegible.

      Award [2–3] if a cash flow forecast is drawn, but either it is not in a generally
      accepted format or it is untidy, and/or the forecast contains three or more errors,
      which could include, in addition to number placement problems and mathematical
      errors, conceptual errors (using the word “profit” rather than “net cash flow”) or
      omissions, such as not having a line like “closing balance” or totals.

      Award [4–5] if the cash flow forecast is drawn essentially correctly and neatly in a
      generally accepted format, but there is one error for [5] or two errors for [4].

      Award [6] if the cash flow forecast is drawn accurately and neatly in a generally
      accepted format, and is error free.

      If the candidate provided a heading of total inflow/outflow without using another
      heading above of inflow or outflow – do not penalise as an omission.

      If the candidate omitted both headings of outflow/inflow = one error

      Substituting the term “net profit in the cash flow forecast for “net cash flow” is
      inaccurate and [1] should be deducted.

      If the candidate has only one row for all cash outflows, subtract [1] from the total
      mark awarded.

      Full working is not expected.

(c)   Calculate TC’s forecasted net profit at the end of June (show all your working).       [2]

      Closing balance in June  opening balance in January plus credit sales =
      5050 – 3000 + 2550 = $4600.

      2550 are added as there was an additional amount of cash due which was credit
      before but should be added to the total revenue.

      Accept any other relevant working provided the workings are clear and logically
      presented.

      Award [1] for working and [1] for the correct answer. Award up to a maximum of
      [2]. If the credit sales are not added then this counts as one error and [1] should
      be awarded.

      Award [1] for working correctly either the total revenue or the total costs.

       Sales rev ($)                      49 000
       COGS                               24 500
       Gross profit                       24 500
       Less rent                13 000
             Labour              4500
             Overheads           2400     19 900
       Net profit                          4600

      Total Revenue = 1300 × $5 + 1700 × $5 × 5months = $49 000.

      Credit candidates who included the labor costs under direct costs.
                                                  – 11 –              N17/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                                Section B
3.   (a)   Define the term productivity rate.                                                     [2]

           Productivity rate is a relative measure of how efficiently inputs are converted into
           output/the ratio of outputs to inputs during production in percentage. A
           productivity rate gives an indication of how well resources are used in the
           production process.

                Total out in a given time period              Output
           eg                                    x 100 =
                   Total workers employed                Capital employed
                   Do not credit students who define the term as level of production or
                   capacity utilization.

           Formula is given so please do not credit the presentation of the formula

           Accept any other relevant definition.
           N.B. no application required. Do not credit examples.

           Award [1] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and
           understanding. Possibly without mentioning the measurement in percentage.

           Award [2] for a full definition that conveys knowledge and understanding similar
           to the answer above. For [2] there should be some indication that the
           organization converts inputs into outputs effectively or efficiently measured in
           percentage/ rate.

     (b)   Explain how each of the two external threats arising from the STEEPLE analysis
           would have impacted on farmers’ incomes in the developing world.                       [4]

           The question is about the process of the external factors.
           If orange producers from the developed communities employ new technology
           with higher productivity rates, the prices of oranges are likely to fall for the
           customer. Developing communities will likely experience a decrease in demand
           for their oranges and thus, even if prices of oranges do not change, will see a
           reduction in income.

           A sustained and severe drought affecting the level of orange production in
           developing countries will likely lead to a shortage of oranges and thus higher
           prices for Pedro’s stock. Customers are unlikely to purchase from higher price
           producers and coupled with the falling prices from the developed producers who
           are competitors, the developing farmers’ incomes are likely to fall further.


           Mark as 2 + 2.
            For an identification or a description of an impact / external threat with or
             without application [1].
            For explanation of the impact of/ one external threat with no application [1].
            For explanation of the impact of one external threat and application [2].

           Explicit reference to the demand and supply of oranges is not expected.
                                             – 12 –              N17/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(c)   Explain one cost and one benefit to Pedro of conducting extensive research and
      development.                                                                           [4]

      The question is essentially about researching and developing new
      technology rather than market research of customers’ opinions etc.

      Costs

      Harvesting in the developing community is labour intensive, children will need
      supervising and the internet is unreliable. Pedro may not have the time and the
      resources to carry out research and development into new technology. The time
      taken to undertake research and development will lead to significant expenses for
      Pedro. Moreover, the opportunity costs in terms of not working in the field could
      be considerable for Pedro.

      As the technology is untested, the poorer community can ill afford for this
      technology not to work as they have limited funds. There are significant
      risks/costs of failure for the developing communities at a time when incomes
      are falling.
      Accept any other relevant/ applicable cost

      Benefits

      The potential benefits for the community of research and development are the
      productivity benefits allowing developing communities a more level playing field
      with respect to competition with the developed farmers. Unit costs could fall, and
      therefore prices to customers, increasing the demand for oranges. Perhaps it is
      a risk worth taking in terms of time and resources.

      By conducting research and development, Pedro could attract an angel
      investor/innovator who for marketing or ethical reasons may be willing to allow
      Pedro to try new, untested technology at a deep discount or even for free as a
      public relations exercise. This could benefit Pedro and other community
      members especially if the cooperative is formed.

      Accept any other relevant cost/benefit.
      Mark as 2 + 2.

       For an identification or a description of one benefit/ cost with or without
        application [1].
       For explanation of one benefit/ cost with no application [1].
       For explanation of one benefit/ cost and application [2].

      Application must refer to researching technology.

(d)   Examine Pedro’s proposal to create an agricultural cooperative in his community
      rather than continuing to operate as a sole trader.                                   [10]

      There are a few issues that the candidates can cover and evaluate. Issues could
      include the advantages of being a sole trader in terms of control over decision
      making, for example, as opposed to operating as a cooperative.
      It is expected that the candidates show understanding of, if not explicit
      explanation as to what a cooperative is/relevant reference to cooperative, not just
      to the name. Creation of a cooperative is much more than just pooling resources,
      etc. While a cooperative is a for-profit organization, it will have the much-needed
      social objective to solve the problem of child labour, lack of education and
                                      – 13 –              N17/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


poverty. Something that each individual sole trader is clearly unable to do given
the information in the case study. One may judge the above as a very strong
argument in favour of the creation of cooperative as the issue of poverty and
children working in the fields are acute.

It should be noted that creating a cooperative could enable Pedro and the other
farmers to raise the much-needed finance as well as diversifying and engaging in
secondary sector activity.

Being a sole trader, Pedro (and the other farmers) experience a lack of financial
power and engage in a high-risk operation due to the nature of the business and
living in a harsh environment. The stimulus indicates that these farmers are
experiencing a high level of uncertainty, low income and even poverty, with little
or no opportunity to improve. With no support, all can be lost as each farmer is
facing unlimited liability.

By creating an agriculture/producers’ cooperative, the farmers will pool resources
together in order to raise the finance needed for investment in new technology,
market their products to compete with international competitors and possibly
diversify and produce an orange juice drink. Pedro, and the other farmers in the
cooperative, through a division of labour, shared responsibility and mutual
support might be able to negotiate better loans, better prices for crops and
reduce the reliance on basic primary, unpredictable weather dependent crops if
they diversify in the medium to long term. If the option of diversification is
pursued it will guarantee a higher and steady income rather than a seasonal
income. One may judge this issue as highly significant given the current harsh
conditions and external threats.

Moreover, the farmers might be more motivated due to their ability to collaborate
and make decisions in a democratic manner. The quality of the decision making
may be better.

The financial gain will also be transferred into a social gain, which the community
needs. Priority can be given to the children’s education instead of the children
supporting each sole trader in the fields. One may judge this issue/benefit as
highly significant.

While there are theoretical and practical disadvantages of operating as
cooperatives, like some disincentives to work due to low wages, slower and
dependent decision-making processes compared to independent and fast
decision making by Pedro and the other farmers. The main disadvantage is the
cultural and linguistic differences among the farmers that might create some
misunderstanding and possibly a clash as well as the long decision-making
process in the short term. Moreover, the movement into the secondary sector
might be too difficult for the farmers. Lots of training will be needed in terms of
production and marketing and investment in different technology. This
operational shift might be a hindrance but the farmers can decide that short term
investment in farming methods is of the highest priority and perhaps in the longer
term, when farming methods are more efficient, they can move into the
secondary sector.

Some judgment:

Still, in this case, one may judge that the arguments for the proposal are more
significant and outweigh the arguments against. Linguistic and cultural
differences with training and wider community support can be overcome in the
                                      – 14 –               N17/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


medium to long term, especially if profit is made and can be further invested into
some social projects. Remaining as sole traders will leave the farmers with little
or no power at all. Decision making power is highly theoretical here given the
level of poverty.

Pedro should seriously consider creating the cooperative.

Accept any other relevant issue.

Accept any other relevant examination.

A conclusion with judgment is expected.

A balanced response is one that covers at least two arguments for and at least
two arguments against.

Marks should be allocated according to the mark bands on page 3 with further
guidance below.

For one relevant issue that is one-sided, award up to [3]. For more than one
relevant issue that is one-sided, award up to a maximum of [4].

Award a maximum of [6] if the answer is of a standard that shows balanced
analysis and understanding throughout the response with reference to the
stimulus material but there is no judgment/conclusion.

Candidates cannot reach the [7–8] markband if they give judgment/conclusions
that are not based on analysis/explanation already given in their answer.

Candidates cannot reach the top marks if there is no relevant reference/
application to the nature of a cooperative and its social context/relevance to the
current life of the farming community.
                                                 – 15 –              N17/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   (a)   Define the term secondary market research.                                            [2]

           Secondary market research or desk research refers to the collection of second
           hand data by a business for decision-making that is derived from second hand
           sources /published sources by a third party. It has not been collected first hand
           by the business themselves.

           Award [1] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and
           understanding.

           Award [2] for a full definition that conveys knowledge and understanding similar
           to the answer above. For [2] there should be some indication that the
           organisation is actually carries out a research/ action.

           Some students are likely to define secondary sources while the definition is about
           research.

           No examples are needed

           No application is required.

     (b)   Explain one advantage and one disadvantage for MM of using sales forecasting.         [4]

           One advantage of using sales forecasting is that it will allow a firm such as MM to
           look at future sales forecasts of its product portfolio and make changes where
           necessary. This will save the business considerable expense, stocking costs and
           influence future cash flow needs. Forecasting allows MM to plan ahead and can
           also impact on human resource planning and finance needs if cash flow forecasts
           indicate that there may be a shortage. There is evidence form the case study
           that MM’s product portfolio revenue streams are changing. MM is experiencing
           changing sales of all of its stock so is planning by using forecasts, André can
           avoid over stocking and tying up valuable capital in unsold DVDs or CDs for
           example or can transfer more resources towards the fast selling computer
           games. Decision making at MM may be more accurate. To be forewarned is to
           be forearmed.

           Disadvantages for MM are linked to the inevitable fact that sales forecasts are
           merely that – future predictions are based on past data, which, given the
           existence of external factors some of which are mentioned in the stimulus and
           unexpected events, cannot be fully accurate. There is evidence from the
           stimulus that André expects sales to be variable (possible cyclical or seasonal
           variations) and even with all relevant future economic and social data at his
           disposal, forecasts can still be widely inaccurate. For example, vinyl record sales
           are expected to rise but what if another musical format is created within the next
           five years? André also has considerable experience in this industry and is aware
           that sales are changing rapidly. Sales forecasts may be out of date by the time
           the data has been collected if they are every month or quarter. Sales forecasts in
           this context may be of little value to MM in such a fast changing industry.

           Mark as 2 + 2.

           [2] cannot be awarded per advantage / disadvantage if the response lacks either
           explanation and/or application.

           For example:
                                             – 16 –               N17/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


       For an identification or a description of an advantage / disadvantage with or
        without application [1].
       For explanation of an advantage / disadvantage with no application [1].
       For explanation of an advantage / disadvantage and application [2].

      Candidates are expected to show some understanding of sales forecasting
      methods.

(c)   Explain one cost and one benefit for MM of setting up an e-commerce website.         [4]

      The benefits to MM from setting up an e-commerce website will be linked to
      increasing customer awareness and sales.

       CD and especially vinyl sales should increase, as the e-commerce site may
        allow for targeting more potential customers in different regions who are
        interested in vinyl records and possibly CD. There is a greater chance of
        success as relying on customers for such a retro segment to visit the physical
        store is rather limited.
        More detailed product descriptions, customer feedback/reviews will be
        possible. The e-commerce website will deepen customer relationships,
        especially if MM can run a social media campaign alongside building brand
        and customer loyalty to the site.
       The e-commerce platform will also allow MM to generate much needed
        advertising revenue through increased loyalty in the future.

      The costs are linked to the inevitable restructuring of the business that
      e-commerce will demand and could be considered to be both short term and long
      term.

       The e-commerce site will need to be built, managed and monitored by a new
        staff member. This will drain MM’s cash reserves at a time when total revenue
        is falling.
       Existing staff will require training or newly employed staff hired such as
        technology experts to run and update the e-commerce facility and possibly
        create social media support. Costs are likely to rise in the short term and
        again, MM is facing fall in revenue and finance is limited.

      If the e-commerce site is to be fully functional then new distribution channels
      around delivery of vinyl records and newly released CDs that are both growing in
      sales to the customer will need to be identified, researched and set up. This will
      also take time and André will have to find additional resources. The stimulus
      indicates that finance is limited.

      An e-commerce website will add a new layer of complexity to MM’s operations
      and logistics and MM has not got the right experience therefore more finance will
      have to be raised for training, hiring people and so on.

      Please note:
      Whatever relevant costs that a candidate explains or describe needs to be
      applied specifically to MM’s lack of finance / lack of experience.

      Mark as 2 + 2.

      Award [1] for identifying or describing the cost / benefit for MM of setting up
      e-commerce and a further [1] for a development with respect to
      MM. Award a maximum of [2].
                                             – 17 –               N17/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



      [2] cannot be awarded per cost / benefit if the response lacks either explanation
      and/or application.
      For example:
       For an identification or a description of a cost / benefit with or without
         application [1].
       For explanation of a cost / benefit with no application [1].
       For explanation of a cost / benefit and application [2].

(d)   Using the Boston Consulting Group (BCG) matrix, discuss the two new tactics
      André is considering to ensure MM’s future success.                                     [10]

      Revenue is falling, computer games sales are rising and now André is
      considering the possibility of setting up an e-commerce business website.
      Although MM and André have been in the business for 25 years, external factors
      are changing the nature of his business model. The two tactics are to stop selling
      DVDs and start increasing below-the-line promotional spending on vinyl records.

      By applying the BCG matrix, we could argue that:
       DVDs are a dog (low market share and growth)
       vinyl records are a problem child or question mark (low market share but
        potential growth).

      Removing or divesting the dog will free up shelf space in the retail store. DVD
      sales could be transferred and sold via the e-commerce site so that MM is able to
      make some form of contribution. More space for games is now possible.
      However, removing a product line from the portfolio is a risk, as some of MM’s
      loyal customers will be unhappy.

      Keeping DVDs – although a dog – may block potential new retail rivals if it
      creates MM’s USP. It is also indicated in the stimulus that computer games are
      not MM’s core business.

      So perhaps it is worth keeping the core product for a little longer until MM is clear
      whether the new product is doing well. If e-commerce is to be used, MM can
      potentially use a market development strategy and find some segment in less
      technologically advanced economies that are still interested in DVDs.

      Increasing spending on below-the-line promotion seems like an appropriate
      tactic. Although MM has not got sufficient internal sources of finance, the product
      is in a question mark position with a potential to grow and be profitable. Profit
      that MM needs. One, therefore, may judge this tactic as highly appropriate
      especially as below-the-line promotional tactics are cheaper than above-the-line
      promotional tactics. Moreover, external sources of finance can be used. André
      needs to use below-the-line promotion methods to move the vinyl records to a
      star and hopefully a cash cow position so in the medium term, he will be able to
      milk the potential cow. Short term spending versus medium to long term benefits/
      profit seems like a good tactic.

      It is expected that the candidates show a clear understanding/application of
      below the line methods rather than just promotion generally.

      Moreover, below-the-line methods can be considerably cheaper than above the
      line methods of promotion which are currently very appropriate to MM. MM can
      use short-term sales promotion to encourage buying the product. Below-the-line
                                        – 18 –             N17/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


promotion can complement the decision to use e-commerce. MM can generate
viral marketing and or/ use social media for promotion.

Candidates should be credited for classification of the vinyl as a dog given the
low growth of the market share and for suggesting to use below-the-line
promotion to extend the life cycle or not to spend money on above-the-line
promotion.

Judgment

The BCG provides some clues as to what André should consider but there are
some difficult choices to be made. Removing DVDs will allow for a greater stock
of vinyl but removing a product line and replacing it with a problem child is risky.
It may be sensible in the short term to keep the DVDs, as they will still contribute
to growth. Spending more on below-the-line promotion seems more sensible
given his loyal customer base and the future potential. If André can’t keep both
options and has to choose one tactic, perhaps the second tactic is more viable as
there is more longer term potential as the market is growing and MM will more
responsive to changes in the external environment.

Accept any other relevant issue.

Accept any other relevant discussion.

A conclusion with judgment is expected.

Accept any substantiated judgment

A balanced response is one that covers at least two arguments for and at least
two arguments against.
As there are two tactics to discuss, a balance response is one that covers one
argument for and one argument against each option.

Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3 with further
guidance below.
For one relevant issue that is one-sided, award up to [3]. For more than one
relevant issue that is one-sided, award up to a maximum of [4].

For a lack of balance for both option award up to a maximum of [4]

 Award a maximum of [6] if the answer is of a standard that shows balanced
analysis and understanding throughout the response with reference to the
stimulus material but there is no judgment/conclusion.

Candidates cannot reach the [7–8] markband if they give judgment/conclusions
that are not based on analysis/explanation already given in their answer.

If the candidate only considers one tactic then award [5] if the answer is balanced
with a judgment.

If the candidate does not use the BCG matrix then award a maximum of [4] even
if the response is fully balanced.
                                                   – 19 –             N17/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


5.   (a)   Define the term ethical objective.                                                    [2]

           Ethical objectives are the goals of a business based on a set of values or moral
           beliefs and guidance of the environment in which it operates. They should cover
           all the actions of an organization and guide its decision-making process and
           strategies/behavior.

           Accept any other relevant definition.

           N.B. no application required. Do not credit examples.

           Award [1] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and understanding.

           Award [2] for a full definition that conveys knowledge and understanding similar to
           the answer above. Some reference to the fact that ethical objectives are the basis
           for guidance regarding organisational behaviour, decision making strategies.

     (b)   Explain one advantage and one disadvantage to GC of having low labour
           turnover.                                                                             [4]

           There is sufficient information in the stimulus for the candidates to apply. See
           below. The use of GC or a reference to “cleaners” does not constitute an
           application.

           Low labour turnover has created a loyal workforce at GC. Recruitment costs are
           reduced and induction training will be minimal. Given that some workers have
           been at GC for nearly two decades. This kind of working environment creates a
           culture of trust and thus productivity and motivation. Evidence from the stimulus
           clearly show that GC’s USP is based on the reliability and quality of its
           employees.

           However, low labour turnover may not allow for fresh new thinking or ideas to be
           introduced. This very advantage may render GC as an organization where some
           employees and their representatives may have become complacent and clearly
           there is evidence of inertia as GC was slow to react to the competitive forces.
           Also, there is the perception of resistance to change perhaps given the current
           culture of employees who have been working together for two decades. Given
           the new competition and slow reaction times, GC is in danger of stagnating.

           Mark as 2+2

            For an identification or a description of an advantage/ disadvantage with or
             without application [1].
            For explanation of an advantage/ disadvantage with no application [1].
            For explanation of an advantage/ disadvantage and application [2].
                                             – 20 –              N17/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(c)   Explain two possible steps in the recruitment process of gardeners for GC.            [4]

      Establish the nature of the job and create job analysis/job description/person
      specification – it is very important for GC to carry out a detailed job
      analysis/description and person specification as this will be the first time that
      gardeners’ jobs have been created. In order to attract the most suitable
      gardeners such analysis is required. This makes the recruitment process quicker
      and more efficient and is likely to attract only the most suitable candidates.

      Prepare a job advertisement:
      As GC is going to recruit gardeners from wide geographical areas, they will have
      to advertise their new positions in a number of different media locations. Local
      job centres close to GC will not be suitable. GC should advertise nationally or
      even internationally through the internet or through gardening associations, as it
      is looking for professionally trained gardeners.

      As GC has limited experience in this area, GC may have to find a recruitment
      agency external to the business to guide and manage the recruitment process.
      As GC is paying new gardeners 20 % more than cleaners and possibly spending
      on a recruitment agency, GC will want to ensure that they hire the most
      professionally trained gardeners. The agency will be able to screen potential
      candidates and select the best for GC’s management to consider. This will
      minimize possible recruitment mistakes. Accept this point even if it seems more
      like a method rather than a step. This is more like subcontracting the process:
       Short list applicants.
       Conduct interviews.
       Conduct testing.
       Issue a contract.

      Accept any other possible step in recruitment as long as it is applicable.

      Candidates must fully explain and find some relevant application to the nature of
      the job/ the types of employees/ experience of the organisation of recruiting new
      types of employees and so on.

      The later examples above are more generic so credit candidates who refer to the
      gardeners or the nature of the job.

      For an identification or a description of a step in the recruitment process with or
      without application [1].
       For explanation of a step in the process with no application [1].
       For explanation of a step in the recruitment process and application [2].
                                             – 21 –              N17/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(d)   With reference to two motivation theories, examine the motivation of cleaners
      at GC.

      The question is asking to examine the cleaners’ motivation NOT how it might be
      changed. Hence therefore the approach might be to state:
      a) Why were the cleaners motivated or what provides their motivation and what
      theories support this?
      b) Why the cleaners are becoming de-motivated and what theories support this?

      There is plenty to support a) – fair wages, ethical products/practices – feeling of
      job security as many worked for more than 20 years and implied good working
      conditions. Maslow’s theory of needs can support the fulfilment of the lower
      level of needs. Moreover, having worked for the organisation for such a long time
      clearly enable the cleaner to achieve the third level of need of love and
      belonging. One may also argue that as the cleaners are professional, the higher
      level of needs of self-esteem can be reached when they feel accomplished and
      proud of their high quality and reliable job performance.
      Herzberg’s theory can explain how some of the issues above are seen as the
      provision of the hygiene factors and some as motivators.

      Perhaps Pink’s sense of purpose due to ethical behaviour and contribution to
      the community can be applied, sense of mastery as although cleaning service is
      provided, nevertheless, the cleaners are professional and proud of their
      performance. However, there are no direct references/application to autonomy.
      Therefore, Pink’s theory is only partly applicable to explain the past motivation of
      the cleaners.

      Adams’ theory can be used to explain that until now the cleaners perceived their
      wages as fair in relation to their contribution and there were no other types of
      employees to be used as a point of comparison. The equity of equal
      job/effort/skills = equal payments existed.

      However, GC wants to recruit professional gardeners and pay them 20 % higher
      wages. This decision is causing resentment, insecurity, injustice and hence
      demotivation among current cleaners at GC. They are afraid of change.

      The changes announced by the management have created some uncertainty and
      conflict with the gardeners. The cleaners feel that the gardeners do not deserve
      the higher wage and that the employee-share ownership scheme may be treated
      as a Taylor bribe? This uncertainty may undermine the security needs of the
      cleaners (Maslow) and the new wage structure which is deemed as unfair
      (Adams). Consequently, the cleaners are becoming demotivated and may
      reduce their efforts to address the sense of inequity and create a new balance
      (Adams)

      The question of an employee share ownership (ESO) scheme might work as long
      as the gardeners do not demand the same so the perception of inequity will
      resurface again. ESO can be seen using Maslow / Herzberg as financial rewards
      = lower level of needs/ hygiene factors or, if significant as self-esteem/
      motivators. Moreover, the shareholders are now opposing to the proposal. They
      feel a sense of inequity. There could be some consequences to GC.

      Some cleaners, however, might find the proposal fair in the long term when GC
      makes a profit, but currently money has to be invested in recruitment to diversify
      in an increasingly competitive environment.
                                      – 22 –               N17/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


If this scheme is not successful, GC will need to look at other ways of motivating
the cleaners otherwise conflict will deepen.

A judgement could be made that the demotivation is likely to be short lived once
the cleaners get used the gardener’s presence. Many firms operate with wide
ranges of staff on different pay structures. If the concern was about job insecurity
then management could easily allay this fear with face-to-face talks. It could
simply be pointed out that GC is paying the going rate for gardeners and that the
additional revenue stream is likely make the cleaners’ jobs more secure in a
competitive market rather than less secure.

Accept any other relevant conclusion and judgment.

Accept any relevant theory that is applied to the information given in the stimulus
material.

Theorists and theories should be applied not just mentioned.

Accept any other relevant examination.

A conclusion with judgment is expected.

A balanced response is one that covers two motivation theories.
A balanced response is one that covers some opposing arguments. Candidates
may use different theories to present contrasting views

Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3 with further
guidance below.

For one relevant issue that is one-sided, award up to [3]. For more than one
relevant issue that is one-sided, award up to a maximum of [4].

Award a maximum of [6] if the answer is of a standard that shows balanced
analysis and understanding throughout the response with reference to the
stimulus material but there is no judgment/conclusion.

Candidates cannot reach the [7–8] markband if they give judgment/conclusions
that are not based on analysis/explanation already given in their answer.
                                                  – 23 –               N17/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                         Section C
Marks should be allocated using the assessment criteria on pages 6 to 7 with further
guidance below.

N.B. examiners should include a breakdown of each mark awarded per criterion and a
brief note explaining the mark awarded at the end of each candidate’s response.

The main aim of paper 2 (SL or HL) section C is to assess candidates’ understanding of the
six major concepts (change, culture, ethics, globalization, innovation, strategy) within a
business context. Candidates are to demonstrate their understanding through an
organization of their choice. The expectation of the use of an organization is to allow
assessment of the depth of candidates’ understanding through their ability to apply the
concepts and their knowledge.

Assessment of candidates’ knowledge of the organization itself is not an aim of the
assessment. If a candidate makes minor factual errors and these minor errors have no
genuine bearing on whether the candidate understands the concepts, examiners should not
penalize. For example, a minor error of historical fact (the year when a company was
founded, for example, or the year in which a change was implemented) which has no
genuine bearing on candidates’ understanding of the concepts does not warrant penalty.

Additional examiner guidance may be added during standardization.

6.   With reference to an organization of your choice, examine the impact of innovation on
     operations management strategy.                                                              [20]

     It is expected that the candidates will explain the nature of the innovation they refer to
     eg adaptive, radical, creative, process and so on.

7.   With reference to an organization of your choice, discuss the ways in which
     globalization can influence organizational culture.                                          [20]

     Do not credit application to/ the use of national culture

8.   With reference to an organization of your choice, discuss the ways in which ethics and
     change can influence human resource management.                                              [20]

     Do not credit application to marketing / operation management etc.

     It is expected that the candidate explains the chosen theoretical direction / content of
     their response.
                                             – 24 –               N17/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Additional guidance in relation to the assessment criteria

For each criterion, the aim is to find the descriptor that conveys most accurately the level
attained by the candidate, using the best-fit model. It is not necessary for every single
aspect of a level descriptor to be met for that mark to be awarded.
 The highest level descriptors do not imply faultless performance and should be
   achievable by a candidate.
 A candidate who attains a high level of achievement for one criterion will not
   necessarily reach high levels of achievement for the other criteria and vice versa.

If only one concept is addressed:
Criteria A, B, C and E: award up to a maximum [3].
Criterion D: full marks can be awarded.

Where the question asks for impacts of two concepts on content, examiners must allow
for unbalanced treatment of the two concepts throughout a candidate’s response. One
concept may be more significant than the other.

In section C, the question rubric explicitly states that “organizations featured in sections
A and B and in the paper 1 case study may not be used as a basis” to candidate’s
answers to questions 6, 7 and 8. When this happens please award marks as follows:

Criterion A: award a maximum of [1]. The business management content cannot be
relevant if the organization is fictitious.
Criterion B: 0 marks – there is no connection to a “real-world organization”
Criterion C: award a maximum of [1]. The arguments cannot be relevant if the
organization is fictitious.
Criterion D: mark as normal.
Criterion E: award up to a maximum of [1]. The individual and/or group perspective(s)
cannot be relevant if the organization is fictitious.

Criterion B
For [2]: “…connection is not developed” should be treated the same as superficial.

Criterion C
 Questions 6 and 7 require consideration of the impact of one concept on a second
   concept – therefore accept 2 + 2 arguments for a balanced response.
 Justification is through logic or data.
 For [2] there is no balance as there are no counter arguments at all, or the
   arguments are all one-sided then this would be unjustified.
 For [3] there is some balanced arguments – some of which are justified.

Criterion D
 Introductions need to be concise and related to the question.
 The candidate’s response does not to have explicit headings for each structural
   element.
 A body is the area in which the substance of arguments occurs. It is usually located
   between the introduction and the conclusion.
 Fit-for-purpose paragraph means that ideas are presented in a clear academic way.
   For example, one idea per paragraph.
                                           – 25 –              N17/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion E
 One example of an “individual” could be an individual consumer or an individual
   manager. However this could not be considered with a “group” of consumers or a
   management team.
 For [4], a balanced response: need to look at the perspectives of both individual and
   group(s). The chosen individual, group needs to be applicable and relevant to the
   question with specific explanation.
 Candidates need to go beyond stating the stakeholder.
 Candidates need not explicitly say “stakeholder”.
