N17/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                       Markscheme


                        November 2017


                               Geography


                           Higher level


                                Paper 3




9 pages
                          –2–            N17/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is the property of the International
Baccalaureate and must not be reproduced or distributed
to any other person without the authorization of the IB
Global Centre, Cardiff.
                                                               –3–                   N17/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 3 markbands

Part (a)

   Level             Knowledge/                        Application/                      Skills             Marks
 descriptor       understanding AO1                    analysis AO2                      AO4                0–10

     A        No relevant knowledge, or          The question has been          None appropriate              0
              inappropriate                      completely
                                                 misinterpreted or omitted

     B        Little relevant knowledge          Important aspects of the       Little attempt at            1–3
              and/or understanding               question are ignored           organization of material

     C        Some relevant knowledge            Answer partially               Some indication of           4–6
              and understanding                  addresses the question         structure or organization

     D        Generally accurate                 Answer is developed            Appropriate structure        7–8
              knowledge and                      and covers most                with generally
              understanding                      aspects of the question        appropriate terminology
     E        Accurate, relevant knowledge       Well-developed answer          Well-structured response    9–10
              and understanding                  that covers most or all        with sound terminology
                                                 aspects of the question


Part (b)

   Level         Knowledge/                 Application/           Synthesis/                Skills         Marks
 descriptor   understanding AO1              analysis            evaluation AO3              AO4            0–15
                                               AO2
     A        No relevant                 The question          No synthesis/          None                   0
              knowledge, or               has been              evaluation             appropriate
              inappropriate               completely
                                          misinterpreted or
                                          omitted

     B        Little relevant             Important             Little attempt at      Little attempt at     1–4
              knowledge and/or            aspects of the        synthesis/             organization of
              understanding               question are          evaluation             material
                                          ignored

     C        Some relevant               Answer partially      Basic synthesis/       Some indication of    5–8
              knowledge and               addresses the         basic or               structure or
              understanding               question              unsubstantiated        organization
                                                                evaluation

     D        Generally accurate          Answer is             Synthesis that         Appropriate          9–12
              knowledge and               developed and         may be partially       structure with
              understanding               covers most           undeveloped/           generally
                                          aspects of the        evaluation that        appropriate
                                          question              may be partially       terminology
                                                                unsubstantiated

     E        Accurate, relevant          Well-developed        Clear, developed       Well-structured      13–15
              knowledge and               answer that           synthesis/clear,       response with
              understanding               covers most or all    substantiated          sound
                                          aspects of the        evaluation             terminology
                                          question
                                                  –4–                N17/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.   (a)   Using examples, analyse the role of global interactions in the growth of environmental
           awareness.                                                                                 [10]

           AO1/2 indicative content:
            Relevant global interactions may include flows of data and information, such as
             internet campaigning by civil society organizations. Also credit other types of
             interaction playing a role, including migrants or tourists who help awareness of
             issues to diffuse to new places.
            Campaigning may be linked to specific issues, such as transboundary pollution.
             Environmental awareness is a blanket term covering many issues. Other
             examples could include global climate change, biodiversity, deforestation, etc.
            Credit the idea that global interactions/globalisation/global development has
             given rise to environmental challenges (climate change, resource security) and
             that people are now aware of these issues.

           Good answers might offer a structured (AO4) analysis of different types of global
           interaction (information, commodity flows) or different environmental causes (climate
           change, biodiversity). Another approach might be to analyse rising environmental
           awareness in specific contexts, eg the diffusion of environmental awareness to
           people in different or new contexts (new consumers in emerging economies).

           For band C (4–6 marks), an example of the growth of environmental awareness
           (such as an NGO campaign or film) will be be outlined and linked weakly with global
           interactions (such as ICT use, or the global trade flows which cause the issues).

           For band D (7–8 marks), expect a structured, well evidenced analysis of:
            either the role of a range of global interactions (such as data flows and trade flows)
            or two detailed examples of the growth of environmental awareness/ campaigns.

           For band E (9–10 marks), expect both band D traits.
                                             –5–                N17/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   Discuss the reasons for the global diffusion of consumer culture.                         [15]

      Credit all content in line with the markbands. Credit unexpected approaches
      wherever relevant.

      Consumer culture can be understood as a lifestyle in capitalist societies wherein the
      consumption of goods and services occupies a central role, in terms of people’s use
      of leisure time, aspirations, and even their personal identity construction. It is
      sometimes associated negatively with unsustainable/“throwaway” use of
      commodities/resources. It can also be associated positively with the progression of
      people beyond poverty and into the consumer classes. Global diffusion patterns
      include the growth of consumer classes in emerging economies.

      Possible AO1/2 indicative content:
       shrinking world technologies and the global diffusion of media/aspirations [Guide 3]
       financial flows from core to periphery regions [Guide 2]
       poverty alleviation, financial flows and the growth of new markets [Guide 3]
       branded commodities and the power of TNCs to build markets [Guide 5]
       migration, tourism and population movements [Guide 3, 5].

      Answers scoring highly according to the AO3 criteria for evaluation might:
       critically discuss the relative importance of different reasons/global interactions
         which either aid diffusion of cultural traits or help to build incomes/markets
       discuss different traits of consumer culture, such as the diffusion of music, fast
         food, branded commodities, etc
       distinguish between the means of diffusion (eg TNCs) and the reasons why
         people are receptive to the arrival of “global culture” (eg state policies).

      Do not award AO1/2 credit for lengthy case studies of places/countries where
      consumer culture has not diffused to / has been blocked, such as North Korea.
      However, some AO3 credit could be awarded for briefly drawing a contrast between
      liberal states and non-liberal states (such as North Korea) in order to demonstrate the
      high importance of liberal government as a reason for cultural diffusion.

      For band C (5–8 marks), expect weakly evidenced outlining of two or three relevant
      reasons/themes from the geography guide.

      For band D (9–12 marks), expect:
       either a structured synthesis which links together several well evidenced and
         well focused themes/reasons from the geography guide
       or a critical conclusion (or on-going evaluation).

      For band E (13–15 marks), expect both of these traits.
                                                 –6–                N17/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   (a)   Analyse the causes and environmental consequences of the international relocation
           of polluting industries.                                                                [10]

           AO1/2 indicative content:
            The international relocation of polluting industries refers primarily to the global
             shift of manufacturing from the developed to the developing world; also credit
             the increased uptake of outsourcing contracts by manufacturers in lower-wage
             economies.
            The main cause is avoidance of high labour and land costs, and “red tape” in
             developed countries; but the movement may also be market-driven if new
             industries are being established in proximity to emerging markets. Another
             theme might be international movements of recycling industries (and linked flows
             of e-waste).
            The consequences for people and places vary according to context. They may
             include impacts on the atmosphere/hydrosphere/biosphere, and short- or long-
             term health costs for societies.

           Good answers may make use of detailed exemplification and/or specialist
           terminology. Or they may analyse the varied types of cause and environmental
           consequence, perhaps for different categories of polluting industry, in a well-
           structured (AO4) way. Another approach might be to analyse some of the temporal
           (long-term) and spatial (pattern) dimensions of the consequences.

           Band D credit may be given for the use of any case studies which illustrate changing
           global patterns of economic activity – including inward investment, outsourcing, and
           refuse flows – provided that the causes are relevant and the consequences are
           environmental (rather than social).

           For band C (4–6 marks), expect some weakly evidenced outlining of a narrow range
           of causes and/or environmental consequences of changing global patterns of
           economic activity.

           For band D (7–8 marks), expect a structured, well evidenced and balanced analysis
           which includes:
            either varied and detailed causes of changing global patterns of economic activity
            or detailed environmental consequences of international industrial relocation.

           For band E (9–10 marks), expect both band D traits.
                                              –7–                 N17/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   “Barriers to globalization are no longer falling but are rising instead.” Discuss this
      statement.                                                                                  [15]

      Credit all content in line with the markbands. Credit unexpected approaches
      wherever relevant.

      Globalization is defined in the subject guide. Real barriers include border controls
      and walls (political barriers) and virtual firewalls (technological barriers). There are
      also the real or perceived cultural barriers of language and religion. The concept of
      a “barrier” is broad and may be interpreted in many ways and from different
      perspectives.

      Possible AO1/2 indicative content:
       falling barriers for data: the shrinking world and time–space convergence [Guide 2]
       falling barriers due to cultural exchange, diaspora growth [Guide 5]
       falling barriers due to the global diffusion of branded commodities [Guide 5]
       increasing barriers for international migration (barriers and/or policies) [Guide 3, 5]
       increasing barriers as governments react to the real or perceived loss of
        sovereignty through retreat from multigovernmental organizations or increased
        protectionism [Guide 6, 3]
       isolated societies for whom barriers neither rise nor fall [Guide 7].

      Answers scoring highly according to the AO3 criteria for evaluation:
       might offer a structured discussion of different categories of barrier
       might systematically discuss both sides of the argument before arriving at a
         judgement that progresses beyond simply concluding the statement is both true
         and false (one approach could be to argue that the statement is more true for
         some types of global interaction than it is for others)
       might address the truth of the statement on different timescales (eg taking a long
         view rather than focusing on more recent events only).

      For band C (5–8 marks), expect weakly evidenced outlining of two or three relevant
      themes from the geography guide focused on whether or not there are barriers to
      globalization.

      For band D (9–12 marks), expect:
       either a structured synthesis which links together several well evidenced and
         well focused themes from the geography guide
       or a critical conclusion (or ongoing evaluation).

      For band E (13–15 marks), expect both of these traits.
                                                –8–                N17/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   (a)   Using examples, analyse the reasons why some places have become international
           outsourcing hubs.                                                                    [10]

           AO1/2 indicative content:
            The outsourcing definition is included in the subject guide. Hubs are well-
             networked places within global networks.
            Global information flows have helped some places, such as Bangalore and
             Manila, to become hubs for international outsourcing centres (call centres). ICT
             and information flows are also an important reason for the growth of outsourcing
             of manufacturing and agriculture (allowing complex networks of supply and
             demand to function).
            In addition to ICT, other factors play a role and may provide reasons for the
             growth of outsourcing in certain places, such as government incentives and
             human resources (including literacy and languages spoken).

           Good, structured (AO4) answers may provide detailed exemplification of
           outsourcing hubs (cities and districts rather than merely countries). They may
           analyse the reasons why particular locations have a comparative advantage over
           others in terms of ICT provision or other production costs compared with other
           places. Or they may be more selective in the way they analyse outsourcing by
           breaking this into constituent parts, such as manufacturing and services or
           agriculture sectors.

           For band C (4–6 marks), expect weak outlining of the reasons why international
           outsourcing happens in a recognizable country or city.

           For band D (7–8 marks), expect a structured, well evidenced analysis of:
            either the reasons for international outsourcing to specific places
            or different categories/sectors of international outsourcing.

           For band E (9–10 marks), expect both aspects to be addressed.
                                             –9–                 N17/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   Examine the challenges that increased global adoption of information and
      communications technology (ICT) brings to different places.                                   [15]

      Credit all content in line with the markbands. Credit unexpected approaches
      wherever relevant.

      ICT refers to internet, broadband, mobiles and smartphones used by citizens,
      businesses and governments. From this arise multiple contexts for possible local
      challenges to be examined. Countries/national governments are creditable as
      places in addition to more local areas and neighbourhoods. The growing global
      pattern of adoption shows rapid uptake in Asia, Latin America and Africa (though at
      a slower rate than in Asia).

      There are economic, social, cultural and political challenges and these vary
      according to the context.

      Possible AO1/2 indicative content:
       the challenges of the shrinking world effect including unchecked flows of culture
        [Guide 2]
       global diffusion of culture is lined with cultural imperialism/loss of identity [Guide 5]
       loss of sovereignty for states/governments unable to control citizens’ internet access
        [Guide 6]
       the way ICT enables increased outsourcing and offshoring, which may have
        negative impacts [Guide 3]
       use of ICT by anti-globalization and terror groups (perspectives will vary on this)
        [Guide 7]
       the challenge of the digital divide and lack of participation in ICT (factors include
        income, age, literacy level), which in turn link to disparities in wealth at varying
        scales [Guide 3]
       e-waste is a product of growing ICT use [Guide 4].

      Answers scoring highly according to the AO3 criteria for evaluation:
       might offer a carefully structured examination of different challenges in specific
         geographic contexts
       might offer a structured examination of the way different categories of ICT are
         affecting places and user groups
       might examine challenges from multiple perspectives, such as that of the state
         or its individual citizens (and in relation to people’s age, culture and identity).

      Do not award AO1/2 credit for lengthy case studies of benefits derived from ICT, such
      as Kenya’s M-Pesa scheme: this is not asked for. However, some AO3 credit may be
      gained for any ongoing evaluation of the way certain challenges can – in part – be
      alleviated/offset/ameliorated by the benefits ICT nonetheless brings.

      For band C (5–8 marks), expect weakly evidenced outlining of two or three relevant
      technology/shrinking world themes from the geography guide.

      For band D (9–12 marks), expect:
       either a structured synthesis which links together several well evidenced and
         well focused themes from the geography guide
       or a critical conclusion (or ongoing evaluation).

      For band E (13–15 marks), expect both of these traits.
