N17/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




Global politics
Higher level and standard level
Paper 1


Thursday 9 November 2017 (afternoon)


1 hour 15 minutes


Instructions to candidates
yy Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
yy Answer all the questions.
yy The maximum mark for this examination paper is [25 marks].




                                                                                              8817 – 5951
     4 pages                                              © International Baccalaureate Organization 2017
                                                   –2–                     N17/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Unit 2     Human rights

                               Practice of, and claims on, human rights

Read all the sources carefully and answer all the questions that follow.

Source A               Cartoon: The Delhi Metro used cartoons to change attitudes on gender equality.
                       The National Commission for Women and UN Women supported the campaign
                       to create greater awareness about women’s empowerment in India (2012).




                                    Removed for copyright reasons




Source B               Adapted from “What gender inequality looks like in Latin America”, an article
                       by Johanna Mendelson Forman, The Huffington Post, an American online news
                       site (2014).

The wage gap between women and men in Latin America is alarming. This was the central message
of a new report released this week by several United Nations agencies including the International Labor
Organization. The report discusses gender inequalities that are a direct consequence of traditional views
on the place and role that women should occupy in society – views based on prejudice, discrimination
and disregard for the progress the region has made and its effects on societies. In Latin America and
the Caribbean, women’s experiences and prospects differ greatly based on their ethnicity (for example,
indigenous or Afro-descendant), their age (young or elderly), where they live (urban or rural areas), their
citizenship status (residents of their own country or migrants) and whether or not they have children.
Globally, women in the workforce are still heavily concentrated in the low-income occupations.

Many women in the region cannot access higher education because of economic barriers. Regional
organizations such as the Inter-American Program on the Promotion of Women’s Human Rights and
Gender Equity and Equality, have urged member states to ensure women have full and equal access to
work and productive resources. The Brasilia Consensus of 2010 (a model of economic integration with
emphasis on social inclusion) includes the recognition of women’s unpaid domestic work and caregiving.
                                                   –3–                   N17/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Source C                Adapted from “Violence and women in Brazil: What happens indoors stays
                        indoors” by Sandra Andrade, The Independent, a UK daily newspaper (2013).

Brazil has the seventh highest rate of violence against women in the world and within the past three
decades, at least 92,000 women have been killed inside their homes. A law recently passed by
President Dilma Rousseff recognises the violence experienced by both men and women in Brazil,
especially those who’ve experienced sexual violence.

This is a definite breakthrough in terms to recognizing the violence faced by many Brazilian women, but
it’s an issue that, although common in our country, is largely ignored. The campaign against violence
hasn’t been easy. In Brazil people don’t talk about this issue. What happens indoors stays indoors.

Women’s rights can be a controversial issue in relation to Catholicism and pregnancy: I have been
working alongside other women’s rights campaigners to encourage churches in Brazil to stand up and
fight this pandemic of violence against women. (The Anglican Service of Diakonia and Development
(SADD) has been campaigning for the rights of all people since 2008.) By closing our eyes and letting it
happen, we’re legitimizing the violence.

In a society fuelled by machismo*, there is quite a lot of resistance from the police to take notice and
respond to this challenge and this is an issue we continue to work hard to combat. If we can end the
silence and denial, we will be victorious in the fight against violence against women.


Source D                Adapted from “International Women’s Day and gender equality in Brazil”,
                        Americas Quarterly, a journal dedicated to politics, business and culture in the
                        Americas (2013).

Last month, leaders of Brazil’s rural women’s movement met with their country’s first female president,
Dilma Rousseff, in Brasilia to press for new national policies addressing domestic violence in Brazil.

In the 1980s, while women including Rousseff worked to overthrow a military dictatorship and lay the
foundation for enduring democracy, young women in southern Brazil founded the Movement of Rural
Women Workers (MMTR) while still in their teens. The MMTR activists took on the place most resistant
to change – their own homes – by fighting for an equal voice and trying to persuade their husbands and
sons to help with the housework. Many of them had been forced to quit school after fifth grade to help
with the housework, and they refused to accept lives in which women didn’t have the same legal rights
as men.

Twenty-five years into this expanding struggle for women’s rights, laws promoting women’s equality are
part of Brazil’s constitution and the federal government pays social security to rural women. But the
struggles these women began years ago are far from over. Many women’s activists have learned that
speaking out is not enough to change reality – the speaker bears a responsibility to carry the speech
forward. In Brazil, as in the rest of the world, reforming gender roles remains as difficult as ever, even
after years of struggle.




* strong and forceful male behaviour




                                                                                                 Turn over
                                                –4–                  N17/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

1.   With specific reference to Source A, identify how expectations of women might impact on
     their human rights.                                                                          [3]



2.   Using Source B and one example you have studied, explain the impact of gender inequality.    [4]



3.   Compare the obstacles to women’s equality as described in Source C and Source D.             [8]


4.   “Women’s rights are the same as human rights.” Discuss this claim, using all the sources
     and your own knowledge.                                                                     [10]
