M&N17/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS




Information technology in a global society
Case study: Wearable Technology – Kita Health Tech (KHT)


For use in May and November 2017




Instructions to candidates
• Case study booklet required for higher level paper 3 information technology in a global society
  examinations.




     8 pages                                               © International Baccalaureate Organization 2016
                                                 –2–             M&N17/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

Foreword

The ITGS case study, Wearable Technology – Kita Health Tech (KHT), is the stimulus material for the
research investigation required for May and November 2017 higher level paper 3. All of the work related
to the case study should reflect the integrated approach explained on pages 15–17 of the ITGS guide.

Candidates should consider Wearable Technology – Kita Health Tech (KHT) with respect to:
• relevant IT systems in a social context
• both local and global areas of impact
• social and ethical impacts on individuals and societies
• current challenges and solutions
• future developments.

Candidates are expected to research real-life situations similar to Wearable Technology – Kita Health
Tech (KHT) and relate their findings to first-hand experiences wherever possible. Information may be
collected through a range of activities: secondary and primary research, field trips, guest speakers,
personal interviews and email correspondence.

Responses to examination questions must reflect the synthesis of knowledge and experiences that the
candidates have gained from their investigations. In some instances, additional information may be
provided in examination questions to allow candidates to generate new ideas.
                                              –3–            M&N17/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

     Overview

     The terms “wearable technology“, “wearable devices“, and “wearables” refer to electronic
     devices which are worn on the body or on clothes to collect and/or process information, usually
     without requiring any human interaction.

     Kita Health Tech (KHT) is a technology company based in Jakarta, Indonesia. The company
5    was founded by four friends who met while studying at university and graduated from different
     faculties (medicine, sport studies, computing and business). When they formed KHT in
     2008, they decided that their mission would be to improve the lives of people using wearable
     technology in as many ways as possible.

     The current management team consists of the following original founding members:
10   • Mr Mika Harjanto, chief technology officer
     • Ms Lily Adihusada, sports scientist
     • Mrs Adel Astuti, health consultant
     • Mr Fajar Salim, chief finance officer

     The early years

     The first KHT product was a watch that measured daily activity by counting the number of steps
15   the user took. KHT worked in partnership with nutritionists, clinics and hospitals in Jakarta,
     and offered their watches to people who wanted to lose weight and improve their health by
     making sure they had a minimum daily level of activity. The watch measured movement with
     an accelerometer and displayed a percentage of the recommended daily activity on the screen
     along with the time of day. The watch also had a small memory and was able to record the
20   total number of steps taken each day for the previous 14 days. This allowed doctors to see
     whether patients had followed their recommendations. The management team realised this was
     a limitation of the device, as the only way to get the data from the watch was by looking at its
     display within that 14-day time period. In Figure 1 below, the time of day is 18:25 and the user
     has already surpassed the daily recommended activity by 10 %.

          Figure 1 – An original concept sketch of the ﬁrst KHT activity monitoring watch




                                                                                           Turn over
                                               –4–              M&N17/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

25   As a result of the partnerships with healthcare organizations KHT was able to use penetration
     pricing to create a market for the watch. KHT also developed partnerships with pharmaceutical
     companies and national healthcare clinics which led to nationwide sales. The revenue obtained
     from these sales allowed the company to make improvements and release new versions of the
     watch. Later versions allowed data to be transferred from the watch to a smartphone wirelessly
30   using the ANT+ protocol.

     Current situation

     Since the first version of their product, the chief technology officer, Mika Harjanto, has continued
     to experiment with new programs and hardware by working on several “proof of concept”
     prototypes. The first of these used new protocols such as ANT+ to connect the watch to other
     fitness devices (eg heart rate monitors, bicycle power meters, gym cross trainers, etc) to record
35   other data on the device. The second prototype synchronized data with several different fitness
     websites and cloud storage using various standard data formats, such as XML.

     Mika decided to join a working group of other industry professionals who were interested in
     developing standards to ensure there would be interoperability between their products. His
     aim was to give KHT’s customers more choice because their devices would be compatible with
40   other products. As part of this working group, Mike realized that it would be more cost-effective
     to aggregate and analyse data in the cloud rather than develop apps to do this.

     Lily Adihusada, the sports scientist, saw many other opportunities in her field, such as skiing,
     tennis, golf, swimming, triathlon, hiking and even parachuting – although she realised that
     several of these would require additional and more specialized hardware. As part of her
45   research, she visited an international sports technology exhibition in Germany and was amazed
     by the innovative products she saw, such as skin sensors to automatically measure calorie
     intake or hydration, the use of coloured light to measure heart rate without the need for a chest
     strap, and also wearable sports clothes that incorporated many sensors.

     Lily was aware that there were many web-based services that could accept data from any
50   device as long as it was in a standard format. However she also heard that some customers
     preferred to store and analyse their data on a local device only, rather than upload it to one of
     the many cloud services that were available. She presumed that this was because they wanted
     to personally monitor and study their activity, rather than get generic feedback from
     online services. Lily was also aware that there may be greater potential for growth if KHT
55   diversified from the development of wearable technologies into the provision of services that
     gave their customers information to allow them to make better decisions about managing their
     own health and well-being. Lily was impressed by services such as “Garmin Connect”.
     Figure 2 shows a small selection of data available using this service.
                                               –5–             M&N17/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

                   Figure 2 – Example of data from the “Garmin Connect” service




                                      Removed for copyright reasons

                        The figure showed data about running (number of calories
                         burned, time spent running and pace), sleep quality and
                              duration, and number of steps walked in a day.




     Many different programs and services exist to analyse data from wearable devices, both online
     and offline. Some of these are directly related to health considerations and others to general
     fitness and well-being, for example sleep pattern analysis.
60
     Fajar Salim, the chief finance officer, was always fighting against plans to develop advanced
     and innovative new software and hardware for the devices, as he thought it would take too
     much time, cost too much money, or require hiring a team of software developers when the
     company could make money in other ways. He was also concerned about protecting their
     technology and ideas from companies that might try to copy them and manufacture them
65   more cheaply in other countries. However he saw the value of obtaining data from all the KHT
     customers, as it would provide opportunities for selling and sharing data with third parties such
     as insurance companies.

     Adel Astuti, the health consultant, wanted to further develop KHT’s relationships with hospitals,
     health providers and insurance companies, who were keen to promote KHT products as long
70   as they could provide access to more detailed information. She interviewed doctors about
     which data would be most helpful in their diagnosis and treatment of patients. From these
     interviews she found that, in addition to the calories burned by daily movement, doctors were
     interested in data such as sleep patterns, skin temperature, glucose levels, hydration and
     heart rate. Doctors were also keen for a future device that would be able to locate patients who
75   frequently got lost, or were at a high risk of heart attacks, strokes, etc. Some discussions took
     place with insurance companies who were interested in using the data provided by KHT in their
     algorithms to set prices for health and life insurance policies. However she was concerned that
     the sharing of data with healthcare professionals and insurance companies could raise ethical
     issues that the company managers needed to address.
80




                                                                                             Turn over
                                              –6–             M&N17/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

     Due to the fact that Adel had completed her medical training both in Indonesia and the UK,
     where the funding and access to medical care varied, she was aware that there would be a
     need to customize wearable technologies to the needs of the different markets if they were to be
85   sold globally.

     Figure 3 below gives an indication of the flows of data in the KHT case study.

                             Figure 3 – Data ﬂows in the KHT case study




     Challenges faced

     Mika, Lily, Adel and Fajar agreed that the road ahead for KHT seemed full of opportunities, but
     there were a number of challenges that needed to be considered.

     Hardware and software
     • Ensuring the software for communicating and storing data in new products is compatible with
90     existing and future standards and protocols, such as ANT+ and XML.
     • Investigating the different sensors available for wearable technology and how they might
       change in the future, as well as how practical it is to add them to items that customers wear
       (not just watches, but clothing, accessories, etc).
     • Developing features that are not strictly health-related, but are useful for monitoring and
95     managing a user’s overall well-being.
                                               –7–             M&N17/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

      End users
      • Deciding whether to prioritise the development of new wearable technologies that can
        be customized to be more responsive to the needs of different users, such as elite sports
        people, scuba divers, golfers, young children and doctors. This might require modifications
        to the hardware or software of the existing products.
100   • Whether to develop products that can be adapted to the needs of the different users in a
        range of countries such as China, Russia, Thailand and Australia.
      • Whether to develop products that claim to enable users to be able to manage their own
        health and well-being, such as by setting safe limits for the time spent exercising or setting
        upper limits for their pulse rate.
105   • Whether to develop different services, such as e-mail or text alerts, monthly bulletins, etc,
        for different user groups, for example sports professionals, people with medical conditions,
        elderly people or children.
      • Deciding to develop downloadable software and special websites that can be used to
        interpret the data that is collected by the devices for particular exercise sessions and
110     over time.

      Data
      • Managing the privacy and security of large quantities of KHT customer data. KHT is
        concerned that many of their customers may worry about their privacy and anonymity being
        compromised by sharing data with health authorities and insurance companies who have
        made such agreements with KHT.
115   • Ensuring there is an appropriate balance between the input from healthcare professionals
        and software developers in the development of algorithms so that users can trust the
        information provided. This information would come from downloadable software and a
        special KHT data analysis website.
      • Developing ethical data gathering and sharing agreements with health authorities and
120     insurance companies within and between countries that are not disadvantageous to certain
        groups of society.

      Policies and practices
      • Developing policies that are able to identify who is accountable should an item of wearable
        technology fail. For example, a customer’s wearable tech fails to detect a heart rate that
        is considerably above the recommended maximum rate. Also, how this accountability is
125     affected if a customer adapts the settings of the device to fit their personal requirements.
      • Updating the services that KHT are offering, such as to trigger alerts when there are changes
        to health advice, to reflect different cultural perceptions about what constitutes a serious
        condition, or sending appropriate information to different groups of users.




                                                                                             Turn over
                                                    –8–             M&N17/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

Key terms associated with Wearable Technology – Kita Health Tech (KHT)

Algorithm
App
ANT+
Copyright
Data synchronization services (such as Tapiriik.com)
Difference between health and well-being
Insurance premium/policy
Interoperability
Patent
Proof of concept
Smartphone
Smartwatch
Standards and protocols
Wearable technology sensors
XML formats for exporting activities (such as GPX and TCX)


Any individuals named in this case study are fictitious and any similarities with actual entities are purely
coincidental.
