M14/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T




      22142226

ENGLISH B – HIGHER LEVEL – PAPER 1
ANGLAIS B – NIVEAU SUPÉRIEUR – ÉPREUVE 1
INGLÉS B – NIVEL SUPERIOR – PRUEBA 1

Tuesday 6 May 2014 (afternoon)
Mardi 6 mai 2014 (après-midi)
Martes 6 de mayo de 2014 (tarde)

1 h 30 m


TEXT BOOKLET – INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES
• Do not open this booklet until instructed to do so.
• This booklet contains all of the texts required for paper 1.
• Answer the questions in the question and answer booklet provided.

LIVRET DE TEXTES – INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS
• N’ouvrez pas ce livret avant d’y être autorisé(e).
• Ce livret contient tous les textes nécessaires à l’épreuve 1.
• Répondez à toutes les questions dans le livret de questions et réponses fourni.

CUADERNO DE TEXTOS – INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS
• No abra este cuaderno hasta que se lo autoricen.
• Este cuaderno contiene todos los textos para la prueba 1.
• Conteste todas las preguntas en el cuaderno de preguntas y respuestas.




2214-2226                                                                                       8 pages/páginas
                                                                 © International Baccalaureate Organization 2014
                                                    –2–              M14/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

TEXT A



                         A letter to our old family kitchen table
            There was never a time when our family
            lived in this house that you weren’t there.
            You were made just before I was born.
            Made to fit perfectly into the kitchen in the
 5          new house we had moved into. I was a bump
            in Mum’s tummy, but my two older sisters
            were there when you were manoeuvred
            into place. Dad is a perfectionist and makes
            things to last, but who would have thought
10          you’d still be there all these years later?

            You are part of our family. You have hosted
            35 Christmas dinners, six christening lunches,
            three wedding banquets and four wakes.
            I can’t count the hundreds of candles that have been blown out with the family sitting
15          around you, but every birthday cake I’ve ever had has been eaten sitting around you.
            Babies have had their first bath in a plastic tub on you, dens have been made under you,
            generations of children have squealed and shrieked as they chased and skidded
            around you.

            You have been moved aside so that the noisy floor can be used for tap dancing practice.
20          Arguments have started and been made up around you, family news has been broken,
            relationships begun and ended, announcements made of births, deaths and engagements.

            I vividly remember, aged seven, lying on you while Dad performed emergency surgery on a
            toenail I’d got caught in a bike chain; and I remember when I was 12 the look on Dad’s face
            when he saw the saucepan-shaped burn I made on you.

25          You have witnessed more than your fair share of drama – you’ve survived a fire, a flood,
            four children, five grandchildren, and had more cutlery thrown on you in suppertime teenage
            angst than you deserve. You are as strong and sturdy as ever.

            Now you’re in the shed. The thing is there are 15 of us, with the husbands and children,
            and you were only made for us six. The new oak table is really nice; it’s oval so we can get
30          more people around it, and it extends to fit us all. But it’s not the same.

            Dad has tried to re-home you, but it looks as if, for now, you’ll stay where you are,
            covered in a tarpaulin and housing Mum’s collection of terracotta pots waiting for plants.
            You may not be at the heart of our home anymore, but please don’t think you’re forgotten;
            as I’ve said rather dramatically – and metaphorically – since you were replaced: “But I was
35          born on that table!” And it wasn’t just me. Our family was born around that table.

                                                                   Image © US Department of Agriculture.
                                                        Text: Copyright Guardian News & Media Ltd 2011.

2214-2226
                                                     –3–              M14/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

TEXT B




            When Man and
            Nature Collide
            There is a war ravaging our world. I speak not of the conflicts between men or countries.
            I speak of another, vastly different kind of war. It is not a war for political reasons or
            for territorial expansion. Its basis is far simpler than that, yet its potential ramifications
            far outstrip anything our civilization has ever before seen. I speak of the ongoing battle
 5          between mankind and the other creatures of this world.

            A prime example of one such battle is that which currently rages in The Serengeti
            National Park. The Tanzanian government intends to pave the road which runs across
            50 km of the park. The annual migrations in this region involve more than 1.5 million
            animals, primarily wildebeests and zebras. These annual migrations are considered
10          one of the great natural wonders of the world. The paving of this road would have
            dire consequences, both to the migrating herds and the local environment itself. But as
            tragic as this would be, it is not the sole repercussion that would ensue.

            Nature is a blend, with all its parts working together in harmony. The lion and cheetah
            populations, which also happen to be among the most popular tourist attractions in
15          the park, depend heavily upon the annual migrations for their food supply.

            The list of such conflicts is extensive. One needs only to turn on the news or read a
            local paper to find stories of such conflicts between man and nature. It is impossible
            to affect one link in the chain which comprises a given environment without incurring
            disastrous ramifications. Human beings are the ultimate embodiment of this destructive
20          potential on the planet. Our encroachment upon various delicate habitats comes
            in a variety of forms. Mankind as a whole is the single greatest contributor to ecological
            imbalance on the planet. Conversely, to be honest, we are also the species that holds
            the ability to have the greatest positive effect upon this world’s ecosystems. We have it
            within us to either save or destroy. The ability and the choice are ours. We as a species
25          need to acquire environmental awareness before our own shortsightedness and apathy
            doom us and our fellow denizens* of this world to extinction.


                                     Text: http://www.ourbreathingplanet.com/when-man-and-nature-collide/
                                             Image: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Tanzanian_Animals.jpg
* denizens: inhabitants



2214-2226                                                     Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                  –4–             M14/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

TEXT C




                                        “Missy’s Room”

            Mrs Falconer and Miss Bailey walked home together through the fine blue summer
            afternoon from the Ladies’ Aid meeting at Mrs Robinson’s. They were engaged
            in conversation; that is to say, Miss Bailey was talking earnestly and volubly,
            and Mrs Falconer was listening. Mrs Falconer had reduced the practice of listening
 5          to a fine art […] Nobody in Lindsay ever felt very well acquainted with Mrs Falconer
            in spite of the fact that she had lived among them forty years. She kept between her
            and her world a fine, baffling reserve which no one had ever been able to penetrate.
            It was known that she had had a bitter sorrow in her life, but she never made any
            reference to it, and most people in Lindsay had forgotten it. Some foolish ones even
10          supposed that Mrs Falconer had forgotten it.

            “Well, I do not know what on earth is to be done with Camilla Clark,” said Miss Bailey,
            with a prodigious sigh. “I suppose that we will simply have to trust the whole matter
            to Providence*.”

            The case of Camilla Clark was agitating the Ladies’ Aid of one of the Lindsay churches.
15          They had talked about it through the whole of that afternoon session while they
            sewed for their missionary box—talked about it, and come to no conclusion.

            In the preceding spring, James Clark, one of the hands in the lumber mill at Lindsay,
            had been killed in an accident. The shock had proved nearly fatal to his young wife.
            The next day Camilla Clark’s baby was born dead, and the poor mother hovered for
20          weeks between life and death. Slowly, very slowly, life won the battle, and Camilla
            came back from the valley of the shadow. But she was still an invalid, and would be
            so for a long time.

            The Clarks had come to Lindsay only a short time before the accident. They were
            boarding at Mrs Barry’s when it happened, and Mrs Barry had shown every kindness
25          and consideration to the unhappy young widow. But now the Barrys were very
            soon to leave Lindsay for the West, and the question was, what was to be done with
            Camilla Clark? She could not go west; she could not even do work of any sort yet in
            Lindsay; she had no relatives or friends in the world; and she was absolutely penniless.




2214-2226
                                                                  –5–               M14/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T



            The obvious solution was for some of them to offer her a home until such time as
30          she would be able to go to work. But there did not seem to be anyone who could
            offer to do this—unless it was Mrs Falconer. The church was small, and the
            Ladies’ Aid smaller. There were only twelve members in it; four of these were
            unmarried ladies who boarded, and so were helpless in the matter; of the remaining
            eight, seven had large families, or sick husbands, or something else that prevented
35          them from offering Camilla Clark an asylum. Their excuses were all valid;
            they were good, sincere women who would have taken her in if they could, but they
            could not see their way clear to do so. However, it was probable they would eventually
            manage it in some way if Mrs Falconer did not rise to the occasion.

            Nobody liked to ask Mrs Falconer outright to take Camilla Clark in, yet everyone
40          thought she might offer. She was comfortably off, and though her house was small,
            there was nobody to live in it except herself and her husband.


                                                                  Lucy Maud Montgomery, Missy’s Room (1907).
                                              “L.M. Montgomery” is a trademark of Heirs of L.M. Montgomery Inc.



* Providence: the protective care of God or of nature as a spiritual power




2214-2226                                                                    Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                              –6–            M14/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

TEXT D



                            Anger Management
       Understanding anger
       The emotion of anger is neither good
       nor bad. It’s perfectly healthy and
       normal to feel angry when you’ve been
 5     mistreated or wronged. The feeling
       isn’t the problem — it’s what you do
       with it that makes a difference.

       Mastering the art of anger management
       takes work, but the more you practice,
10     the easier it will get. And the payoff
       can be huge. Learning to control your
       anger and express it appropriately can
       help you build better relationships,
       achieve your goals, and lead a
15     healthier, more satisfying life.

       Anger is often a cover-up for other feelings
       In order to get your needs met and express your anger in appropriate ways,
       you need to be in touch with what you are really feeling: Are you truly angry?
       Or is your anger masking other feelings such as embarrassment, insecurity, hurt,
20     shame, or vulnerability?

       Clues that there’s something more to your anger:
        Is it hard for you to understand other people’s points of view, and even harder
         to concede a point? Compromising might bring up scary feelings of failure
         and vulnerability.
25         Do you pride yourself on being tough and in control, never letting your
            guard down? Do you feel that emotions like fear, guilt, or shame don’t apply
            to you? Everyone has those emotions, and if you think you don’t, you may be
            using anger as a cover for them.
           Do you believe that your way is always right and get angry when others
30          disagree? If you have a strong need to be in control or a fragile ego, you may
            interpret other perspectives as a challenge to your authority, rather than simply
            a different way of looking at things.

       Emotional awareness is the key to self-understanding and success in life.
       Without the ability to recognize, manage, and deal with the full range of human
35     emotions, you’ll inevitably spin into confusion, isolation, and self-doubt.


2214-2226
                                                  –7–               M14/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T




            Myths and Facts about Anger
            Myth: Anger, aggression, and intimidation help me earn respect and get
                  what I want.

            Fact: True power doesn’t come from bullying others. People may be afraid
40                of you, but they won’t respect you if you can’t control yourself or handle
                  opposing viewpoints. Others will be more willing to listen to you and
                  accommodate your needs if you communicate in a respectful way.

            Myth: [ – X – ]

            Fact: While it’s true that suppressing and ignoring anger is unhealthy, venting
45                is no better. In fact, outbursts and tirades only fuel the fire and
                  reinforce your anger problem.

            Myth: [ – 43 – ]

            Fact: You can express your anger without being verbally or physically abusive.
                  Even if someone is pushing your buttons, you always have a choice
50                about how to respond.

            Myth: [ – 44 – ]

            Fact: Never getting angry is not a good goal. Anger is normal, and it will
                  come out regardless of how hard you try to suppress it. Rather than
                  trying to suppress your anger, the goal is to express it in constructive
55                ways.


                      ©Helpguide.org. All rights reserved. Helpguide.org is an ad-free non-profit resource
                         for supporting better mental health and lifestyle choices for adults and children.




2214-2226                                                  Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                                    –8–               M14/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

TEXT E


             TV Product Placement in India

             Product placement is a form of advertisement, where
             branded goods or services are placed in movies,
             the story line of television shows, or news programmes.
             Though product placement has been a common
    5        instance since the 1980s in evolved markets like the US,                     Image removed for copyright
             Indian television viewers started seeing products as part                             reasons
             of the programming content much later.

             Networks usually charge a significant premium above
             regular advertising rates for product placements
10           in shows. Yash Khanna, president of CMCG* India,
             pointed out that currently there have been a lot of
             consumer products which are using this space, especially in reality shows. The spots
             on offer include passive product shots, where there is no interaction with the brand,
             an active placement, where there is limited interaction or activity around the brand,
15           or a hyperactive placement, where there is an aggressive usage of the product in
             the show. Reality shows like Bigg Boss, Perfect Bride, and Indian Idol all had their share
             of placements.

             Pointing out that at present there are no specific regulations for product placement with
             respect to Indian television programmes, Khanna added, “I understand that the Ministry of
20           Information and Broadcasting is working on a content regulation and guidelines, and product
             placements could be a part of it.”

             Mona Jain, chief operating officer at Vivaki Exchange, feels that any kind of regulations in
             place are strictly channel specific and purely for commercial reasons. “We can have product
             placement if the channel is alright with it. Some marketers also take the route of placing
25           products through production houses. However, the channels often want to do it because
             they don’t want to miss an opportunity to make more money out of it.”

             [ – X – ] the evolution of the television product placement space in India, Jain said that
             channels have dedicated teams to think of solutions. “As a marketer, you can [ – 49 – ]
             brief the channel on your brand’s requirements and they get back to you [ – 50 – ]
30           tailor-made solutions. There are many instances in [ – 51 – ] the placement has been
             seamless and doesn’t look like a commercial placement. [ – 52 – ], I feel that Indian
             markets are far more innovative and flexible when compared to the international markets
             [ – 53 – ] more stringent rules regarding solutions apply.”

                                                                           Jagadeesh Krishnamurthy, Campaign India (2011)
                                                                                                     Used with permission.

*       CMCG: a public relations and strategic communications consulting firm



2214-2226
