M14/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T




      22142805

ENGLISH AB INITIO – STANDARD LEVEL – PAPER 1
ANGLAIS AB INITIO – NIVEAU MOYEN – ÉPREUVE 1
INGLÉS AB INITIO – NIVEL MEDIO – PRUEBA 1

Tuesday 6 May 2014 (afternoon)
Mardi 6 mai 2014 (après-midi)
Martes 6 de mayo de 2014 (tarde)

1 h 30 m


TEXT BOOKLET – INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES
• Do not open this booklet until instructed to do so.
• This booklet contains all of the texts required for paper 1.
• Answer the questions in the question and answer booklet provided.

LIVRET DE TEXTES – INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS
• N’ouvrez pas ce livret avant d’y être autorisé(e).
• Ce livret contient tous les textes nécessaires à l’épreuve 1.
• Répondez à toutes les questions dans le livret de questions et réponses fourni.

CUADERNO DE TEXTOS – INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS
• No abra este cuaderno hasta que se lo autoricen.
• Este cuaderno contiene todos los textos para la prueba 1.
• Conteste todas las preguntas en el cuaderno de preguntas y respuestas.




2214-2805                                                                                       7 pages/páginas
                                                                 © International Baccalaureate Organization 2014
                 –2–           M14/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T




              Blank page
              Page vierge
            Página en blanco




2214-2805
                                                       –3–               M14/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

TEXT A



                          Explore The New Forest!
            Part 1

            There is something for
            the whole family in the                                           London
            New Forest. Nicky Cox and
            family went to visit.
                                                        Hampshire
            The New Forest is an area of
            southern England which has             The New
                                                    Forest
            large, open fields, wild areas
                                                           Isle of Wight
            and forests. Horses and cows
            move freely in the New Forest
            and this helps to keep the environment as it was in the past. If you’re hoping to relax,
            explore or just enjoy yourself, the New Forest is the ideal place to be.

            The New Forest is also a great place to visit. There are dozens of events organised during the
            year to help you get close to nature. There is also much to do in the area. You can visit historic
            villages or you can visit the village where people used to build the huge sailing boats of
            the past. There is also a New Forest Visitor Centre which is an ideal place to begin your visit.

            Part 2

            The best way to discover the secrets of the New Forest and to experience the sights,
            smells and sounds of the forest is to get out there and explore. You have to leave the car
            behind and explore on foot, bicycle or horseback. We went for a winter break and stayed
            at the Balmer Lawn Hotel in Brockenhurst. It was an ideal location to explore the New Forest
            on bikes. It was already quite dark when we first got on our bikes, but in the forest we
            saw a variety of wildlife: ponies, deer and bats. Coming back to the hotel’s swimming pool,
            jacuzzi and a steaming pot of hot chocolate was very welcome!

            On our second morning, we were back on our bikes again. After an eight-mile ride we had
            the most amazing lunch at Monty’s, a brilliant bistro with, definitely, the best fish and chips
            with peas we have ever tasted!

            We had a great time in the New Forest, but we didn’t have enough time to take the ferry over
            to the Isle of Wight so we’ll need to go back soon to do that. Maybe we’ll see you there!


                                                       Adapted from First News World Explorer (March 2010)
                                                                                      Used with permission.




2214-2805                                                       Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                            –4–              M14/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

TEXT B




            Text removed for copyright reasons




2214-2805
                            –5–              M14/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T




            Text removed for copyright reasons




2214-2805                           Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                               –6–               M14/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

TEXT C



            There are a million teenagers without
            jobs but they are our happiest age group
           The Office for National Statistics has carried out a survey to measure young people’s
            happiness. The average score out of 10 that 16 to 19-year-olds gave when asked how
            optimistic they felt about the next 12 months was 8.5.

           The British Prime Minister, David Cameron, said that it was as essential to measure
 5          the country’s happiness as to calculate the country’s economy. He declared:
            “Happiness is about the beauty of our surroundings, the quality of our culture and,
            above all, it’s about how we get on with other people”.

           The report by the Office for National Statistics says that 16 and 17-year-olds are “more
            satisfied” with life than any other age group. The report also says that teenagers are
10          the most optimistic and the least anxious about the future.

           Their optimism is surprising because youth unemployment is high and university
            tuition fees are increasing. Michaela Berciu, co-founder of the young people’s charity
            CareActGive, said: “Although young people suffer the most from unemployment,
            the research shows Britain’s young people to be a fundamentally optimistic group.
15          On average, they rate their satisfaction higher than any other age group and the
            majority are optimistic about the next 12 months.”

           However, she warned that young people’s happiness will not continue to constantly
            increase. “There are strong contrasts in Britain. The pressure to succeed at school or
            get a job when there are very few opportunities makes many young people concerned
20          and anxious. The riots in London and other cities last year showed the deep frustrations
            felt by urban youth.”


                                          Adapted from James Hall, The Daily Telegraph (11 October 2012)
                                                                 © Telegraph Media Group Limited 2012




2214-2805
                                                 –7–              M14/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

TEXT D




       Why live in a
       cohousing
       community?

       History
       Cohousing came to North America in 1988 from Denmark where it had started 25 years earlier.
       In North America 127 cohousing communities have been created since 1991 and another 118 are
       being built.

 5     Why build cohousing communities?
       Some people say that cohousing communities are like small towns where the best thing
       is everyone knows everyone else. Others say they are like a traditional village. Futurists call
       them a new response to the social, economic and environmental challenges of the 21st century.
       The world has changed dramatically in the last 50 years – women are more likely to have careers,
10     resources are more limited and environmental concerns are increasing.

       Cohousing offers the independence of private houses and also the advantages of living in a
       community where people know and interact with their neighbours and share resources.

       What are cohousing communities?
       Residents own their individual homes, which are built around a “common house”. In this shared
15     building there may be a kitchen and dining room, children’s playroom, workshops, guest rooms,
       home office support, arts and crafts area, laundry and more. Each home has its own kitchen,
       but dinners prepared by residents are often available at the common house for those who wish
       to participate.

       Cohousing residents participate in the planning and management of their community and meet
20     frequently to discuss projects. Cohousing communities are environmentally sensitive: residents
       can go everywhere on foot. In each community there are 10–35 households with a mixture of
       generations. There are singles, families with children, couples and old people.

       Why support cohousing communities?
       Through cohousing, we can build a better place to live, a place where we know our neighbours, a
25     place where we can enjoy a rich sense of community and contribute to a more sustainable world.

                              Adapted from www.cohousing.ca (December 2012). Used with permission.




2214-2805
