N20/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

November / Novembre / Noviembre de 2020


        English / Anglais / Inglés ab initio


                         Standard level
                         Niveau moyen
                          Nivel medio


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




8 pages/páginas
                                           –2–             N20/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de
tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris,
sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de
tutorat ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement
supérieur, des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes
d’études, des gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des
développeurs d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la
procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse suivante :
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios
de apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores
de aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u
ofrezcan recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este
enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia:
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.
                                                –3–              N20/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Criterion A: Language

How successfully does the candidate command written language?
• To what extent is the vocabulary appropriate and varied?
• To what extent are the grammatical structures varied?
• To what extent does the accuracy of the language contribute to effective communication?

  Marks    Level descriptor
    0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
           Command of the language is limited
           Vocabulary is sometimes appropriate to the task.
    1-2    Basic grammatical structures are used.
           Language contains errors in basic structures. Abundant repetition and inaccuracies
           interfere with meaning.
           Command of the language is generally effective.
           Vocabulary is generally appropriate to the task, and varied.
           Some basic grammatical structures are used, with some attempts to use more complex
    3-4
           structures.
           Language is generally accurate for basic structures, but errors occur in more complex
           structures. Errors at times interfere with communication.
           Command of the language is effective and mostly accurate.
           Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied.
    5-6
           A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used effectively.
           Language is mostly accurate. Occasional errors do not interfere with communication.


Language
Not all errors have the same importance, and examiners should bear this in mind. Some errors
affect the communication of meaning significantly, and others do not. Also, some errors indicate a
fundamental lack of command of the language, while others may simply indicate a moment of
forgetfulness.

SLIPS – mistakes at all levels of difficulty, but erratic and occasional – eg the candidate normally
forms past tenses well, but occasionally forgets “-ed”.

FLAWS – errors occur more regularly, particularly in certain structures – eg past tenses are formed
correctly quite often, but are not really reliable, and there may be basic confusions (eg past simple
versus present perfect).

GAPS – some structures are rarely correct, or simply don’t appear – eg the past tenses are
needed, but do not appear.
                                                 –4–              N20/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B: Message

To what extent does the candidate fulfil the task?
   • How relevant are the ideas to the task?
   • To what extent are ideas developed?
   • To what extent do the clarity and organization of ideas contribute to the successful delivery
      of the message?

The “descriptor unpacked” explain the assessment criteria in greater detail. Where a candidate’s
response does not correspond exactly to a single mark band, the statements in bold should be
used as a guide for the ‘best fit’ approach.

 Marks   Level descriptor                    Descriptor unpacked
 0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
 1–2     The task is partially fulfilled. The link between the response and task is unclear at
                                          times; the reader has difficulty in understanding the
         Some ideas are relevant.
                                          message.
         Ideas are stated, but with no
                                          The response covers only some points in the task, and
         development.
                                          not all the points expressed are relevant.
         Ideas are not clearly presented
                                          Supporting details and/or examples barely feature, if at
         and do not follow a logical
                                          all.
         structure, making the message
         difficult to determine.          The ideas do not link well together; inadequate or
                                          inappropriate use of cohesive devices confuse the
                                          message.
 3–4     The task is generally fulfilled.    The link between the response and the task is mostly
                                             clear; the reader’s overall understanding is not
         Most ideas are relevant to the
                                             impeded, despite some ambiguity.
         task.
                                             The response covers most of the points in the task, and
         Some ideas are developed with
                                             most of the points expressed are relevant.
         some detail and examples.
                                             The response includes some supporting details and
         Ideas are generally clearly
                                             examples.
         presented and the response is
         generally structured in a logical   The ideas are organized in a logical way; basic cohesive
         manner, leading to a mostly         devices are used correctly to aid the delivery of the
         successful delivery of the          message, although there may be areas of slight
         message.                            confusion at times.
 5–6     The task is fulfilled               The link between the response and the task is clear;
         effectively.                        the reader has a good understanding of the message
                                             conveyed.
         Ideas are relevant to the task.
                                             The response covers all the points in the task, and the
         Ideas are developed well,
                                             points expressed are relevant.
         providing details and relevant
         examples.                           The response uses supporting details and examples to
                                             clarify the message.
         Ideas are clearly presented and
         the response is structured in a     The ideas are organized well; a range of basic cohesive
         logical manner, supporting the      devices are used correctly to deliver the message with
         delivery of the message.            little or no ambiguity.


Note: When marking candidate responses, keep in mind that neither the factual accuracy of the
information presented, nor the validity of the candidates’ personal opinions, are being assessed.
Therefore, scripts that are factually inaccurate should not be marked down, provided the ideas
presented have coherence and are sufficiently developed.
                                                    –5–              N20/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion C: Conceptual understanding

To what extent does the candidate demonstrate conceptual understanding?
   •       To what extent is the choice of text type appropriate to the task?
   •       To what extent are register and tone appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of
           the task?
   •       To what extent does the response incorporate the conventions of the chosen text type?

  Marks       Level descriptor
    0         The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
              Conceptual understanding is limited.
              The choice of text type is generally inappropriate to the context, purpose or audience.
       1
              The register and tone are inappropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the task.
              The response incorporates limited recognizable conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is mostly demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is generally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
       2      The register and tone, while occasionally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience
              of the task, fluctuate throughout the response.
              The response incorporates some conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is fully demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
       3
              The register and tone are appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the task.
              The response fully incorporates the conventions of the chosen text type.


Note: Examiners must balance all three elements in criterion C (choice of text type,
appropriateness of tone and register, and use of text type conventions) to arrive at the final mark.
                                                 –6–                N20/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Question specific guidance (Criterion B and C)

                                              Section A
Task 2

    You recently moved to a new school in a new country where your routine is very different. You
    want to reflect on this experience. Write a text describing two or more differences about your
    new routine and how this is making you feel.

    Blog                             Diary                             Speech


Criterion B:

Points to be covered:
•     Information relevant to the context: reference to a move to a new country and / or going to a
      new school.
•     Description of two or more differences in routine between the student’s own country or school
      and the new one. These differences do not have to be linked to the new school but may refer to
      the customs of the country.
      The word “routine” suggests a difference in time /organization/programme of the day. Also
      accept the description of a difference in habit, lifestyle, custom…
•     Description / explanation of how this move to a new country makes the student feel.



Criterion C:

Choice of text type:

                              Text type           Rationale
Appropriate                   Diary               The text type is suitable: the candidate is asked to
                                                  reflect on the situation. This text type is usually
                                                  personal and not shared with other readers.
Generally appropriate         Blog                This text type could contain some elements of
                                                  reflexion although the audience is more numerous.
                                                  If the blog is specifically addressed to friends or
                                                  classmates this choice could be generally
                                                  appropriate
Generally inappropriate       Speech              This text type is addressed to an audience. It does
                                                  not allow the “author” of the speech to reflect.


Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”, and the
“generally inappropriate” text type can be considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• informal
• personal

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                   –7–              N20/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                                 Section B

Task 4

    Your class went on a language exchange visit to an English-speaking country last month. You
    thought the visit was particularly successful, and you want to let your school principal know.
    Write a text describing what you did, and two or more things that you learned from the visit.

    Article                             Letter                          Presentation


Criterion B:

Points to be covered:
•     Information relevant to the context: the letter refers to the school language exchange.
•     Description of what the student did: a list of events or activities or a single, well-developed,
      activity. The description of the exchange should be positive to reflect “particularly successful”,
      but these words are not required in the letter.
•     Mention of two or more things the student learned. These points may be linked to what the
      student did (events and /or activities) or be more general (referring, for example, to the
      experience of the exchange).

Criterion C:

Choice of text type:

                              Text type             Rationale
Appropriate                   Letter                This text type is suitable since it is addressed to an
                                                    individual, the school principal. A letter can be
                                                    used to describe an event or experience.
Generally appropriate         Presentation          This text type is generally an oral text given to a
                                                    class or to a small audience. It could be suitable if
                                                    the presentation is specifically delivered to the
                                                    teachers and the headmaster, for example.
Generally inappropriate       Article               This text type is not suitable since it does not allow
                                                    for communication with the headmaster.


Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”, and the
“generally inappropriate” text type can be considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• formal
• polite

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                               –8–             N20/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Appendix: Text type conventions (Criterion C)

The most common and recognisable conventions of the text types are given below:

Blog
• Title
• Time / Date
• Writer’s name / username
• Reference to audience (directly, or through use of “we” and “you” etc)

Diary
• Date
• First person narration
• Opening and closing statement
• Form of address and signature

Speech
• Opening address
• Reference to audience (directly, or through use of “we” and “you” etc)
• Concluding remarks / closing statement

Article
• Headline
• Writer’s name or date of publication
• Introduction

Letter
• Date
• Opening salutation / greeting
• closing salutations
• Name of the sender

Presentation
• Opening address
• Reference to the topic of the presentation
• Concluding remarks / closing statement
