No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de
tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris,
sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de
tutorat ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement
supérieur, des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes
d’études, des gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des
développeurs d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la
procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse suivante :
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios
de apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores
de aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u
ofrezcan recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este
enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia:
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.
Computer science
Higher level
Paper 3

Monday 2 November 2020 (morning)


1 hour


Instructions to candidates
y   Do not turn over this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y   A clean copy of the computer science case study is required for this examination paper.
y   Read the case study carefully.
y   Answer all questions.
y   The maximum mark for this examination paper is [30 marks].




                                                                                              8820 – 7013
      2 pages                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2020
                                                  –2–                                               8820 – 7013


Answer all questions.

1.   (a)	Identify two characteristics of a peer-2-peer (P2P) network.                                     [2]

     (b)   Identify two sources of entropy.                                                                [2]


2.   (a)   Describe the steps that need to be carried out by the blockchain system to find a user’s
           current MONS balance.                                                                           [4]

     Dolores states, “one of the great things about the blockchain is that we can ensure that
     the solution time remains at 10 minutes, and we can do this even as the number of MONS
     miners increases” (lines 63–65).

     (b)   Explain why it is important to ensure the solution time remains at 10 minutes.                  [4]


3.   Critics have complained about the potential environmental effects caused by the computing
     resources required by a blockchain network.

     Analyse the potential effects that the use of MONS could have on the environment.                     [6]


4.   Pablo states: “In a traditional banking system, users trust the banks to keep everyone’s
     money safe; but with MONS, the whole blockchain, right from the very first transaction,
     would be visible to all MONS users, so it is important to be able to explain to citizens how
     their money is guaranteed to be safe” (lines 109–112).

     With reference to the key technologies, to what extent do you believe the MONS project will
     ensure the safety of the residents’ money?                                                          [12]




