No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de
tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris,
sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de
tutorat ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement
supérieur, des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes
d’études, des gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des
développeurs d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la
procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse suivante :
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios
de apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores
de aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u
ofrezcan recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este
enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia:
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.
Design technology
Higher level
Paper 1

Thursday 5 November 2020 (afternoon)


1 hour


Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y Answer all the questions.
y For each question, choose the answer you consider to be the best and indicate your choice on
  the answer sheet provided.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [40 marks].




                                                                                             8820 – 6201
     21 pages                                            © International Baccalaureate Organization 2020
                                                –2–                                           8820 – 6201


1.   Which part of the human information processing system would most likely be affected by
     mental stress?

     A.   Motor processes

     B.   Output

     C.   Sensory processes

     D.   Central processes

2.   Which of the following is a biomechanical consideration?

     A.   Torque

     B.   Alertness

     C.   Static data

     D.   Adjustability
                                                –3–                                    8820 – 6201


3.   Figure 1 is an example of a tool used by designers.

            Figure 1: A tool used to demonstrate the stages and impacts of a project




     What is Figure 1 an example of?

     A.   Life cycle analysis (LCA) matrix

     B.   Design for the environment software

     C.   Affinity diagramming

     D.   Environmental impact assessment matrix




                                                                                       Turn over
                                                  –4–                                      8820 – 6201


4.   Which of the following renewable energy resources could be considered as having the least
     environmental and social impact?

     A.   Geothermal energy

     B.   Solar

     C.   Wind

     D.   Hydropower

5.   Which of the following best describes a circular economy?

     A.   Maximizing the amount of material that can be recycled

     B.   Designing products so they produce the minimal amount of pollution

     C.   Designing products so their waste can be used as a resource

     D.   Designing products so they can be disposed of as easily as possible

6.   Which of the following statements are true of life cycle analysis (LCA)?

          I.      Straight forward
          II.     Expensive
          III.    Time consuming

     A.   I and II only

     B.   I and III only

     C.   II and III only

     D.   I, II and III

7.   Focussing on one or two environmental objectives is considered a strategy for…

     A.   Eco-design

     B.   Radical design

     C.   Green design

     D.   Constructive discontent
                                                   –5–                                        8820 – 6201


8.    What might be considered a disadvantage of an incremental solution?

      A.   It requires considerable expenditure on research and development

      B.   It causes minimal disruption

      C.   It requires a high capital investment

      D.   It focuses on short-term goals

9.    Figure 2 shows a freehand drawing and an orthographic projection of a chair.

                             Figure 2: Different representations of a chair




      What is an advantage of using a freehand drawing rather than an orthographic drawing?

      A.   More accurate

      B.   Allows quick exploration of ideas

      C.   Can be given to a manufacturer to make it

      D.   All parts drawn in proportion

10.   What rapid prototyping process uses lasers to solidify layers from a liquid resin?

      A.   Stereolithography (SLA)

      B.   Fused deposition modelling (FDM)

      C.   Selective laser sintering (SLS)

      D.   Laminated object manufacturing (LOM)




                                                                                              Turn over
                                                  –6–                                           8820 – 6201


11.   Figure 3 shows an industrial robotic arm.

                                   Figure 3: An industrial robotic arm




      The blue shaded area shows how far the robotic arm can reach. What is this area called?

      A.   Task area

      B.   Work envelope

      C.   Load capacity

      D.   Load area

12.   Which of the following would affect the choice of a production system?

           I.     Labour
           II.    Skills and training
           III.   Impact on the environment

      A.   I and II only

      B.   I and III only

      C.   II and III only

      D.   I, II and III
                                                    –7–                                       8820 – 6201


13.   Which of the following is a permanent joining method?

      A.    Nuts and bolts

      B.    Screws

      C.    Fusing

      D.    Velcro

14.   Which of the following are required to extract iron from its ore?

            I.     Coke and limestone
            II.    A blast furnace
            III.   Electrolysis

      A.    I and II only

      B.    I and III only

      C.    II and III only

      D.    I, II and III

15.   What property does a material have if it can be drawn or extruded into wires and does not break
      or return to its original shape?

      A.    Tensile strength

      B.    Ductility

      C.    Elasticity

      D.    Toughness

16.   Timber is often dried in large ovens called kilns. What is the reason for this?

      A.    To improve aesthetics

      B.    To protect it from insects

      C.    To soften the wood for easier manufacture into products

      D.    To prevent the wood deforming




                                                                                              Turn over
                                                   –8–                                           8820 – 6201


17.   Nike is a global running shoe brand well recognized by the Nike Swoosh (tick) design.




                                 Figure 4 removed for copyright reasons




      Which of the following intellectual property (IP) strategies would be used to prevent any other
      company from copying the Nike Swoosh design?

      A.   Copyright ©

      B.   Patent

      C.   Trademark ®

      D.   Service mark (SM)

18.   At which stage of the product life cycle might a company consider releasing a new generation of
      the product?

      A.   Launch

      B.   Growth

      C.   Maturity

      D.   Withdrawal
                                                   –9–                                     8820 – 6201


19.   Which type of obsolescence best describes a product that has been replaced due to changes of
      consumer tastes?

      A.   Planned

      B.   Style (fashion)

      C.   Technological

      D.   Function

20.   Which of the following statements are true of classic designs?

           I.     The function of the product is better than its competitors
           II.    The form of the product provokes emotional reactions
           III.   Obsolescence does not impact the product’s popularity

      A.   I and II only

      B.   I and III only

      C.   II and III only

      D.   I, II and III




                                                                                           Turn over
                                                  – 10 –                                         8820 – 6201


21.   Figure 5 shows four different products.

                                      Figure 5: Four different products




      Identify the product where the psychological function rather than practical function was the
      determining factor in the design.

      A.   Lockheed lounge chair

      B.   Oxo Grip vegetable peeler

      C.   Sports glasses for children

      D.   Exoskeleton
                                                   – 11 –                                       8820 – 6201


22.   Figure 6 shows a USB cable which can only fit into a computer in one way.

                                              Figure 6: A USB cable




      Which characteristic of a good user interface does this demonstrate?

      A.   Intuitive logic and organization

      B.   Constraints

      C.   Mapping

      D.   Affordance

23.   A common strategy for user-centred design (UCD) involves selecting users to represent the 2.5th
      and the 97.5th percentile of the population. Products are then tested to ensure that they function
      efficiently for those users. What does this strategy describe?

      A.   Method of extremes

      B.   Affinity diagramming

      C.   Participatory design

      D.   Field research




                                                                                               Turn over
                                                   – 12 –                                       8820 – 6201


24.   Figure 7 shows an infographic a company has created to show the efforts they are making to
      ensure their product is more sustainable.

                                      Figure 7: A sustainability infographic




                56
                 million
                                                   Introduced a formal rubber recycling
                                                   program at factories in Asia

            pairs sold in 2014

                                                 17.6% shoes compared to 2013
                                                               decrease in VOCs per pair of
                and over



           300+
           million sold to date
                                                 1.5
                                                           of energy used to make one
                                                       kWh pair of Crocs™ shoes



                                                       7
                                                              of Croslite™ material in each
                                         On average:        % pair of shoes comes from reused
                                                              scrap material



      What is this infographic an example of?

      A.   Triple bottom line sustainability

      B.   Decoupling

      C.   Sustainability reporting

      D.   Product stewardship

25.   Greenpeace is an organization that regularly arranges demonstrations opposing practices that they
      believe will damage the environment. Greenpeace is an example of…

      A.   An eco phobe

      B.   A pressure group

      C.   A lifestyle consumer

      D.   An eco fan
                                                    – 13 –                                    8820 – 6201


26.   Which of the following are true of a green design?

           I.     Meets all parts of the triple bottom line
           II.    Is a short-term solution
           III.   Has a cradle to grave approach

      A.   I and II only

      B.   I and III only

      C.   II and III only

      D.   I, II and III

27.   Some sustainable energy innovations are initiated by individuals and businesses through local
      initiatives. Which term best describes this?

      A.   Regulation

      B.   Macro energy sustainability

      C.   Energy security

      D.   Micro energy sustainability




                                                                                             Turn over
                                                 – 14 –                                          8820 – 6201


28.   Figure 8 shows a range of sunscreen products from different manufacturers.

                                   Figure 8: A range of sunscreen products




      G&C were the first to launch their sunscreen onto the market in 2015 priced at US$2.99. Solis and
      Living Suncare launched their products in 2016 at the same price as G&C.

      Which strategy of price setting best describes the one used by Solis and Living Suncare?

      A.   Competitor-based pricing

      B.   Psychological pricing

      C.   Product line pricing

      D.   Demand pricing
                                                   – 15 –                                          8820 – 6201


29.   The iameco D4R laptop is marketed as “the first truly environmentally-friendly laptop”. Iameco
      focussed on what the laptop is made from and how it is made in order to reduce energy
      consumption, encourage re-use and eliminate waste.

      The goals in developing the laptop were:
      • to achieve a decrease of at least 30% in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
      • to re-use and recycle at least 70% of the waste
      • to ensure a reduction of at least 75% of fresh water utilization.

      Iameco used market segmentation to identify target markets for their laptop.

      Which of the following characteristics was most likely to be considered in the design and
      manufacture of the iameco laptop?

      A.    Profession

      B.    Income

      C.    Age

      D.    Values

30.   Which of the following best describes diversification?

      A.    Existing products, New markets

      B.    Existing products, Existing Markets

      C.    New products, New markets

      D.    New products, Existing markets

31.   Which of the following best describes the market research strategy of gathering information
      about the external world, competitors and the organization itself to identify external opportunities
      and threats?

      A.    Market surveys

      B.    Perceptual mapping

      C.    Environmental scanning

      D.    User research




                                                                                                  Turn over
                                                          – 16 –                                  8820 – 6201


32.   Figure 9 shows a graph measuring how parts of a manufacturing process are within tolerance.
      These are recorded so that if a process is erratic within the upper or lower control limit, the
      manufacturing process can be changed to improve it.

                                         Figure 9: A graph showing process output

                                30
                                                                   Upper Control Limit (UCL)

                                25
               Process output




                                20


                                15

                                                                   Lower Control Limit (LCL)
                                10
                                     2     4     6    8      10     12    14    16   18    20
                                                       Time order

      What quality management technique does this process describe?

      A.    Kaizen

      B.    Statistical process control

      C.    Quality assurance

      D.    Value stream mapping

33.   A manufacturer can sell their products in bulk to a retailer for a reduced price. What is the name of
      this pricing strategy?

      A.    Unit cost

      B.    Retail price

      C.    Wholesale price

      D.    Typical manufacturing price
                                                   – 17 –                                     8820 – 6201


34.   Which of the following are monitored in computer integrated manufacturing (CIM)?

           I.     Purchasing
           II.    Recovery of products at the end of their useful life
           III.   Distribution

      A.   I and II only

      B.   I and III only

      C.   II and III only

      D.   I, II and III

35.   A manufacturer can review the sequence of production, tools used and worker movement to help
      identify areas of improvement. What is the name of this lean production concept, often shown as a
      flow chart?

      A.   Value stream mapping

      B.   Lead time

      C.   Sorting

      D.   Workflow analysis




                                                                                             Turn over
                                                 – 18 –                                       8820 – 6201


Questions 36 – 40 relate to the following case study. Please read the case study carefully and answer
the questions.

Figure 10 and Figure 11 show the Werner ProForm™ F3 Construction Harness. In the event of a fall, a
construction worker can pull a cord to release a built-in seat to reduce the likelihood of injury.

The product was developed by Priority Designs after workers were careless when putting on traditional
harnesses. After a fall, workers would often be suspended for hours, awaiting rescue in an extremely
uncomfortable and potentially dangerous situation with their harness often being the cause of
extreme pain.

This harness is manufactured using lightweight materials to deliver maximum comfort and safety
performance. The parts of the harness that connect with the body promote airflow and maximize comfort.

                                 Figure 10: Quick Connect buckle system




                       Figure 11: Adjustable straps are used to maximize comfort
                                                  – 19 –                                          8820 – 6201


36.   Which of the following is the most likely driver for invention for the Werner ProForm™ F3
      Construction Harness?

      A.   Desire to make money

      B.   Constructive discontent

      C.   Scientific curiosity

      D.   Technological breakthrough

37.   Which of the following material properties would be most important for the part of this harness that
      connects the worker to the built-in seat?

      A.   Ductility

      B.   Compressive strength

      C.   Stiffness

      D.   Tensile strength

38.   The comfort of the workers using this harness is what type of human factor?

      A.   Psychological

      B.   Physiological

      C.   Anthropometrics

      D.   Adjustability

39.   The buckle closing system of this harness was virtually prototyped to identify areas of high stress
      on the material. What computer aided design (CAD) method would be used for this?

      A.   Instrumented models

      B.   Surface modelling

      C.   Finite element analysis (FEA)

      D.   Virtual reality




                                                                                                  Turn over
                                               – 20 –                                      8820 – 6201


40.   The materials for the harness were only sourced from companies that comply to ISO standard
      9001. Which quality management principle is this an example of?

      A.   Quality control (QC)

      B.   Quality assurance (QA)

      C.   Statistical process control (SPC)

      D.   Workflow analysis




References:

Figure 1      © International Baccalaureate Organization 2020.

Figure 2      [freehand drawing of a chair] © International Baccalaureate Organization 2020.
              [orthographic drawing of a chair] © International Baccalaureate Organization 2020.

Figure 3      Image with permission from Hunan Cothinkrobotics Technology Co. Ltd.

Figure 5      [Lockheed lounge chair] Courtesy of Phillips, photograph by Clint Bowers, and Marc Newson Limited for
              providing the image.
              [OXO Grip vegetable peeler] OXO Y Peeler.
              [exoskeleton] https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Honda_Walking_Assist_Device_with_Bodyweight_
              Support_System_front_2013_Tokyo_Motor_Show.jpg. Image by Morio under copyright CC 3.0 licence
              (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/deed.en).

Figure 7      Crocs, 2014. 2014 Sustainability Report. https://www.crocs.co.uk/pg/sustainability-report.html.
              With permission from Crocs, Inc.

Figure 8      [3 sunscreen products] © International Baccalaureate Organization 2020.

Figure 9      Copyright OPEX Resources Ltd 2020. Reproduced with permission from opexresources.com and the publication
              ‘Lean Six Sigma and Minitab’. ISBN: 978 0995789944.

Figure 10     [Werner ProForm F3 Construction Harness Quick Connect buckle system] Courtesy of Werner.

Figure 11     [Werner ProForm F3 Construction Harness] Courtesy of Werner.
