No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de
tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris,
sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de
tutorat ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement
supérieur, des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes
d’études, des gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des
développeurs d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la
procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse suivante :
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios
de apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores
de aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u
ofrezcan recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este
enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia:
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.
Design technology
Standard level
Paper 1

Thursday 5 November 2020 (afternoon)


45 minutes


Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y Answer all the questions.
y For each question, choose the answer you consider to be the best and indicate your choice on
  the answer sheet provided.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [30 marks].




                                                                                             8820 – 6202
     14 pages                                            © International Baccalaureate Organization 2020
                                                  –2–                                          8820 – 6202


1.   Which part of the human information processing system would most likely be affected by
     mental stress?

     A.   Motor processes

     B.   Output

     C.   Sensory processes

     D.   Central processes

2.   Which of the following usually relies on collecting anthropometric data relevant to the
     5th percentile only?

     A.   Reach

     B.   Clearance

     C.   Adjustability

     D.   Range of sizes

3.   Which of the following is influenced by perception?

     A.   Biomechanics

     B.   Strength

     C.   Thermal comfort

     D.   Reach
                                                –3–                                    8820 – 6202


4.   Figure 1 is an example of a tool used by designers.

            Figure 1: A tool used to demonstrate the stages and impacts of a project




     What is Figure 1 an example of?

     A.   Life cycle analysis (LCA) matrix

     B.   Design for the environment software

     C.   Affinity diagramming

     D.   Environmental impact assessment matrix




                                                                                       Turn over
                                                 –4–                                          8820 – 6202


5.   Which of the following renewable energy resources could be considered as having the least
     environmental and social impact?

     A.   Geothermal energy

     B.   Solar

     C.   Wind

     D.   Hydropower

6.   Which of the following best describes a circular economy?

     A.   Maximizing the amount of material that can be recycled

     B.   Designing products so they produce the minimal amount of pollution

     C.   Designing products so their waste can be used as a resource

     D.   Designing products so they can be disposed of as easily as possible

7.   Which of the following is considered most reliable in terms of constant supply?

          I.      Solar
          II.     Nuclear
          III.    Tidal

     A.   I and II only

     B.   I and III only

     C.   II and III only

     D.   I, II and III

8.   Which of the following waste mitigation strategies involves the use of small amounts of energy?

          I.      Re-use
          II.     Recycle
          III.    Repair

     A.   I and II only

     B.   I and III only

     C.   II and III only

     D.   I, II and III
                                                  –5–                                        8820 – 6202


9.    Which of the following strategies would be the easiest way to ensure energy was being used
      most efficiently?

      A.   Constructing power plants closer to cities

      B.   Combining renewable and non-renewable energy sources

      C.   Implementing combined heat and power (CHP)

      D.   Reducing reliance on international grid systems

10.   Which of the following best describes a system level solution?

      A.   Reducing pollutants and waste at the end of the production processes

      B.   Removing harmful gases from the exhaust stream before they are released into
           the atmosphere

      C.   Using waste as a resource in a closed loop system

      D.   Considers the impact of production at every stage and seeks to minimize the
           negative consequences




                                                                                            Turn over
                                                  –6–                                          8820 – 6202


11.   Figure 2 shows a freehand drawing and an orthographic projection of a chair.

                            Figure 2: Different representations of a chair




      What is an advantage of using a freehand drawing rather than an orthographic drawing?

      A.   More accurate

      B.   Allows quick exploration of ideas

      C.   Can be given to a manufacturer to make it

      D.   All parts drawn in proportion

12.   In computer-aided design (CAD), when a model is created that has no interior material and is just a
      visual representation of the final product, this is considered as a…

      A.   Bottom up model

      B.   Surface model

      C.   Solid model

      D.   Top down model

13.   What best describes a physical model that can be used to test ergonomic features but does not
      function?

      A.   Scale model

      B.   Prototype

      C.   Mock-up

      D.   Instrumented model
                                                  –7–                                           8820 – 6202


14.   Figure 3 shows an industrial robotic arm.

                                   Figure 3: An industrial robotic arm




      The blue shaded area shows how far the robotic arm can reach. What is this area called?

      A.   Task area

      B.   Work envelope

      C.   Load capacity

      D.   Load area

15.   Which of the following would affect the choice of a production system?

           I.     Labour
           II.    Skills and training
           III.   Impact on the environment

      A.   I and II only

      B.   I and III only

      C.   II and III only

      D.   I, II and III




                                                                                            Turn over
                                                  –8–                                         8820 – 6202


16.   Which of the following is a permanent joining method?

      A.   Nuts and bolts

      B.   Screws

      C.   Fusing

      D.   Velcro

17.   Composite fibres can be soaked with a liquid polymer resin and then pulled through a heated die to
      form parts such as tubes. What is this process called?

      A.   Pultrusion

      B.   Laminating

      C.   Moulding

      D.   Extrusion

18.   Which fibre has the following properties?
      • Absorbent
      • Slow to dry
      • Cool to wear on the skin
      • Can be machine washed and ironed
      • Creases easily

      A.   Wool

      B.   Cotton

      C.   Silk

      D.   Polyester

19.   Plastic products often have a symbol moulded onto them. What is the reason for this?

      A.   To make them easier to manufacture

      B.   So consumers can make choices on what to buy

      C.   To show that they are non toxic

      D.   To make them easier to identify, separate and recycle
                                                   –9–                                           8820 – 6202


20.   Coffee tables with glass tops are often made from an impact resistant type of glass that is made by
      cooling the outside of the glass rapidly. What is this type of glass called?

      A.   Soda glass

      B.   Laminated glass

      C.   Toughened glass

      D.   Pyrex

21.   Nike is a global running shoe brand well recognized by the Nike Swoosh (tick) design.




                                 Figure 4 removed for copyright reasons




      Which of the following intellectual property (IP) strategies would be used to prevent any other
      company from copying the Nike Swoosh design?

      A.   Copyright ©

      B.   Patent

      C.   Trademark ®

      D.   Service mark (SM)




                                                                                                Turn over
                                                      – 10 –                                  8820 – 6202


22.   Which of the following are true about a first to market strategy?

            I.     It may involve significant risks
            II.    It guarantees success in new markets
            III.   It can involve costly research & development

      A.    I and II only

      B.    I and III only

      C.    II and III only

      D.    I, II and III

23.   HolidayWithUs enables people to rent out their properties using the company website, see
      Figure 5. Instead of staying in hotels or guesthouses, people can now stay in private homes. This
      has completely changed how people travel.

                              Figure 5: A screenshot of the HolidayWithUs website




      What is this type of innovation known as?

      A.    Sustaining innovation

      B.    Disruptive innovation

      C.    Modular innovation

      D.    Architectural innovation
                                                   – 11 –                                       8820 – 6202


24.   Which of the following statements are true of classic designs?

           I.     The function of the product is better than its competitors
           II.    The form of the product provokes emotional reactions
           III.   Obsolescence does not impact the product’s popularity

      A.   I and II only

      B.   I and III only

      C.   II and III only

      D.   I, II and III

25.   The ballpoint pen, see Figure 6, was invented by László Bíró in 1938. The first ballpoint pen to
      go on sale in the UK in 1946 cost 55 shillings (UK£2.75), which was more than half the average
      weekly wage at the time. In 1953, Marcel Bich developed a process for the manufacture and
      assembly of ballpoint pens that dramatically increased the volume of production and reduced the
      cost of each pen.

                                        Figure 6: The Bic ballpoint pen




      Which of the following principles was most likely the reason for the Bic ballpoint pen becoming a
      classic design?

      A.   Defying obsolescence

      B.   Mass production techniques

      C.   Status and culture

      D.   Transcending its original function




                                                                                               Turn over
                                                  – 12 –                                         8820 – 6202


26.   Figure 7 shows four different products.

                                      Figure 7: Four different products




      Identify the product where the psychological function rather than practical function was the
      determining factor in the design.

      A.   Lockheed lounge chair

      B.   Oxo Grip vegetable peeler

      C.   Sports glasses for children

      D.   Exoskeleton
                                                 – 13 –                                       8820 – 6202


Questions 27 – 30 relate to the following case study. Please read the case study carefully and answer
the questions.

Figure 8 and Figure 9 show the Werner ProForm™ F3 Construction Harness. In the event of a fall, a
construction worker can pull a cord to release a built-in seat to reduce the likelihood of injury.

The product was developed by Priority Designs after workers were careless when putting on traditional
harnesses. After a fall, workers would often be suspended for hours, awaiting rescue in an extremely
uncomfortable and potentially dangerous situation with their harness often being the cause of
extreme pain.

This harness is manufactured using lightweight materials to deliver maximum comfort and safety
performance. The parts of the harness that connect with the body promote airflow and maximize comfort.

                                 Figure 8: Quick Connect buckle system




                        Figure 9: Adjustable straps are used to maximize comfort




                                                                                              Turn over
                                                  – 14 –                                          8820 – 6202


27.   Which of the following is the most likely driver for invention for the Werner ProForm™ F3
      Construction Harness?

      A.   Desire to make money

      B.   Constructive discontent

      C.   Scientific curiosity

      D.   Technological breakthrough

28.   Which of the following material properties would be most important for the part of this harness that
      connects the worker to the built-in seat?

      A.   Ductility

      B.   Compressive strength

      C.   Stiffness

      D.   Tensile strength

29.   The comfort of the workers using this harness is what type of human factor?

      A.   Psychological

      B.   Physiological

      C.   Anthropometrics

      D.   Adjustability

30.   The buckle closing system of this harness was virtually prototyped to identify areas of high stress
      on the material. What computer aided design (CAD) method would be used for this?

      A.   Instrumented models

      B.   Surface modelling

      C.   Finite element analysis (FEA)

      D.   Virtual reality




References:

Figure 1      © International Baccalaureate Organization 2020.

Figure 2      [freehand drawing of a chair] © International Baccalaureate Organization 2020.
              [orthographic drawing of a chair] © International Baccalaureate Organization 2020.

Figure 3      Image with permission from Hunan Cothinkrobotics Technology Co. Ltd.

Figure 5      © International Baccalaureate Organization 2020.

Figure 6      Image of the Cristal® pen was provided with permission from BIC USA INC.

Figure 7      [Lockheed lounge chair] Courtesy of Phillips, photograph by Clint Bowers, and Marc Newson Limited for
              providing the image.
              [OXO Grip vegetable peeler] OXO Y Peeler.
              [exoskeleton] https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Honda_Walking_Assist_Device_with_Bodyweight_
              Support_System_front_2013_Tokyo_Motor_Show.jpg. Image by Morio under copyright CC 3.0 licence
              (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/deed.en).

Figure 8      [Werner ProForm F3 Construction Harness Quick Connect buckle system] Courtesy of Werner.

Figure 9      [Werner ProForm F3 Construction Harness] Courtesy of Werner.
