N18/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                        November 2018


                         Global politics


          Higher level and standard level


                               Paper 1




8 pages
                          –2–             N18/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is the property of the International
Baccalaureate and must not be reproduced or distributed
to any other person without the authorization of the
IB Global Centre, Cardiff.
                                                   –3–                  N18/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Unit 1      Power, sovereignty and international relations

Bulleted lists in this markscheme indicate likely points that candidates may include in their
answer: they are not exhaustive, and examiners should credit other valid points not listed.

          Operation of state power in global politics: legitimacy of state power

1.    Outline what Source A reveals about the trends in democracy and autocracy.                 [3]

      Answers may include the following:
       The graph shows two forms of state power: democracy and autocracy.
       The graph shows a (steady) increase in the amount of democratic states/democracy
        globally over time.
       The graph shows that from the late 1980s (or end of the Cold War) there were
        significantly fewer autocratic states globally compared to democratic states.
       The graph shows that from the 1960s to the late 1980s (or end of the Cold War)
        there were significantly more autocratic states globally compared to democratic
        states.
       The graph shows that autocracy/autocratic states increased or peaked during the
        1970s and/or that democratic states began to increase in the 1990s.
       The gap between the number of autocracies and democracies appears to be
        increasing over time.

      Award [1] for each relevant point up to a maximum of [3].

      Other relevant points not listed can also be rewarded.
                                                  –4–                 N18/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   With explicit reference to Source B and one example you have studied, analyse
     the concept of a flawed democracy.                                                           [4]

     Answers may include, but are not limited to:
      Source B illustrates factors that are measured in order to assess flawed status.
       Factors which undermine democracy include “weak governance, an underdeveloped
       political culture and low levels of political participation”. These may be used to
       determine classification as a flawed democracy.
      Specific reference may be made to all factors listed in the article – weaknesses in a
       country’s electoral process, civil liberties, the functioning of government, political
       participation and political culture.
      Source B emphasizes “the erosion of public trust in political institutions,” as having a
       key impact in America’s altered status from full democracy. Specific reference may
       be made to public institutions – including the legislature, free press and banks – to
       make a general point about flawed democracy.

     Valid examples from own knowledge may include, but are not limited to:
      The point may be made that “flawed” is a subjective term and/or that the concept is
       about values as well as measurement of indicators. The argument may be made
       that all democracies will have flaws to some extent
      Related to this point, the EIU index may be contrasted with other models such The
       Freedom House measure of Political Freedom
      Examples may be given of countries undergoing democratization or a democratic
       transition eg Ecuador, and note that even flawed democratic status can indicate
       significant progress
      Students may use examples of flaws related to electoral processes; civil liberties;
       the functioning of government; political participation; and political culture from a
       variety of states classed as flawed democracies eg Chile, South Korea, Israel.

     Other relevant points not listed can also be rewarded. Candidates are not expected to
     make four separate points in order to achieve full marks. For each valid point a
     maximum of [2] may be awarded, up to a total of [4]. If there is no reference to one
     example studied, award a maximum of [2].
                                                 –5–                 N18/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   Compare and contrast the accounts of democratic decline provided in Source C
     and Source D.                                                                              [8]

     Potential points of comparison:
      Sources C and D both discuss a global or international decline in freedom and
       democracy. Source C highlights the trend of decreasing democracy worldwide and
       specifies that a third of the world’s population now lives in countries ranked as not
       free or the least free. Source D also highlights the global trend in decreasing
       democracy in both non-Western and Western regions.
      Sources C and D suggest that oppressive use of power is increasing overall.
      Source C and Source D both include Russia and Turkey as examples of many
       non-democratic states.
      Sources C and D indicate that terrorism influences democratic decline.

      Potential points of contrast:
       Source C only discusses examples of democratic decline; Source D offers examples
        where improvement has been achieved and/or claims that Western democratic
        institutions are relatively strong.
       Source C links economic downturns to democratic decline throughout the world. In
        contrast Source D focuses on the growth of populism as a key factor in democratic
        decline.
      Source C argues undemocratic leaders claim legitimacy as "the crushing of dissent
        is necessary to keep peace and stability"; whereas Source D states that
        undemocratic leaders claim "legitimate political authority is based on popular
        sovereignty and majority rule".
      Source C focuses mainly on state actors (considering the civil society as a victim of
        laws) while source D also refers to the people, constituents (according to the
        variable age) who support or are against liberal institutions or populism, as part of
        the problem.

     If the view of only one source is discussed, award a maximum of [4]. For a response
     which focuses significantly on one source with only minimal reference to the other
     source, award a maximum of [5]. Award [2] per effective point of comparison or
     contrast up to a maximum of [8]. For responses that discuss the sources separately,
     rather than in a running comparison and contrast, award a maximum [6]. For an [8]
     response expect detailed comparison and contrast but do not expect all of the points
     above, and allow other valid points.
                                                  –6–                 N18/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   “States need to be democracies to be legitimate.” Examine this claim using all the
     sources and your own knowledge.                                                              [10]

     Question 4 is assessed according to the markbands that follow, in conjunction with these
     marking notes.

     Source material may include, but is not limited to:
      Source A shows that many autocratic (non-democratic) states exist alongside many
       more democracies. Answers may discuss democracy as an important concept and
       evidence its spread across the globe. As a counterpoint, answers may focus on the
       continued presence of less democratic states.
      Source B shows that democracies are in decline and that their legitimacy is linked to
       many separate issues including public sentiment. The status of flawed democracy
       shows that states can still exist despite being perceived as less legitimate internally.
      Answers may discuss how states function successfully and if authoritarianism limits
       their power. Source C shows that states can appear to be stable but also be
       repressive and non-democratic in practice.
      Source C shows that non-democratic rulers/states may use excessive force and
       undemocratic measures to effectively control populations and preserve the state.
       This behaviour is also tolerated by democratic states as the testimony to Congress
       suggests/critiques.
      Source C refers to flawed democracies and Source D discusses hybrid regimes.
       This suggests that states adapt democracy to suit their needs and that legitimacy is
       a complex issue.
      Source D shows a link between populism and a risk to democracy (and/or
       legitimacy). A counterpoint may suggest that populism is itself a form of “popular
       sovereignty” or state legitimacy.
      Source D shows that generation and age influence support for democracy or
       populism, meaning that legitimacy is experienced differently within a state.
      Answers may consider legitimacy to be subjective. Source C shows that the idea of
       freedom can be used to determine democratic status. Freedom is also a subjective
       and complex term. The sources suggest that democracy can be measured or
       thought about in different ways and state legitimacy may therefore be subjective or
       contested.

     Own knowledge could include, but is not limited to:
      Discussion of the institution of sovereignty and the importance of external or legal
       recognition of statehood – by states and the United Nations.
      Different understandings of state legitimacy, especially those drawn from outside the
       West where statehood and state survival may be linked more closely to use of force
       or oppression and tolerated to differing degrees by citizens and other states.
      Related to this – types of regime and sources of power ie military dictatorships or
       religious authority (theocracy) may be discussed in relation to legitimacy; for
       example, Iran.
      The rule of law may be cited as part of a claim or counter claim towards states
       functioning legitimately. Examples such as Singapore can be used.
      The theory of Liberalism in terms of Western norms of state behaviour, state
       cooperation and legitimacy may be discussed in order to evaluate the claim.
      As a counterclaim, candidates may refer to the theory of Realism and the absence
       of consistent norms of state behaviour. The idea of state legitimacy can be
       contested using examples of states past and present that have committed acts of
       violence against their own citizens or peoples (Burma and Rohingya Muslims).
      The point can be made that states may increasingly use anti-democratic measures
       to enhance their power or stability in an age of global threat (terrorism).
                                             –7–                 N18/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


 Related to this, the debate over freedom versus national security may be
  referenced, for example the USA and its support (recognition) of non-democratic
  regimes (Saudi Arabia).
 A counterclaim by candidates could discuss regime change and democratization,
  which has not always led to stability or legitimacy especially in the Middle East
  (eg Egypt, Algeria and Kenya).

Do not expect all of the above, and reward other relevant points not listed.

Students should synthesize and evaluate evidence from the sources and from their
study of the prescribed content and key concepts of the course.

If only source material or only own knowledge is used, the response can only be
awarded a maximum of [6].

To achieve the maximum [10], responses must refer to all four sources.
                                           –8–                  N18/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Markbands for question 4

The aim is to find the descriptor that conveys most accurately the level attained by the
student, using the best-fit model. The mark awarded should be one that most fairly reflects
the balance of achievement against the descriptor. It is not necessary for every single
aspect of a level descriptor to be met for that mark to be awarded.


 Marks        Level descriptor
 0              The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors
                 below.
 1–2            There is little relevant knowledge and a very limited awareness of
                 the demands of the question.
                There is little or no attempt to synthesise own knowledge and
                 source material.
                Responses at this level are often largely descriptive and contain
                 unsupported generalizations.
 3–4            There is limited awareness of the demands of the question or the
                 question is only partially addressed.
                There is some knowledge demonstrated, but this is not always
                 relevant or accurate, and may not be used appropriately or
                 effectively.
                Responses at this level are often more descriptive than evaluative.
 5–6            Answers show some awareness of the demands of the question.
                Knowledge is mostly accurate and relevant, and there is some
                 limited synthesis of own knowledge and source material.
                Counterclaims are implicitly identified but are not explored.
 7–8            Answers are focused and show good awareness of the demands of
                 the question.
                Relevant and accurate knowledge is demonstrated, there is some
                 synthesis of own knowledge and source material, and appropriate
                 examples are used.
                The response contains claims and counter claims.
 9–10           Answers are clearly focused and show a high degree of awareness
                 of the demands of the question.
                Relevant and accurate knowledge is demonstrated, there is
                 effective synthesis of own knowledge and source material, and
                 appropriate examples are used.
                The response contains clear evaluation, with well-balanced claims
                 and counter claims.
