N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                         November 2018


                               Philosophy


           Higher level and standard level


                                Paper 2




35 pages
                          –2–             N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is the property of the International
Baccalaureate and must not be reproduced or distributed
to any other person without the authorization of the
IB Global Centre, Cardiff.
                                                    –3–                N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


  I.    QIG availability
The following QIGs are available this coming session for which you can to attempt qualification:


   QIG                       Text/author                     English QIG       Spanish QIG
  number                                                     availability       availability
       01     Simone de Beauvoir The Second Sex,
              Vol. 1 part 1, Vol. 2 part 1 and Vol. 2 part
              4
       02     René Descartes Meditations
       03     David Hume Dialogues Concerning
              Natural Religion
       04     John Stuart Mill On Liberty
       05     Friedrich Nietzsche The Genealogy of
              Morals
       06     Martha Nussbaum Creating Capabilities:
              The Human Development Approach
       07     Ortega y Gasset The Origin of
              Philosophy
       08     Plato The Republic, Books IV–IX
       09     Peter Singer The Life You Can Save
       10     Charles Taylor The Ethics of Authenticity
       11     Lao Tzu Tao Te Ching
       12     Zhuangzi Zhuangzi, Inner Chapters




 II.    Candidates who overlook the new Paper 2 rubric of answering both parts a and b of one
        question
However clearly the IB sets out its expectations on how candidates should answer exam questions there
are occasions when we receive work that does not match what we asked for. There is a specific case in
exams where we ask students to select particular questions to answer and they fail to follow these rules
(rubrics).
This note is intended to clarify how we deal with these situations through a series of scenarios. The
actions have been checked to ensure that they are supported by RM Assessor.

Overarching principles
The following statements underpin our decisions below:
   1. No candidate should be disadvantaged for following the rules.
   2. Whenever possible candidates should receive credit for what they know.
Example
To help understand the different scenarios we will make reference to an example assessment.
                                                     –4–                  N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Instruction: candidates must respond to both parts of one question.
Q7. (a)     Explain Mill’s view of the relationship between liberty and utility.          (10 marks)
      (b)   To what extent are liberty and utility fundamentally conflicting concepts?    (15 marks)


Q9. (a)     Explain the view that morality has a clear and traceable genealogy.           (10 marks)
      (b)   To what extent do you agree with the genealogy Nietzsche proposes?            (15 marks)

Scenario 1. Candidate answers parts from two different questions.
Example: Candidate answers 7(a) and 9(a) or answers 7(b) and 9(a)
Action:
Mark all of the candidate’s answers. The student will receive their best mark from one question.
In the second example this means the best mark for either 7(b) or 9(a).
This requires that examiners assign each mark to the correct question part (i.e. gives the mark for 9(a) to
9(a) and not 7(a) – if question is QIGed this will happen automatically).

Scenario 2. Candidate does not split their answer according to the sub-parts.
Example: Candidate writes one answer which they label as question 7 or they indicate they have only
answered 9(a) but actually answer both 9(a) and 9(b) in that answer.
Action:
Examiners use their best judgement to award marks for all sub-parts as if the candidate has correctly
labelled their answer.
In the example this means the candidate would be able to gain up to 25 marks despite only labelling the
answer as 9(a).
Exception – where the nature of the two parts of the question means it is important to differentiate
between the two answers, for example the first part should be done before the second part (in maths) or
the candidate needs to show they understand the difference between the two parts of the question then
examiners should use their judgement and only award marks if it is clear that the candidate has simply
made a mistake in numbering their answers.

Scenario 3. Candidate duplicates their answer to the first part in the second part.
Example: Candidate answers 7(a) and the repeats the same text as part of 7(b)
Action:
Only give credit for the answer once (in the first part of the question). The assessment criteria should
assess distinct skills when there are parts to a question so this problem should not occur.

Scenario 4. Candidate provides the wrong question number for their answer.
Example: Candidate states they are answering 7(a) and 7(b) but their response clearly talks about
Nietzsche (Q9) rather than Mills (Q7).
Action:
Mark the answer according to the mark scheme for the question that they should have indicated.
Exception – this only applies when there is no ambiguity as to which question the student has
attempted, for example if they have rephrased the question in their opening paragraph. It is not the role
of the examiner to identify which question is the best fit for their answer (i.e. which questions their
answer would get most marks for). If the given question number is a plausible match with their answer
                                                 –5–                N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


then the student should be marked according to that question. Only in exceptional circumstances should
this rule be applied to sub-questions (i.e. assuming the candidate had mistakenly swapped their answers
for Q7(a) and Q7(b)
                                                   –6–                  N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


How to use the Diploma Programme Philosophy markscheme

The assessment markbands constitute the formal tool for marking examination scripts, and in these
assessment markbands examiners can see the skills being assessed in the examinations. The
markschemes are designed to assist examiners in possible routes taken by candidates in terms of the
content of their answers when demonstrating their skills of doing philosophy through their responses.
The points listed are not compulsory points, and not necessarily the best possible points. They are a
framework to help examiners contextualize the requirements of the question, and to facilitate the
application of marks according to the assessment markbands listed on page 9 for part A responses, and
page 10 for part B responses.

It is important that examiners understand that the main idea of the course is to promote doing
philosophy, and this involves activity and engagement throughout a two-year programme, as opposed to
emphasizing the chance to display knowledge in a terminal set of examination papers. Even in the
examinations, responses should not be assessed on how much candidates know as much as how they
are able to use their knowledge in support of an argument, using the skills referred to in the various
assessment markbands published in the subject guide, reflecting an engagement with philosophical
activity throughout the course. As a tool intended to help examiners in assessing responses, the
following points should be kept in mind when using a markscheme:

• The Diploma Programme Philosophy course is designed to encourage the skills of doing philosophy
  in the candidates. These skills can be accessed through reading the assessment markbands in the
  subject guide
• The markscheme does not intend to outline a model/correct answer
• The markscheme has an introductory paragraph which contextualizes the emphasis of the question
  being asked
• The bullet points below the paragraph are suggested possible points of development that should not
  be considered a prescriptive list but rather an indicative list where they might appear in the answer
• If there are names of philosophers and references to their work incorporated into the markscheme,
  this should help to give context for the examiners and does not reflect a requirement that such
  philosophers and references should appear in an answer: They are possible lines of development.
• Candidates can legitimately select from a wide range of ideas, arguments and concepts in service of
  the question they are answering, and it is possible that candidates will use material effectively that is
  not mentioned in the markscheme
• Examiners should be aware of the command terms for Philosophy as published on page 54 of the
  Philosophy subject guide when assessing responses
• In markschemes for Paper 2 there is a greater requirement for specific content as the Paper requires
  the study of a text by the candidates and the questions set will derive from that text. The
  markscheme will show what is relevant for both part A and part B answers. In part B responses,
  candidates may select other material they deem as relevant
• Responses for part A and part B should be assessed using the distinct assessment markbands.


Note to examiners

Candidates at both Higher Level and Standard Level answer one question on the prescribed texts.
Each question consists of two parts, and candidates must answer both parts of the question
(a and b).
                                                –7–                 N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 2 part A markbands

 Marks                                         Level descriptor


   0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

          There is little relevant knowledge of the specified idea/argument/concept from the text.
  1–2     The explanation is minimal.
          Philosophical vocabulary is not used, or is consistently used inappropriately.

          Some knowledge of the specified idea/argument/concept from the text is demonstrated but
           this lacks accuracy, relevance and detail.
  3–4
          The explanation is basic and in need of development.
          Philosophical vocabulary is not used, or is consistently used inappropriately.

          Knowledge of the specified idea/argument/concept from the text is mostly accurate and
           relevant, but lacking in detail.
  5–6
          There is a satisfactory explanation.
          Philosophical vocabulary is used, sometimes appropriately.

          The response contains accurate and relevant knowledge of the specified idea/
           argument/concept from the text.
  7–8
          The explanation is clear, although may be in need of further development.
          Philosophical vocabulary is mostly used appropriately.

          The response contains relevant, accurate and detailed knowledge of the specified
           idea/argument/concept from the text.
 9–10
          The explanation is clear and well developed.
          There is appropriate use of philosophical vocabulary throughout the response.
                                                 –8–                  N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 2 part B markbands

 Marks                                           Level descriptor


   0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

            There is little relevant knowledge of the text.
            Philosophical vocabulary is not used, or is consistently used inappropriately.
  1–3
            The response is mostly descriptive with very little analysis.
            There is no discussion of alternative interpretations or points of view.

            Some knowledge of the text is demonstrated but this lacks accuracy and relevance.
            Philosophical vocabulary is used, sometimes appropriately.
  4–6       There is some limited analysis, but the response is more descriptive than analytical.
            There is little discussion of alternative interpretations or points of view.
            Some of the main points are justified.

            Knowledge of the text is mostly accurate and relevant.
            Philosophical vocabulary is used, sometimes appropriately.
  7–9       The response contains analysis, but this analysis lacks development.
            There is some discussion of alternative interpretations or points of view.
            Many of the main points are justified.

            The response contains accurate and relevant knowledge of the text.
            Philosophical vocabulary is mostly used appropriately.
 10–12      The response contains clear critical analysis.
            There is discussion and some assessment of alternative interpretations or points of view.
            Most of the main points are justified.

            The response contains relevant, accurate and detailed knowledge of the text.
            There is appropriate use of philosophical vocabulary throughout the response.
 13–15      The response contains clear and well developed critical analysis.
            There is discussion and assessment of alternative interpretations or points of view.
            All or nearly all of the main points are justified.
                                                   –9–                   N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Simone de Beauvoir: The Second Sex, Vol. 1 part 1, Vol. 2 part 1 and Vol. 2 part 4

1.   (a)   Explain de Beauvoir’s idea of bad faith.                                                       [10]

           This question invites an explanation of a central idea to de Beauvoir’s argument
           concerning the oppression of woman. It is an idea that is developed through the works
           of other existentialists particularly Sartre. It is linked to her critique of both the biological
           and societal oppression of the woman. Bad faith is the inability to seize freedom for
           yourself and others. To escape bad faith, good faith has to be established and this is
           achieved within her argument toward the end of the work by embracing both freedoms.
           Both the social conditioning and language, which are dominated by man, create bad faith.
           It is seen in the form of portraying woman as an object whereas man appears as a subject.
           In bad faith woman is the other. Woman is a subset of man and not valued in and for
           herself. The escape from bad faith is rooted in the desire by the woman to be liberated
           and for woman to have “being” in herself. The traditional sciences of biology and
           psychoanalysis reinforce bad faith. The whole idea of femininity perpetuates bad faith.

           Candidates might explore:
           • How man has presented femininity as natural
           • The idea of being an object in language and behaviour
           • The existentialist idea of the other and consequent social interactions
           • An analysis of the oppression of women
           • Marxist aspects of simply seeing woman as another class; effectively making and
             continuing the category error
           • The link to consciousness of the self
           • Cross-cultural traditions that perpetuate the subordinate role of woman in society.

     (b)   Evaluate the degree to which a woman can bring about good faith.                               [15]

           Possible discussion points include:
           • The need to free the self as a woman and the other
           • Social conditioning as causes of bad faith
           • The need to move away from definitions and therefore to challenge the materialistic
             and psychoanalytical impositions of the world and how we view sex roles
           • The rejection of Freudian interpretations of consciousness and self
           • The new science insights in to the nature of sexuality; bisexual, transsexual and
             “femininity” within a man
           • The ways in which language can be changed so as to change perceptions
           • The rejection of biological necessities such as reproduction as a defining feature of
             woman
           • The freedom granted in practical terms by more sophisticated birth control methods
             that allow the woman to be in command of her own sexuality
           • Role models in society and choices to be what you want to be contrasted with media
             stereotyping.
                                                 – 10 –               N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   (a)   Explain the idea that “woman can be emancipated only when she can take part in
           creative work (production)”.                                                   [10]

           This question seeks an investigation of how de Beauvoir sees a concrete way out of the
           oppression of woman. A full involvement in economic activity, beyond the activity in the
           domestic world would allow woman not to be an object in a property driven world but an
           independent subject with equal rights and equality of conscience. The economic
           involvement would allow sexual sovereignty of her “self” and stop her resorting to acts of
           infidelity as the only weapon against dominance. The idea of infidelity would become
           redundant in a relationship of economic reciprocity. The removal of oppression and
           becoming free, would move woman to being a subject and not an object. It would allow
           her to be an “I” in her own right. The links to socialism (Engels could be questioned) in
           that the socialistic perspective to a degree sees woman as a proletariat. However, her
           role in the family and motherhood might be seen as the contradiction to this position.

           Candidates might explore:
           • Types of creative work that would free the woman
           • Campaigns to become emancipated
           • Whether work can present risks for emancipation, eg economic slavery, emotional
             dependence
           • Ways to achieve work place reciprocity
           • Ways to achieve sexual sovereignty
           • Socialist views on the role of women and their place in society as a whole and more
             particularly in the work place
           • The balance women might have to achieve between mother/family role and economic
             responsibilities
           • The role of the state in creating opportunities for women to be free; equal pay laws,
             on site crèches (day care for children), maternity rights.

     (b)   Evaluate the degree to which women can enter into the economic system in their
           own right.                                                                                   [15]

           Possible discussion points include:
           • The role of motherhood and family as reinforcing the position of other
           • As technology and the work place change, elements of choice appear, if the woman
             can escape her own consciousness. She would be bound by her body yet must also
             use her mind to be free from oppression
           • Cultural mores that limit woman moving into the economic system, eg the role of Hindu
             women in the rural society
           • Inequalities that the economic system perpetuates: Lack of equal pay and career
             limitation because of maternity in some traditions
           • The need to overcome the societal conditioning about the nature of feminism
           • The critique of both Marxist and Freudian perceptions of woman
           • Equality meaning reciprocity and a new independent consciousness.
                                                 – 11 –               N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


René Descartes: Meditations

3.   (a)   Explain Descartes’s argument for dualism.                                                   [10]

           This question arises from Descartes’s assertion that mind and body (mental/physical)
           are two separate things. This is a result of the arguments Descartes puts forward in the
           Second Meditation and which he brings to a culmination in the Sixth Meditation.
           Descartes held that reality has two kinds of substances in it – “physical substance”
           (regular physical, material, corporeal matter) which has extension, and ‘mental substance’
           (ideas, thoughts and sensations) which do not have extension. Descartes stated in the
           Second Meditation that he “was persuaded that there was nothing in all the world, that
           there was no heaven, no earth, that there were no minds, nor any bodies: Was I not then
           likewise persuaded that I did not exist? Not at all; of a surety I myself did exist since I
           persuaded myself of something [or merely because I thought of something].” The logical
           distinctions between mind and body are scattered throughout the text, but chiefly they
           centre on the exclusive properties we attribute to mind – indivisibility, non-extendedness,
           self-evidence which excludes those of the body. In the Sixth Meditation Descartes
           concludes “that my essence consists solely in the fact that I am a thinking thing [or a
           substance whose whole essence or nature is to think].”

           Candidates might explore:
           • The argument from the self-evidence of consciousness, the cogito. Here,
             consciousness is the necessary medium for the argument, that is to say, the argument
             is thought itself. So, self-evidently, there is something which thought is (and this is
             thought)
           • Descartes’s argument from doubt in which he concludes that although he can
             conceive the possibility that his perception of his own body could in fact be false, he
             cannot conceive the possibility that he is without a mind
           • The argument from clear and distinct perception and the part of the Meditations where
             Descartes attempts to prove that the mind is without doubt distinct from the body
           • Just because one can clearly and distinctly perceive the mind and body as distinct,
             does this mean that they actually are distinct?
           • The wax example and its purpose
           • The argument from simplicity which stems from the idea that everything extended is
             divisible into parts
           • One of the main problems associated with Descartes’s dualism is how exactly the
             mind and the body interact
           • Descartes’s conceivability argument for dualism.
                                           – 12 –               N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   Evaluate Descartes’s argument for dualism.                                               [15]

      Possible discussion points include:
      • Descartes thought it was conceivable (that is, something he could coherently
        imagine) that he could think and have thoughts and yet there is nothing at all material
        or extended
      • For Descartes (and many other thinkers of his time) whatever is conceivable is
        possible
      • Descartes claimed that there was one thing he could be sure of: If he thinks, then he
        exists (the cogito). You do not necessarily exist, since you might not have existed,
        and there will come a day when you will not exist but it is necessarily true that if you
        think, then you exist
      • If something is physical then it must be physical, and if it is not, then it cannot be
      • However, if anything physical must be physical (as Descartes posits) and he is
        physical then he could not possibly be some unextended mental thing. But since he
        could possibly be some unextended mental thing he is not physical at all. Physical
        substances have to be physical
      • Why should we believe that conceivability is a good guide to what is possible? For
        example, can you conceive of time before the Big Bang? That is a physical
        impossibility because according to physics time did not exist before the Big Bang
      • The mind-body problem: Physical-psycho interaction and if substance dualism is true
        then commonplace interactions are impossible
      • Problem of other minds: Dualism apparently has the implication that it is impossible for
        us to know anything about the minds of other people – but we do often know what
        others are thinking, or how they are feeling, or what they intend to do. Therefore,
        dualism must be mistaken.
                                                  – 13 –               N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   (a)   Explain Descartes’s causal argument.                                                         [10]

           This question is prompted from the Third Meditation where Descartes argues that God
           must exist as the cause of his concept of God. Descartes states “[…] I would not have
           the idea of an infinite substance, since I am a finite being, unless the idea had been put
           into me by some substance which was truly infinite.” The Trademark Argument is a type
           of cosmological argument that establishes God as a first cause. Descartes argues from
           the existence of the idea of God (the effect) to God as the ultimate cause of this idea. He
           starts by saying that he has an idea of God as a perfect or infinite being. He then claims
           that ideas need causes, just as much as material things like tables or chairs need causes.
           He then introduces what has been called the Causal Adequacy Principle: That there must
           be at least as much reality in the total cause as in the effect. He argues that God is the
           author of his being. He rejects that he is self-produced as he would have given himself all
           perfections. His lifetime consists of an infinite division of parts which are independent of
           each other; he is thus created afresh by some cause at every moment. If he were self-
           produced, he would be conscious of such a cause, he is not, therefore some other being
           is the cause. He appeals to the Causal Adequacy Principle to show that this being is a
           perfect being as he has the idea of perfection. He rejects the plurality of causes option as
           God’s unity is itself a perfection.

           Candidates might explore:
           • Descartes’s version of the cosmological argument: His Trademark Argument in that the
             idea of God is not derived from the senses nor self-produced; it is like a mark left by a
             tradesman
           • Candidates might unpack what Descartes means when he states that “now it is
             manifest by the natural light that there must be at least as much reality in the efficient
             and total cause as in its effect”
           • Descartes’s understanding of degrees of reality (as being types of existence)
           • The idea of God has two different types of reality: “Formal reality” and “objective reality”
           • Descartes thinks that God is needed to sustain reality
           • Descartes is a thinking thing with the idea of God: The cause must also be a thinking
             thing with the idea of the traditional attributes of God
           • One could argue that the idea of God is not something that needs a divine origin
           • Maybe humans, as Hume has argued, could have formed the idea of God themselves.

     (b)   Evaluate Descartes’s causal argument.                                                        [15]

           Possible discussion points include:
           • Although held in high regard in Descartes time it is now discredited
           • Emergent phenomena: Often properties appear in an effect that do not exist in their
             cause Cottingham points out that a sponge cake has many properties not present in
             the ingredients (eg sponginess)
           • Even if this Causal Adequacy Principle was accepted, it was intended to apply to
             physical objects not ideas
           • The Causal Adequacy Principle suggests that causes have more reality than their
             effects
           • Something that exists can have qualities but existence itself is not a quality that
             something possesses. This being the case neither is existence something that can be
             held in degree
           • Kant’s argument that existence is not a predicate
           • Can something pre-exist before existing? Either something exists or it does not, eg
             issues of quantum physics
           • Descartes gives no grounds for rejecting the concept that there could be an indefinitely
             long chain of ideas
           • The Cartesian circle defeats Descartes's strategy of using God as the ultimate
             guarantee that clear and distinct ideas are indeed true.
                                                  – 14 –                N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


David Hume: Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion

5.   (a)   Explain Philo’s argument of the resemblance of the universe to an animal or
           organic body.                                                                                [10]

           The question refers to an argument that Philo illustrates from Part 6 to Part 8, against
           Cleanthes’s position in favour of the argument from design. Cleanthes’s theism is based
           on the analogy of the machines, which are created by intelligence; Philo’s objections
           insist – among other elements – on the fact that it is possible to find other analogies
           contrary to the idea of an intelligent design. In Part 3, Philo had already affirmed that the
           kind of order we experience in organic bodies, caused by generation and vegetation, is
           not necessarily the product of an intelligence. Candidates might refer to Philo’s arguments
           on the analogy between the universe and the organic bodies, which lead him to state that
           “the world is an animal” (Part 6) and, particularly, that “the world plainly resembles an
           animal or a plant more than it does a watch or a knitting-loom” (Part 7). Candidates might
           also analyse Philo’s argument of the mind and how he explains that we do not have any
           experience of a mind without a body. Candidates might give account of how Philo uses
           inference in illustrating his argument and presenting the relationship between parts –
           namely animals and plants – and the whole system of the universe. As counterarguments,
           candidates might consider Demea’s objections: One is based on “arbitrary suppositions”,
           since it is difficult to take as standards objects that are so different in general; the other
           one is based on the meaning of the processes of generation and vegetation and,
           specifically, on the “vegetative quality” of the world, ie its capacity to sow the seeds of new
           worlds, which would be a further argument for design in Demea’s opinion.

           Candidates might explore:
           • Cleanthes’s theism
           • Argument for design, eg analogy of machines
           • Philo’s criticisms of Cleanthes’s argument
           • Analogy of the universe and organic bodies
           • Relationship between parts and the whole
           • God as the mind of the universe; possibility to know God’s plans
           • Order and chaos
           • Inferential reasoning.

     (b)   To what extent do you agree with Philo’s argument?                                           [15]

           Possible discussion points include:
           • The value of using analogies
           • Demea’s criticisms of Philo’s arguments
           • Organic life and mechanicism, eg Descartes’s view of animals as automata
           • Mind-body issues, eg material versus immaterial substance
           • Dualistic views versus holistic or organicist conceptions, eg Descartes, Dewey
           • Independent and self-balanced functioning of the universe, eg entropy
           • Hume as precursor of contemporary ecologic theories on Earth, eg Lovelock’s
             Gaia, Leopold’s Land Ethic
           • Anthropomorphism, anthropocentrism
           • Pathetic fallacy.
                                                 – 15 –               N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


6.   (a)   Explain Cleanthes’s claim that “religion, however corrupted, is still better than no
           religion at all”.                                                                    [10]

           The question arises from Cleanthes’s own claim presented in Part 12 and invites an
           analysis of the dispute between skepticism and dogmatism and, particularly, of the
           nature of religion. Candidates might analyse Cleanthes’s motivation for his claim, which
           grounds in the opinion that – as he states – “the doctrine of a future state is so strong
           and necessary a security to morals that we never ought to abandon or neglect it”.
           Nonetheless, candidates might pinpoint Cleanthes’s distinction between a social and
           proper function of religion and an improper one, that is a religion as a means for regulation
           of human conduct and obedience versus a religion, which calls attention to itself. As
           counterarguments, candidates might also consider Philo’s distinction between true religion
           and superstition, to which Cleanthes’s claim is actually a response. Particularly, Philo
           states that “no period of time can be happier or more prosperous than those in which the
           religious spirit is never honoured or heard of”. Moreover, candidates might consider Philo’s
           arguments against superstition – as a source of dismal consequences – and those in
           favour of the philosophical and rational religion: Philo states that “the smallest grain of
           natural honesty and benevolence has more effect on men’s conduct than the most grandly
           inflated views suggested by theological theories and systems”, so making the philosophical
           religion the proper route to true Christianity.

           Candidates might explore:
           • Cleanthes’s view on religion
           • Philo’s view on religion
           • Proper and original function of religion
           • Eschatological, teleological roles of religion
           • True religion versus superstition
           • Religion as convention
           • Religion as source of dismal consequences
           • Philosophical and rational religion.

     (b)   To what extent do you agree with Cleanthes’s claim?                                        [15]

           Possible discussion points include:
           • Religion as a means for power and authority
           • Human need for social control, regulation, and obedience
           • Examples of good conduct driven by social control, eg Bentham’s Panopticon
           • Religion as a means for genuine spirituality
           • Religious institutions versus individual religious experiences
           • Theism versus atheism
           • Secularization, civic religion, human rights
           • Christianity versus Christianism, eg Kierkegaard’s view.
                                                  – 16 –                N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


John Stuart Mill: On Liberty

7.   (a)   Explain Mill’s views on individual liberty and social improvement.                             [10]

           In the introductory chapter 1 Mill states: “The object of this essay is to assert one very
           simple principle, as entitled to govern absolutely the dealings of society with the individual
           in the way of compulsion and control, whether the means used be physical force in the
           form of legal penalties or the moral coercion of public opinion. That principle is that the
           sole end for which mankind are warranted, individually or collectively, in interfering with
           the liberty of action of any of their number is self-protection. That the only purpose for
           which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilized community,
           against his will, is to prevent harm to others.” This basic principle safeguards people’s
           freedom to pursue their own goals, so long as they do not infringe on the legitimate
           interests of others: Power should not be exercised over people for their own good. Mill
           defended the principle on two grounds.
           It enables individuals to realize their potential in their own distinctive way, and, by
           liberating talents, creativity, and energy, it institutes the social conditions for the moral
           development of culture and character. Practically all other positions, aspects and issues
           considered by Mill in this text are connected to this fundamental statement, which
           therefore might serve as a basis for the development of answers in different lines.

           Candidates might explore:
           • Mill’s Harm Principle
           • A society which respects Mill’s principle enables individuals to realize their potential
             in their own way
           • It liberates a mature diversity of interest and feeling, and it nurtures the moral freedom
             of reason and will
           • Therefore, throwing open the gates to talent, creativity and dynamism, it produces
             the social conditions of moral and intellectual progress
           • The Romantic-Hellenic ideal of human life inspired Mill’s democratic ideals
           • Mill had a long-term vision in which the emancipation and education of the working
             class could bring free self-culture to all human beings
           • Mill sustained that all human beings have an equal potential to develop their higher
             faculties. This prevents the possibility that utilitarianism might recommend an
             extremely inegalitarian pursuit of higher forms of well-being as the equilibrium state
             of a fully-developed human society
           • Mill seems to posit that freedom is part of utility and therefore they could not conflict.
             However, it is clear that freedom and utility can actually be in conflict at times.
                                             – 17 –               N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   To what extent do you agree with Mill’s views on individual liberty and social
      improvement?                                                                                   [15]

      Possible discussion points include:
      • Millian argument remains the strongest defence of any liberalism founded on
        teleological ethics. It is a resource upon which teleological liberals will always be able
        to draw, whether or not they accept Mill’s hedonistic conception of the human good or
        his aggregative conception of the good of all
      • The one very simple principle of liberty has never gained acceptance
      • Whether Mill’s doctrine of liberty fits together with his account of justice
      • Mill’s position on democracy. Like other nineteenth-century thinkers, liberal as well as
        conservative, Mill felt a strain of anxiety about democratic institutions and the
        democratic spirit; bad forms of democracy could themselves pose a threat to it by
        drifting into collective despotism. His advice for preventing this threat was not less
        democracy but more liberty
      • Criticisms of Mill’s positions coming from conservatism and left-orientated thought
        as well
      • Are there limits to toleration?
      • Mill tries to found rights on utility in a very large sense, related to the permanent
        interests of humans as progressive beings
      • Does the concept of utility really give an adequate account of this permanent
        interest?
                                                  – 18 –               N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


8.   (a)   Explain Mill’s use of specimens to show the application of the two maxims.                     [10]

           Mill initiates in his last chapter the applications of the principles asserted previously.
           According to him these principles asserted should be generally admitted as the basis for
           discussion of details before a consistent application of them to the various areas of
           government and morals. The analyses on questions of detail are designed to illustrate
           the principles rather than to follow them out to their consequences. The maxims are, first,
           “that the individual is not accountable to society for his actions in so far as these concern
           the interests of no person but himself” (Chapter 5). The only measures by which society
           can justifiably express its dislike or disapprobation of the individual’s conduct are advice,
           instruction, persuasion, and avoidance by other people, if thought necessary by them for
           their own good. The second one states that when the individual actions are prejudicial to
           the interests of others, “the individual is accountable and may be subjected either to social
           or to legal punishment if society is of opinion that the one or the other is requisite for its
           protection” (Chapter 5). This discussion is intended to clear up remaining ambiguities
           surrounding his doctrine, and to illustrate how the maxims can be consistently applied.
           Many situations arise in practice, he suggests, where it is not immediately clear which of
           the maxims applies. He offers lines of analysis to help how to go about arriving at
           reasonable practical conclusions in these sorts of situations.

           Candidates might explore:
           • The liberty principle is not intended to determine the convenient scope of individual
             liberty
           • The purely “self-regarding” sphere, to which the maxim applies, is a minimum domain
             of individual liberty, the violation of which ought to be considered an injustice in any
             civil society
           • In general, the adequate field of liberty will include more than that inviolable minimum
           • Absence of harm to others, while sufficient, is not necessary for individual liberty to be
             generally convenient
           • The helpful, convenient scope of liberty may extend beyond the ambit of the liberty
             principle, which tells us where the individual has an inviolable moral right to choose as
             he pleases
           • The realm of private action; if by private action it is meant any action (including
             competitive market behaviour) that individuals are morally at liberty to perform, without
             interference by others (including government officials), then the proper domain of
             private action may extend beyond the purely “self-regarding” sphere.

     (b)   Evaluate Mill’s use of specimens to show the application of the two maxims.                    [15]

           Possible discussion points include:
           • Competitive situations do not justify enforcement of social rules (legal or moral). Are
             the harms suffered by losing competitors of a less weighty kind?
           • Social control of exchange and production is not illegitimate in principle
           • No society which purports to value liberty and individuality can properly enforce
             slavery contracts
           • Legitimate authority to tax sales and limit the number of sellers; criticisms of Mill’s
             views on taxes
           • The proper limits of society’s police authority
           • The laissez-faire doctrine and criticism of its application to social issues, which are
             limit cases, eg gambling
           • Voluntary release and the permission to break contracts
           • Education and birth control
           • Liberty to refuse to co-operate and prevention of totalitarian state.
                                                  – 19 –                N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Friedrich Nietzsche: The Genealogy of Morals

9.   (a)   Explain Nietzsche’s concept of the “master morality” and “slave morality”.                    [10]

           This question invites an explanation of two key concepts of Nietzsche’s work, “master
           morality” and “slave morality”. According to Nietzsche, the two types of morality refer to
           two different kinds of values: the “master morality” involves a reference to the traditional
           set of values appraised by the ancient Greek and Roman cultures, such as strength,
           beauty, power, and nobility, whereas the “slave morality” implies a set of values central to
           Christianity, such as humility, poorness, weakness, and kindness. This would confirm
           Nietzsche’s view that morality is strictly dependent on the specific culture, which it stems
           from, and that a culture is informed by the struggle between those two fundamental moral
           structures. Candidates might explore a further distinction: the “master morality” entails a
           consequentialist ethical approach, which evaluates actions to be good or bad according to
           the good or bad consequences; on the contrary, the “slave morality” entangles a
           deontological ethical approach, which considers the good or evil of actions in themselves,
           independently from their consequences. Slaves morality or herd morality holds to the
           standard of that which is useful or beneficial to the weak or powerless. Slave morality is
           essentially negative and reactive, originating in a denial of everything that is different from
           it. It is inspired by “the most intelligent revenge” of the weak. Master morality, on the other
           hand, concerns itself very little with what is outside of it.

           Candidates might explore:
           • The concept of good and bad in Nietzsche’s view
           • The crucial opposition between master and slave morality
           • The way master morality is weighted towards actions
           • The way slave morality is weighted towards the standard of the powerless
           • The idea of a long historical fight between two different moral structures
           • The idea of connecting a moral structure to the products of a culture, eg the ancient
             Greek and Roman cultures and values
           • The way in which the slave morality has undermined western culture
           • The way Nietzsche values classical virtues.

     (b)   Evaluate Nietzsche’s view that slave morality has triumphed.                                  [15]

           Possible discussion points include:
           • What is the connection between the master morality and classical virtues and vices?
           • In which sense is the slave morality connected to Christianity?
           • Is it only Christianity that is connected to the slave morality?
           • Is this opposition historically supported?
           • How does Nietzsche evaluate this triumph?
           • In what sense is co-existence between these two perceptions of morality impossible?
           • Does modern morality endorse values that are harmful to “the higher man” and benefit
             the “the lower man”?
           • In what sense are different elements of culture informed by these two moral structures?
                                                  – 20 –               N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


10.   (a)   Explain the relationship between the ascetic ideal and ressentiment.                           [10]

            The question invites the exploration of two key concepts of Nietzsche’s work, the ascetic
            ideal and ressentiment, and the relationship between them. Nietzsche presents these
            two concepts in the Third Essay, where he also describes the power of asceticism, which
            can help an individual to achieve control over pain and despair and reach a full mastery
            of him/herself. Candidates might explore the role that pain and despair play in Christianity
            according to Nietzsche and how the ascetic ideal is a way priests take control over them.
            Candidates might also explain the relationship between asceticism and “will to power”,
            which also implies the concept of ressentiment. According to Nietzsche, Christian
            asceticism does not serve the “will to power”, but, on the contrary, results in a sort of
            hibernation and denial of the surrounding world. Slave morality, unlike master morality,
            which is sentiment, is based on ressentiment. This implies a devaluation of that which the
            master values and that the slave does not have. As master morality has its origin in the
            strong, slave morality has its origin in the weak and, as such, slave morality is a reaction
            to oppression. This struggle between master and slave moralities recurs historically.

            Candidates might explore:
            • The concept of ascetic ideal. The different possibilities of analysis that this concept
              might invite
            • A brief development on what is opposed to the ascetic ideal in Nietzsche’s views
            • The concept of ressentiment or hostility and the idea of a historical “decadence”
            • The way in which historical “decadence” can be traced
            • The idea of a strong connection between both concepts and the negative attitude that
              the ascetic ideal gives origin to
            • Nietzsche’s suggestion that the “slave revolt in morality” begins with ressentiment
            • The idea of the historical development of this morality
            • The invitation to think in a new and different way as proposed by Nietzsche and
              reconsider traditional values.


      (b)   To what extent do you agree with the relationship established by Nietzsche?              [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • Is ressentiment a historical experience as Nietzsche maintains?
            • Is slave morality essentially negative and reactive?
            • In which ways does slave morality affect any high culture development?
            • What could be the consequences to society if the master morality prevails?
            • Could master morality go beyond a limited number of human beings?
            • What are the consequences of this relation through time?
            • The idea that social practices and moral concepts have a genealogy: Has the
              author provided a merely historical narrative rather than a philosophical
              explanation?
            • Can master and slave morality involve distortions of the truth?
                                                   – 21 –               N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Martha Nussbaum: Creating Capabilities: The Human Development Approach

11.   (a)   Explain Nussbaum’s claim that “the Capabilities Approach can be provisionally
            defined as an approach to comparative quality-of-life assessment and to
            theorizing about basic social justice.”                                                       [10]

            Nussbaum holds that when comparing societies and assessing them for their basic
            justice the key question to ask is “What is each person able to do and to be?” (Chapter 2).
            In this chapter Nussbaum explains the central capabilities, which are the keystones of the
            capabilities approach. It is grounded on three main principles: It takes each person as an
            end; it focuses on choice and freedom; and it is concerned with fixed social injustice and
            inequality. The approach holds good societies should promote for their people a set of
            opportunities, or substantial freedoms, which people then may or may not exercise in
            action. Being resolutely pluralist about valuing the approach also holds “that the capability
            achievements that are central for people are different in quality, not just in quantity; that
            they cannot without distortion be reduced to a single numerical scale; and that a
            fundamental part of understanding and producing them is understanding the specific
            nature of each” (Chapter 2). The answers might take different paths, eg, they could refer
            to other concepts presented by Nussbaum, such as freedom to choose, welfare, political
            liberalism, pluralism about value and respect, to Amartya Sen’s own theory of
            “functionings” and “capabilities”, and to the different kinds of capabilities.

            Candidates might explore:
            • Human dignity is not conceived merely as a theoretical concept, but rather as a
              criterion to be fulfilled by humans to be able to live a genuine human life; if only
              theorized, dignity, is unable to serve humans
            • Human dignity has to be filled up with a substantial content and translated into the real
              life of concrete human beings
            • The ten central capabilities: Life, bodily health, bodily integrity, senses (imagination
              and thought), emotions, practical reason, affiliation, other species, play, control over
              one’s environment
            • The concern with capability failures is a result of discrimination or marginalization
            • Governments and public policies should improve the quality of life for all people, as
              defined by their capabilities.

      (b)   To what extent do you agree with Nussbaum’s claim?                                            [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • The Capabilities Approach tries to meet the demands of some, if not all of these ten
              central capabilities.
            • Any policy that aims at putting an end to poverty, injustice, and inequalities must fulfil
              the requirements of the ten central capabilities
            • Nussbaum starts from the presupposition that all people are endowed with capabilities,
              the usage of which, can guarantee a dignified life
            • In opposition to theories that objectify or mechanize the human person and reduces
              her to a mere human resource, Nussbaum’s approach proposes to return to the basics
              of human life to explore the ways in which human flourishing might be possible
            • People often do not make the most rational choices
            • Comparisons with other capabilities approaches, eg Amartya Sen
            • The problem of poverty and its implications
            • The extent to which Nussbaum’s approach might represent forms of economic and
              cultural domination.
                                                   – 22 –               N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


12.   (a)   Explain the moral role that nations have in the context of Nussbaum’s account
            of the requirements of global justice.                                                       [10]

            Chapter 6 is focused on the requirements of global justice. Here, Nussbaum analyses
            the moral role of nations. Their moral role is securely “grounded in the Capabilities
            Approach, because the approach gives central importance to people's freedom and
            self-definition” (Chapter 6). Further she points out that “most democratic nations, wisely
            and efficiently administered, can do pretty well at securing for their people the capabilities
            on the list” (Chapter 6). However, today’s world contains inequalities in basic life
            opportunities that are not reasonable from the standpoint of justice. Just as it is not
            admissible that a person’s basic opportunities in life are limited by that person’s race or
            gender or class, so too it is not acceptable that basic opportunities are significantly
            affected by the luck of being born in one nation rather than another. All the items on the
            list of capabilities vary to a great extent across national boundaries, and these inequalities
            are rapidly increasing. The influences that generate them are present from the very start
            of every human life – and even earlier, since maternal nutrition and health care are a major
            source of unequal life opportunities. Basic justice requires that a person’s entitlements are
            not reduced by arbitrary features. There is clear evidence of inequality, pushing many
            people beneath the capability limit.

            Candidates might explore:
            • Many of the problems of poorer nations were caused by colonial exploitation,
              eg of natural resources which prevented them from industrializing
            • Does the current world order make redistribution of resources mandatory?
            • The world economy is to a large degree controlled by the richer nations and by the
              corporations that influence their choices
            • Individuals in countless everyday actions and choices form part of that same,
              allegedly unfair, global economy, affecting lives at a distance
            • Do individual nations have a duty to entitle their citizens to a decent living standard?
            • Do multi-national corporations, international agencies and agreements,
              non-governmental organizations play a part in securing the capabilities of all world
              citizens?
            • The need for an institutional solution to global problems; key duties must be
              assigned to institutions.

      (b)   Evaluate Nussbaum’s account of the requirements of global justice.                           [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • Does the Capabilities Approach to global justice reject some consequentialist
              thinkers, (Peter Singer’s and Peter Unger’s), who see the solution as personal
              philanthropy?
            • The extent to which richer nations bear responsibility for assisting the efforts of
              poorer nations in entitling their citizens to flourish
            • Should the governments of richer nations be prescribed to give a fixed amount to
              poorer nations?
            • Is Nussbaum’s view too simplistic in trying to remediate the past by redistributing
              current wealth?
            • Other theories of social justice, eg Rawls’s principle of difference
            • Would a one-world government better enact a Capabilities Approach?
                                                  – 23 –               N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Ortega y Gasset: The Origins of Philosophy

13.   (a)   Explain the nature and development of the “thinker”.                                        [10]

            This question asks for an explanation as to how the “thinker” arises and develops within
            society. The discussion of the rise of the “thinker” is largely centred on the 10th Chapter,
            and Ortega is trying to explain how some people would eventually become a philosopher
            because they philosophized. He sees them initially as something of strangers within
            society, as they question everything and move from the “outside” to the “inside”. They
            are often seen by others as too clever because they question too much. Once ‘socialized’
            although they might be seen as questioning religious practice they also are seen as
            perhaps providers of secrets of the world.

            Candidates might explore:
            • The relationship of the thinker to tradition and religious belief
            • The “thinker” as a step removed from prior Ionian scientists as they did not merely
              express opinions but they challenged every assertion
            • The difficulty of being socially acceptable
            • The illustration of the “thinker” in Aristophanes’s Clouds where they were exaggerated
              and ridiculed
            • How the thinker could detect and explain the “savour” of things. This can be seen as
              having a sense of the essence of things
            • A comparison between the sophist and the thinker in their attitude towards knowledge.


      (b)   Evaluate Ortega’s view of the nature and development of the “thinker”.                      [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • The atheistic nature of the “thinker” relative to the religious stance of the populous
            • The idea that new truths revealed errors in the old established truths
            • The threatening nature of digging too deeply into the nature of knowledge
            • The move from many gods, to gods in things, to one God
            • The relationship of the new “thinker” to established scientists and scientific thinking
            • The fate of Socrates as he is attributed by Ortega to be the first Athenian to publicly
              pronounce new ideas
            • The Socratic stance of having “knowledge that does not know” and the worry/fear the
              populous might have of this
            • The relationship between the “thinker” and authorities, eg Croce and fascism
            • Contrasts might be made with other philosophers, eg Nietzsche’s critique of
              Socrates’s shaping of the idea of philosophy.
                                                 – 24 –               N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


14.   (a)   Explain Ortega’s views of skepticism.                                                        [10]

            This question seeks an explanation of the nature of skepticism as defined in the 3rd
            thought of the First Chapter. It recognizes what has been described in the preceding
            thoughts in terms of describing how past truths are full of errors. The historical and
            linguistic development of the word could be explored and how it has lost its true meaning.
            The conclusion is that because it has lost its original meaning a new descriptor of
            “investigator” has to be coined, as a person who seeks truth and consequently questions
            things.

            Candidates might explore:
            • Skepticism is something that is acquired and not innate. It is not something
              spontaneous and natural
            • How the seeking for “being” or truth might have declined?
            • The role of the skeptic to reveal errors in past truths
            • “The broken plate society” analogy
            • The reconstruction of dissected parts of truth and reality can create a deeper
              understanding
            • The degree to which the skeptic was/is obsessive, whose hope was to prove all
              things invalid.


      (b)   Evaluate Ortega’s claim that the skeptic is “the seeker and scrutinizer of truths”.      [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • In seeking truths the “arsenal and treasury of errors” is revealed
            • The transformation of errors into incomplete truths
            • The skeptic believes something, that is all things can be questioned
            • The transformation of the word skeptic from the original Greek derivation
            • The value of being the seeker and the move to the seeking of “being”
            • By dissecting truth new truths are revealed
            • Ortega’s notion that the skeptic is a “human drill”
            • Comparisons to Cartesian hyperbolic doubt and Pyrrhonian skepticism
            • Contrast between skepticism and cynicism
            • Nietzsche questioning the western tradition of accepting values and perceptions of
              reality as valid.
                                                  – 25 –               N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Plato: The Republic, Books IV–IX

15.   (a)   Explain Plato’s claim that “in all of us, even in good men, there is a lawless
            wild-beast nature”.                                                                           [10]

            The claim is expressed by Socrates in the first part of Book IX and invites an analysis of
            one of the central topics of Plato’s philosophy: Balance and harmony. Particularly, the
            claim refers to a specific kind of man who is slave to his own desires and appetites –
            mainly the erotic love: The tyrannical man. Candidates might explain how Socrates
            describes the tyrannical man and his nature and consider the difference between
            appetites and reason, sleepy and awakened rational powers, strong and weak persons.
            Candidates might also refer to Socrates’s genealogy of the tyrannical man in relation with
            the democratic man, who, moderately indulging in various pleasures, could prepare the
            ground for his son and his degeneration into a tyrannical profile. In fact, as Socrates
            wonders, “a man who is deranged and not right in his mind, will fancy that he is able to
            rule, not only over men, but also over the gods?” Candidates might mention the
            relationship between the son-tyrant and his parents and friends, since Socrates states
            that “the tyrant never tastes of true freedom or friendship”. Another element worthy of
            analysis might be the relationship between the tyrant and justice, for a city under a king
            and a city under a tyrant are the opposite extremes with respect to justice and to
            happiness. Finally, candidates might follow Socrates’s parallel between the enslaved city
            under a tyrant and his soul, which is also the soul of a slave. As counterarguments,
            candidates might want to consider other views on tyrants, such as Machiavelli’s prince,
            mention Plato’s meeting with the tyrants of Syracuse, Dionysius I and II, and his attempt
            to establish a moderate government under them, or refer to the fact that Plato links tyranny
            to a slavery of emotions, desires, and pleasures, while tyranny could be fostered and
            supported by rational plans or ideologies.

            Candidates might explore:
            • Definition of the tyrannical man
            • Role played by desires and appetites
            • Strong versus weak persons
            • Progress of degeneration of the democratic man into the tyrannical man
            • Loneliness of the tyrannical man; relationship with his parents and friends
            • Parallel between the city under a tyrant and the tyrant’s soul
            • Tyranny and justice
            • Justice and happiness.

      (b)   Evaluate the role played by desires and appetites in the emerging of the
            tyrannical man.                                                                               [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • Appetites and desires; erotic love
            • Appetites and desires as a means for injustice and unhappiness
            • Reason versus appetite
            • The allegory of the Chariot
            • Slavery of the city and of the soul
            • Positive effects, if any, of tyranny on the development of the city/state, eg Dionysius I
              and II, Enlightened absolutists (eg Napoleon, William the Great, Peter the Great)
            • Alternative views, ie tyranny as a product of rational conduct, eg Machiavelli’s prince
            • Historical examples of tyrants who were dominated by desires or otherwise controlled,
            • eg Hitler, Stalin, Mussolini, Pol Pot.
                                                  – 26 –               N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


16.   (a)   Explain Plato’s claim that those “who see the many just, and not absolute justice,
            and the like, – such persons may be said to have opinion but not knowledge”.       [10]

            The claim is from the second part of Book V, where Plato introduces his theory of Forms.
            Candidates might explain the theory of Forms that Socrates presents through the
            examples of beauty and justice. Plato also uses the metaphor of the dreamer, which is
            counterbalanced by the figure of the awake, who is the person that “is able to distinguish
            the idea from the objects which participate in the idea”. Candidates might refer to Plato’s
            aim in illustrating the theory of Forms: To describe the true knowledge as a necessary
            step towards the definition of the philosopher king. In explaining the theory of Forms,
            candidates might also refer to the distinction between knowledge and opinion (doxa),
            which are intended as different faculties, since opinion is a sort of intermediate element
            between knowledge and ignorance; so, “opinion and knowledge have to do with different
            kinds of matter corresponding to this difference of faculties”. In other terms, Socrates
            defines opinion “to be darker than knowledge, but lighter than ignorance”. Therefore,
            candidates might mention the theory of the Divided Line and describe the allegory of the
            Cave. As counterarguments, candidates might refer to Aristotle’s criticism of the theory
            of Forms, particularly against the idea that knowledge is innate and not coming from
            experience and against the notion of participation in the idea; candidates might also refer
            to the dispute between nominalism and realism, consider empiricism, or mention the most
            recent positions against innatism, such as non-cognitivism and conventionalism.

            Candidates might explore:
            • Theory of Forms
            • Ideas of beauty and justice
            • Dreamer versus the awake
            • Opinion versus knowledge; ignorance
            • Is justice a pre-requisite for knowledge?
            • Being and not-being
            • Theory of the Divided Line
            • Allegory of the Cave
            • The philosopher king and knowledge.

      (b)   To what extent do you agree that opinion is not knowledge?                                [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • Opinion as an intermediate element between knowledge and ignorance
            • Opinion as a possibility of knowledge, eg Aristotle’s endoxa
            • Opinion versus truth; subjectivity versus objectivity
            • Knowledge from sense perception versus innate ideas, eg empiricism versus
              idealism, non-cognitivism versus innatism
            • Opinion in relation to belief and knowledge, eg Kant’s view
            • Opinion as linked to hypotheses in science; theory-ladenness
            • Verificationism and falsificationism
            • Knowledge as agreement, eg conventionalism.
                                                  – 27 –               N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Peter Singer: The Life You Can Save

17.   (a)   Explain Singer’s view that we should give more of our income to help the poor.             [10]

            Singer considers that it is possible to do our part in what he metaphorically calls the
            epoch-making of climbing an immense mountain. He mentions important contributions
            made by famous and rich people around the world. These contributions in a way have
            been important but of course not enough facing the importance of the challenge that is
            raised by the problem. But immense as they are, they are only a small fraction of what
            people in rich countries could easily give without a significant reduction in their standard
            of living. As much more could be done following Singer’s ideas, everybody should ask
            themselves what ought to be done to help and Singer wants to convince us about doing
            our personal contribution. He says he does not want to make us feel guilty. First of all,
            Singer wants us to raise our standards of ethical behaviour to reconsider if we are really
            living a morally good life and so to persuade us to change some of our ideas and attitudes
            by challenging our obligation to those in extreme need. But another goal of Singer’s book
            is to specifically reduce extreme poverty by each of us giving a small part of our income.

            Candidates might explore:
            • The ethical impact of Singer’s ideas
            • The dramatic cost of ignoring what is happening around us
            • The moral implication of ignoring what is happening
            • The comparison Singer makes between death by extreme poverty each year and the
              millions caused by dictators and the horrors of twentieth century wars
            • The ethical attitude of Singer, challenging our moral standards and questioning our
              “good lives”
            • Singer’s comment on the money we spend on things that are not really necessary but
              that could easily save so many lives
            • The way in which societies distract themselves with unimportant things while such a
              major issue as poverty is clearly evident
            • The impact of poverty on those that are not necessarily poor but live in a world where
              poverty grows.

      (b)   Evaluate Singer’s ideas on donating more of our income to help others.                     [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • The importance of giving as a moral attitude
            • The change of attitude that a new moral perspective would raise
            • The idea of raising our moral standards by accepting this challenge
            • Other approaches to social contribution, eg Rawls’s principle of difference
            • Singer’s personal philanthropy contrasted to Nussbaum’s nation-driven philanthropy
            • Would we feel we are living a morally good life ignoring Singer’s proposal?
            • The difficulty of giving to unknown and distant people
            • The difficulty to convince people to give in periods of economic uncertainty
            • The process of moving from an egocentric world view to a more altruistic world view
            • Social utility of altruism
            • A connection between Singer’s ideas and preference utilitarianism.
                                                    – 28 –                 N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


18.   (a)   Explain the psychological reasons that prevent us donating even though the cost
            is minimal.                                                                     [10]

            The question focuses on the psychological reasons why we humans, under certain
            conditions, do not have a spontaneous attitude to donating. Singer offers some evidence
            that people can be rationally persuaded to give and he will rebut those who would argue
            that “it’s not in our nature” to give (evolution might explain why we have this natural
            intuition, but it does not justify us in relying on it or those of our feelings that are based on
            it). He previously mentions some psychological reasons why we do not donate. One is
            “the identifiable victim”: People will do more to save a single, identifiable individual than
            they will do to save a group. Singer appeals to Slovic’s research that highlights our
            affective system that is more likely to motivate us to act rather than cold deliberation
            (deliberative system). Another reason is “parochialism” (people are more likely to help
            their family, friends, and countrymen than they are to help those living far away from
            them). A further reason is “futility” (ie the smaller the proportion of people at risk who can
            be saved the less willing people are to send aid). The following reason mentioned by
            Singer would be “the diffusion of responsibility”: We are less likely to help if others who
            are not in a position to help are not doing anything. Another reason would be “the sense
            of fairness” (people are less likely to help if they think that that would be doing more than
            their fair share). A final reason would be “money”: As societies began to use money, the
            need to rely on family and friends is diminished, and people are able to become more
            self-sufficient.

            Candidates might explore:
            • The concepts of donation and the cost of donating
            • An analysis of the importance of this moral attitude
            • The opposition between nature, evolution and conscious human thinking
            • The opposition between “affective and deliberative systems”, as mentioned by
              Slovic
            • The possibility of defeating or going beyond what Singer calls “our natural intuitions”
            • The impact of a new conception that may change what we consider to be human
              nature
            • Might our affective domain encourage the possibility of us donating?
            • An empathetic response to those in need might change our way of thinking.

      (b)   Evaluate the difficulty in developing a spontaneous attitude towards giving.                        [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • Is it possible to talk about a “cost” when a life is in danger?
            • Has society reached a point where everything is measured only in economic terms?
            • Why a culture of giving is not easy to be found?
            • Why this culture of giving is urgently needed?
            • Can we fully trust that our donations are going to the intended cause?
            • The efficacy of personal charity versus organized/institutionalized charity
            • Would our moral attitude be against our natural intuitions?
            • Is it possible to educate human beings to develop their “affective system”?
            • Is it not possible to use our “deliberative system” to be persuaded of donating?
            • Is Singer not making use of reasoning and arguments to make us to be more
              conscious about the value of donating to save lives?
                                                    – 29 –                N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Charles Taylor: The Ethics of Authenticity

19.   (a)   Explain Taylor’s view that we should support a “culture of authenticity”.                         [10]

            The question is drawn from Chapter 7 of Taylor’s book, La Lotta Continua. The chapter
            begins by restating the idea that the ideal of authenticity “suffers from a constitutive
            tension”. There is the sense that the creation of an authentic self demands creativity,
            originality and, to some extent, opposition to social rules and norms, while at the same
            time it demands openness to horizons of significance and dialogue. This constitutive
            tension advocates that the metaphor for the modern condition is one of perpetual struggle
            (la lotta continua) wherein we must constantly fight to retrieve the ideal of authenticity from
            its inherent tendency towards degeneracy caused by the more debased individualistic
            forms of authenticity that lead to narcissism, subjectivism and atomism. Taylor contrasts
            the idea of struggle with the trend line thinking of the “boosters” and “knockers”. This
            thinking sees the culture of authenticity as either good or bad - leading inevitably to
            improvement or debasement. Trend line thinking ignores the nature of life in a free
            society – it presumes an end when freedom implies constant struggle. Taylor contends
            that “The nature of a free society is that it will always be the locus of a struggle between
            higher and lower forms of freedom […] I suggest that in this matter we look not for the
            Trend, whatever it is, up or down, but that we break with our temptation to see
            irreversible trends, and see that there is a struggle here, whose outcome is continually up
            for grabs”.

            Candidates might explore:
            • Why Taylor thinks the struggle between the “boosters” and “knockers” is a mistake
            • Taylor’s belief that people need to be persuaded that self-fulfilment needs
              unconditional relationships and moral demands that go beyond the self
            • Taylor’s view that there should be an attempt to raise the culture’s practice by making
              it more substantial to the participants than what they already have ethically
            • Taylor argues the struggle ought not to be over authenticity, for or against it, but about
              it, defining its proper meaning
            • Does authenticity open up an age of responsibility?
            • The culture of narcissism
            • Is it appropriate for a “genuinely free society” to embrace the slogan “la lotta
              continua”?
            • Taylor’s view on authenticity relies on certain assumptions such as: Authenticity is
              an ideal worth embracing and you can establish in reason what it involves.

      (b)   Evaluate the “culture of authenticity” as a worthy ideal.                                         [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • One can reason about what the ideal of authenticity requires
            • The worthiness of authenticity as an ideal needs to be placed in context
            • If it is developed in an appropriate framework of values
            • Taylor never makes it quite clear where his ultimate values originate – is it religion,
              reason, intuition, or something else?
            • Taylor also appeals to the fact that “everybody in our culture feels the force of this
              ideal” not in its intrinsic worth but in its widespread influence
            • How feasible is it that the culture of authenticity can be displaced by a return to
              religion
              or by the rise of some other set of moral ideals as Taylor seems to suggest?
            • Is it not foolish to think that the tide can be turned against the deterioration of the ideal
              of authenticity that Taylor champions?
                                                   – 30 –                N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


20.   (a)   Explain Taylor’s concept of instrumental reason.                                              [10]

            The question refers to Chapter 9, An Iron Cage? and is the second of what Taylor calls
            the three malaises. He identified the rise of the idea of authenticity as a function of the
            first major malaise – individualism; he sees modern technological civilization as a function
            of the second major malaise - instrumental reason. What Taylor strives for here, as with
            the previous eight chapters on individualism, is a “stance towards modernity”, a way
            malaise can be converted into something honourable. Just as he rejects the terms of the
            debate between the “boosters” and “knockers” of authenticity, equally he refuses to take
            a side on the debate of whether instrumental reason is a good thing or a bad thing:
            Taylor’s interested neither in singing the praises of technology nor in railing against it as
            inherently bad. In this chapter he again calls for an act of “retrieval” to find the moral
            sources that fuel the dominance of instrumental reason. “Retrieving them might allow us
            to recover some balance, one in which technology would occupy another place in our
            lives than as an insistent, unreflected imperative” Taylor admits that his position is
            untenable if we are not really free to change or limit the effects of instrumental rationality.

            Candidates might explore:
            • Taylor’s rejection of all “boosters” and “knockers”
            • The validity of the Iron Cage metaphor
            • What Taylor means by instrumental reason
            • How the debate over instrumental reason parallels the debate over authenticity
            • Does this debate lead to contradictions within the positions of each side?
            • What Taylor means when he writes of the “domination” model of viewing
              instrumental reasons; why Taylor objects to this model?
            • If there is no way to simply turn the clock back, and there is no way to return to
              traditional worldviews as if modernity never happened then is Taylor a victim of
              nostalgic fantasy?
            • Instrumental reason is connected to the “affirmation of ordinary life” - reason should
              be put to the service of perpetuating life and family (rather than being purely
              unengaged thought for the sake of thought).

      (b)   Evaluate Taylor’s concept of instrumental reason.                                             [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • The moral ideals that gave rise to instrumental reason
            • The ethical roots of instrumentalism (just as in the previous six chapters Taylor
              sought the roots of individualism)
            • By understanding these roots we will be able to argue in reason about what is good
              and problematic about technology and instrumental reason
            • Taylor posits that it is only when we lose sight of these roots that we begin to see
              technology as a means of domination and not as a means to improve the human
              condition. Taylor provides a good example of this misconception when he writes of
              instances where modern medicine has lost touch with its essentially humanistic goals
            • Taylor does not see the inevitability of the Iron Cage: Taylor argues that to escape
              the Iron Cage, we must understand the moral ideals that underlie instrumental
              reason – Freedom and the desire to “relieve the condition of mankind”
            • Instrumental reason springs both from a desire for greater responsibility and from a
              “practical and universal benevolence”
            • Some of these good ideals identified by Taylor have been perverted, it might be
              argued, into the extreme individualism called “atomism” demanding freedoms to
              hammer upon traditional social ties; and worldliness, materialism and consumerism
            • So is instrumental reason animated by moral ideals or by a blind self-propagating
              force?
                                                  – 31 –                N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Lao Tzu: Tao Te Ching

21.   (a)   Explain the role that the opposites play in the process towards knowledge and
            wisdom.                                                                                     [10]

            The question arises from the content of Chapter 2 and invites an analysis of the process
            that drives a person to know, make judgments, and gain wisdom. Candidates might refer
            to the view that “when all the world recognizes good as good, this in itself is evil”, because
            things can be known by comparison of the opposites. In fact, “the hidden and the manifest
            give birth to each other”. Candidates might take into account the notion of the opposites
            and explain how knowledge proceeds – eg by comparing a beautiful thing to another one
            which is considered to be ugly, and so on. Candidates might also analyse the difference
            between the knowledge acquired by an ordinary human being and the one gained by a
            sage: A sage, differently from an ordinary human being, is in harmony with the Tao and,
            as such, is aware that knowledge is made of judgments, which are relative to the human
            being who makes them, and to the situation in which they are made, as much as they are
            relative to that which is judged. Candidates might also consider the profile of the sage,
            who acts and teaches with no efforts, spontaneously, thanks to his awareness and being in
            harmony with the Tao.

            Candidates might explore:
            • Ordinary human beings versus sage
            • Knowledge through comparison of the manifestations of the natural qualities
              possessed by things
            • Comparison of the opposites
            • Sage as the human being who is in harmony with the Tao
            • Knowledge as awareness of the judgments
            • Relativity of judgments, human beings, situations, and things
            • Spontaneity of sage’s action and teaching
            • Sage’s teaching considered as everlasting.

      (b)   Evaluate the process towards knowledge and wisdom.                                          [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • Possibility to know the natural qualities of things, through moving towards the Tao
            • The existence and relation between the opposites, yin-yang
            • Knowledge as a progressive path towards pure ideas, eg the Way
            • Knowledge as experience, eg Aristotle’s view or as in scientific methodology
            • Different levels of knowledge, the ordinary human being encountering everyday things
              and the sage encountering the Tao
            • Relativity of knowledge and judgments; relativism, situationism
            • Distinction between knowledge and wisdom
            • Contrasts can be made with Locke and Hume, platonic forms or Aristotle’s scientific
              method
            • Counterarguments considering knowledge as a progressive path towards pure ideas
              (Plato), or refer to specific theories, which deny the possibility to know the natural
              qualities of things (Locke, Hume).
                                                  – 32 –               N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


22.   (a)   Explain the claim that “he who holds onto the Way seeks no excess and can
            grow old”.                                                                                  [10]

            The question arises from Chapter 15 and invites an analysis of the “ancient excellence”.
            He who seeks the Tao, the Way, becomes more harmonious and grows old. Candidates
            might describe the qualities that the “ancient masters” possess by mentioning the
            metaphors that Lao Tzu uses, eg “cautious, like crossing a frozen stream in the winter”,
            or “supple and pliant, like ice about to melt”. Candidates might also refer to the view that
            the past epochs of human history are regarded as superior to the present times, not only
            in Lao Tzu’s philosophy. In fact, many cultures share the idea that the ancestors were
            wiser: Ortega y Gasset’s notions of “height of the times” and “fullness of the times” and,
            particularly, his idea of “rebellion of the masses”. As counterarguments, candidates might
            counterbalance these ideas with the common sense of progress and innovation that have
            chronologically marked the whole of human civilization, producing significant
            enhancements and advancements in humans’ living conditions: From medical and health
            improvements to socio-economic and political betterments, which made nowadays life
            longer and safer than in the past; or refer to the wider space of liberty that the individual
            can enjoy today for the achievement of his own life projects. On the contrary, in supporting
            Lao Tzu’s view, candidates might also consider the role played by the new media and
            devices, which nowadays tend to produce an overwhelming milieu of news, sounds, and
            images, whose main effect is a sensorial and emotional dizziness; the consequence is that
            people progressively deviate from the Tao and get lost in chaotic and disordered lives.
            Lao Tzu’s invitation is everlasting, for it is an invitation to sobriety.

            Candidates might explore:
            • Metaphors used by Lao Tzu, eg stream, ice, valley, mud
            • Qualities possessed by the ancient masters, such as harmony, wu wei, practising of
              ren
            • Comparison between past and present times; the past might offer better conditions
              for self-reflection, contemplation of nature, spontaneity and non-action, whilst
              present times seem chaotic, disordered and driven by market forces
            • Notion of “Golden Age”
            • Tao as harmony in making decisions and judgments
            • Lack of excess in the ancient masters.

      (b)   Evaluate whether the Way is feasible in modern times.                                       [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • The status of the elderly
            • Wisdom linked to mature ages, experience; wisdom calls for tranquillity, contrary to
              undifferentiated and overflowing conditions
            • Overwhelming conditions of the present times, eg speed, dizziness, chaos
            • Present times shroud the Tao
            • Progress as depriving humans’ natural goodness or as a source of spiritual corruption
            • The changing role of progress in past and present times
            • Lao Tzu’s understanding of the status quo contrasted with modern concepts of
              progress
            • Candidates might also refer to critical views of progress, eg Rousseau’s conception
              of it as depriving humans’ natural goodness, Jonas’s criticism of technology, or
              criticisms of modern work and cultural conditions, leading to alienation, homologation,
              and conformity, as in the Frankfurt School’s theorists
            • Condition of minority or debt of present times, eg Bertrand of Chartres’s view that
              “we stand on the shoulders of giants”.
                                                   – 33 –                N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Zhuangzi: Zhuangzi

23.   (a)   Explain Zhuangzi’s metaphorical story of the ox.                                                [10]

            The question arises from Chapter 3 of the Inner Chapters. This story describes a
            complete process, consisting of three steps (and these reflect his epistemology and
            specifically what can be known about the world). First, the cook (butcher) recognizes
            the singularity of the ox; at this stage the ox was the ox as a whole in his eyes. He did
            not know much about the biological structure of the ox, which means that his knowledge
            about the ox was just at the perception stage of knowledge of the object. Second, after
            three years, the cook went beyond the phenomenon of the ox and attained insight into
            the inner structure of the ox by practicing slaughtering it over and over again. This
            indicates that the cook’s knowledge was approaching an understanding of the object
            through empirical knowledge. Third, the cook acquired Tao of butchering the ox “by
            spirit.” He states “Perception and understanding have come to a stop and spirit moves
            where it wants”. When he acquired Tao, it became the guidance of his action. In this
            story, Zhuangzi not only hints that all things in the world, including Tao, are recognizable,
            but also describes the process of the knowing of all things and Tao. The knowledge of
            Tao is the highest form of knowledge, and Tao exists in all things. So with this story
            Zhuangzi identifies the interaction of the mind with the senses and the spirit, and so
            outlines three steps in his epistemic method: Senses, mind and spirit.

            Candidates might explore:
            • The intended meaning of the story
            • The three stages within the story as being indicative of gaining knowledge
            • Identify the mind as a link between the senses and the spirit
            • What Zhuangzi’s understanding of the mind might be
            • The function of the mind as possibly signposted in the story
            • The centrality of the story in Zhuangzi
            • Whether the story embraces a particular way of doing one thing and so is absolute
              in doing so
            • In fostering wu wei (the attitude one must have to get along in life) Zhuangzi is
              advocating a skeptical outlook on life.

      (b)   Evaluate how the story of the ox reflects Zhuangzi’s epistemology.                              [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • Human beings cannot reach a complete and thorough knowledge of the world
            • Zhuangzi emphasizes the question: “What can I really know about the world?”
            • Zhuangzi suspects, but does not deny the possibility of acquiring knowledge about
              things in the world. This includes acquiring the highest knowledge – Tao
            • The three steps of his epistemic method as identified in the story of the ox – senses,
              mind and spirit
            • Zhuangzi’s understanding of the relationship between the dividedness and the Tao
            • Is Zhuangzi’s perspective flexibility hard to follow if we also accept convention and
              work for single-minded mastery
            • Is the relativism of Zhuangzi informing a skeptical approach to conceptual
              knowledge?
            • Is Zhuangzi’s epistemology a reductionist approach that overlooks the multi-faceted
              nature of the cultivation of skills in the story of the ox and in the text as a whole?
                                                  – 34 –               N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


24.   (a)   Explain the fish-bird story.                                                               [10]

            The concept of “free and easy wandering” is the title of first chapter of the Inner
            Chapters. Free and easy wandering is clearly about movement. The fish-bird story and
            the story about a dove and a cicada appears to indicate movement from, the big and
            the small, the far and the near, the common and the uncommon, the useful and the
            useless. There is clear identification with Yin-Yang within the text. This moving and
            wayfaring is not tense or worrying, but rather conveys peace and travelling at ease. How
            are we to comprehend this roaming and wandering? Zhuangzi does not literally advocate
            becoming a wandering vagrant although many Daoists have in fact done this. Rather,
            Zhuangzi is telling us first and foremost about what state of mind, and what emotional
            state we should be in. This follows naturally from what is understood about wu wei. When
            one views the self as a dynamic being with no permanent or determinate essence, the
            good or wise person is the one who can adapt to different situations, seeing any particular
            state of affairs from more than just one limited point of view unlike that of the cicada and
            dove where they state, “When we make an effort and fly up, we can get as far as the elm
            or the sapanwood tree, but sometimes we don’t make it and just fall down on the ground.
            Now how is anyone going to go ninety thousand li to the south!”

            Candidates might explore:
            • The meanings and interpretations in the story of Peng
            • Yin-Yang and wu wei as concepts within the Zhuangzi and clearly Ch. 1
            • The number of dynamic shifts that occur: The story starts in the north and ends in the
              south, the fish starts below the world and the bird ends up miles above the world etc
            • By accepting the Yin-Yang outlook and fostering wu wei Zhuangzi achieves a skeptical
              outlook on life
            • The importance of animals/birds for Zhuangzi (for example having a more spontaneous
              lifestyle)
            • Whether Zhuangzi is simply turning valuations on their head, and flipping them (the
              useless becomes useful and the uncommon becomes common etc)
            • Whether Zhuangzi is prone to exaggeration in his use and application of
              parables/metaphors etc
            • Whether Zhuangzi offers a realistic lesson in the uselessness of trying to figure out life
            • Zhuangzi’s understanding of Tao compared to other Taoists, in that he might be
              suggesting that the Tao is reachable whereas others have it as the ultimate aim, or it is
              a path, a way, not an end that is reached.
                                            – 35 –               N18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   Evaluate the concept of spontaneity and freedom suggested in the fish-bird story. [15]

      Possible discussion points include:
      • Whether Zhuangzi intends for us to think of our life not as a pre-determined goal, but
        merely to get through life without too much harm
      • What Zhuangzi intends when he advocates we accept things as they are and to let the
        mind move freely
      • Acting spontaneously on our natural impulses which for Zhuangzi is “judgmental
        attitude” that views some things as good and some as bad
      • Is Zhuangzi right when he advocates elsewhere in the Inner Chapters that one should
        not give value judgments?
      • Zhuangzi’s rejection of the handing down of laws and customs because laws, customs,
        and rites have a tendency to become determinate and static
      • By seeing the world in non-judgmental terms Zhuangzi enables us to see it in a myriad
        of different ways that are divorced from, and contrary to, the traditional interpretations
        of our particular culture and thus aid spontaneity and freedom
      • Whether Zhuangzi’s holistic notion of appreciating the experience of being alive brings
        about an absence of existential distress or worry
      • Whether the advocated spontaneity and freedom is possible in complex modern
        societies
      • This spontaneity and freedom is not something accidental or tangential to Zhuangzi’s
        philosophy but rather Zhuangzi’s view of rationality that leads directly to spontaneity
        and freedom.
