N18/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                        November 2018


                           Psychology


                           Higher level


                               Paper 3




6 pages
                          –2–            N18/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is the property of the International
Baccalaureate and must not be reproduced or distributed
to any other person without the authorization of the
IB Global Centre, Cardiff.
                                         –3–                 N18/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 3 markbands

Marks      Level descriptor

 Marks     Level descriptor
    0      The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
           There is an attempt to answer the question, but knowledge and understanding is
           limited, often inaccurate, or of marginal relevance to the question. The response
   1–3
           makes no direct reference to the stimulus material or relies too heavily on quotations
           from the text.
           The question is partially answered. Knowledge and understanding is accurate but
           limited. Either the command term is not effectively addressed or the response is not
   4–7
           sufficiently explicit in answering the question. The response makes limited use of
           the stimulus material.
           The question is answered in a focused and effective manner and meets the
           demands of the command term. The answer is supported by appropriate and
   8–10    accurate knowledge and understanding of qualitative research methodology. The
           response demonstrates a critical understanding of qualitative research methodology
           applied to the stimulus material.
                                                  –4–                 N18/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.   Evaluate the purposive sampling technique used in this study.                                     [10]

     Refer to the paper 3 markbands when awarding marks.

     The command term “evaluate” requires candidates to make an appraisal by weighing up the
     strengths and limitations of the sampling technique used in the study. Although a
     discussion of both strengths and limitations is required, it does not have to be evenly
     balanced to gain high marks.

     Responses that use the term “experiment” as a generic term for “study” should not be
     penalized.

     Purposive sampling is a non-probability sampling technique often used in qualitative
     research to serve a specific research aim. It is up to the researcher's judgment to decide
     what characteristics are important to meet the purpose of the study. In this study, the
     researcher chose participants who were similar on salient characteristics, that is, the target
     population was “elderly dog owners”.

     Strengths of the purposive sampling method could include, but are not limited to:
     • The participants accurately represent the topic under investigation because they are
        selected based on specific characteristics relevant to the research in order to provide
        rich data. For example, the participants were chosen because they owned a dog and
        were elderly, which fitted perfectly with the aim of this study, which opened up a new
        research area.
     • It is relatively easy to select a sample once the selection criteria are clear. The sample
        can be supplemented with more participants during the research if necessary, e.g. using
        snowball sampling. In this study, the 24 participants were found in places where you
        would expect to meet dog owners.
     • With purposive sampling you can gain insight into people's subjective beliefs about dog
        ownership and how that relates to their behaviour and wellbeing. For example, some
        participants referred to how they were “motivated to walk the dog even when they were
        in ill health” or that “the dog helped them when they felt depressed or lonely”.

     Limitations of the purposive sampling method could include, but are not limited to:
     • The selection criteria used by the researcher are related to the overall topic of the study
        and could be subjective and biased. However, if the sampling process is based on
        objective criteria, documented and explained, bias can be reduced. In this explorative
        study, the researchers had chosen “elderly dog owners” as a target population in order
        to investigate potential benefits of dog ownership for the elderly. There may be potential
        biases in the selection process; for example, it could be assumed that dog owners were
        generally healthier and fitter than other people of the same age so the researchers must
        be attentive to whether or not they could apply the findings outside the actual sample.
     • The sample may not be representative outside the target population because it is based
        on specific criteria, so it is difficult to generalize. However, this is less important in a
        qualitative study such as this explorative study because the focus is on how these
        particular participants experience potential health benefits of owning a dog and the data
        gathered could be used to make further research in the area under investigation.

     Candidates may refer to other sampling methods but this should only be credited if it is
     done as part of their evaluation of the purposive sampling method used in this study.

     Responses that refer to only strengths or only limitations of the purposive sampling method
     used in this study should be awarded up to a maximum of [5].

     Responses that evaluate only a sampling method other than the purposive sampling
     method used in the study should be awarded [0].
                                                 –5–                 N18/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   Describe how researchers in this study used inductive content analysis (thematic analysis) on the
     interview transcripts.                                                                         [10]

     Refer to the paper 3 markbands when awarding marks.

     The command term “describe” requires candidates to give a detailed account of how
     inductive content analysis was applied to the interview transcripts in the study.

     Responses that use the term “experiment” as a generic term for “study” should not be
     penalized.

     Candidates should describe characteristics or features of the procedure of inductive
     content analysis on the transcript in the context of this study. Relevant parts of the
     procedure of inductive content analysis in this study include, but are not limited to:
     • Reading and rereading the transcripts of the focus group interviews to identify
        possible categories or themes (coding the raw data) that relate to how participants
        believe they benefit from having a dog.
     • After a systematic analysis of the transcript and coding of data in terms of emerging
        themes (for example, "walking the dog is good for my health" or "socializing with
        other dog walkers helps me feel part of a group", the researcher could try to connect
        emerging themes in meaningful ways to establish low-level and higher-level themes
        and connect them in meaningful ways to establish possible hierarchies of themes.
     • Constructing a summary table of the three higher-order themes mentioned in the
        stimulus material (physical benefits, psychological benefits, and social benefits) and
        connecting them to lower-level themes.
     • Adding relevant quotations from participants in the study to support the choice of
        each theme. For example, for physical benefits some participants said “they were
        motivated to walk, even when in ill health”. When discussing psychological benefits
        some participants said “the dog gave them comfort and companionship.”
     • Analysis of the transcripts will continue until saturation of the data.
     • The final task is to make interpretations based on the summary table in order to find
        a relationship between the different themes and support this with relevant quotations
        from the participants.
     • Finally, the researcher could attempt formulation of theory based on the analysis.
     • Credibility checks can take place during the whole process of inductive content
        analysis, for example checking themes with other coders or researchers as well as
        participants to have them confirm the interpretation of data. Credibility checks could
        also include reflexivity, that is, the researcher controls for own biases.

     Responses that merely identify themes but do not describe the process of inductive
     content analysis should be awarded up to a maximum of up to [3].

     Responses that merely quote themes mentioned in the stimulus material but fail to describe any
     elements of the process of inductive content analysis should be awarded [0].

     Responses that merely state that inductive content analysis is concerned with finding themes in the
     transcripts but fail to describe any elements of the process of inductive content analysis should be
     awarded [0].
                                                   –6–                  N18/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   Discuss the use of focus group interviews in this study.                                       [10]

     Refer to the paper 3 markbands when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered review of
     factors relevant for the use of focus group interviews in this study.

     Responses that use the term “experiment” as a generic term for “study” should not be
     penalized.

     A focus group interview is a discussion guided by a facilitator. The group discussion is
     carefully planned to create a positive environment in which participants are free to talk
     openly. In this way, they are encouraged to express their attitudes on the topic under
     investigation. Focus group interviews are often used in research studies where the aim
     is to explore a specific problem in more depth and to guide future action. This is also
     the case in this study, which is focused on a specific age group and a new research
     area into potential health benefits for the elderly of owning a dog. Participants interact
     with each other during the focus group interview as they would in real life and this
     contributes to rich data.

     Discussion points could include but are not limited to:
     • The focus group allows for a flexible approach to the topic under investigation. The
        researcher can prepare a list of topics and questions to ask in advance and use
        them as a guide but they can be adjusted if necessary. In this study, some
        participants revealed that their dog was a source of comfort when they lost their
        partner. This topic was probably not planned by the researcher but could be further
        explored now that it was mentioned during the group discussion.
     • In focus groups, participants can use their own language and they can discuss and
        respond to each other's statements. This gives a special dynamic to the interview
        and generates rich data. Normally, a focus group interview is considered to be
        higher in ecological validity because of its conversational nature. In the context of
        this study, members of the focus group could perhaps stimulate new thoughts on
        potential benefits of dog ownership that would not have occurred otherwise.
     • Candidates may compare the focus group interview to alternative interview
        methods. For example, the focus group interview gave the researchers an
        opportunity to explore a number of opinions at the same time. This could save time
        compared to conducting individual interviews.
     • Conformity might occur in a focus group interview as well as social desirability
        effects but a skilled facilitator will be attentive to this.
     • Confidentiality/anonymity is very difficult if not impossible to obtain when a focus
        group interview is chosen but it can be justified if the topic under investigation is not
        particularly sensitive as in this study.
