M19/2/GREEK/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                       Markscheme


                               May 2019


                        Classical Greek


                         Standard level


                               Paper 1




5 pages
                                      –2–                 M19/2/GREEK/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic
or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without written permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of
any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties,
including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study
services, preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping
services or teacher resource digital platforms and app developers, is not
permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license. More
information on how to request a license can be obtained from http://
www.ibo.org/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-
third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni
par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation
écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation
commerciale de tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit.
L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs,
des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou d’aide aux études,
des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des
gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs
d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations
sur la procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à
l’adresse http://www.ibo.org/fr/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni
por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin que medie la
autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines
comerciales de todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El
uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales,
profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o ayuda para el
estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan
recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del
IB. En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una
licencia: http://www.ibo.org/es/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.
                                                    –3–                 M19/2/GREEK/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The translation is assessed in its basic units of clause and sentence. To this end, the original text is
chunked in a fixed number of sections (or “sense units”), 15 at SL and 30 at HL. Every section is
awarded two separate marks according to the two descriptors outlined below.

Each section is awarded 0 to 3 marks for descriptor A (Meaning) and 0 to 3 marks for descriptor B
(Vocabulary & Grammar).

The range of marks for each section is therefore 0 to 6, while the maximum number of marks for the
whole text is 90 at SL (15 sections × 6 marks).

Criterion A (Meaning) assesses how well the meaning of each sense unit has been communicated.

Criterion B (Vocabulary & Grammar) assesses how correctly vocabulary and grammar have been
rendered in relation to each sense unit. The term “grammar” here includes syntax and accidence.

As a guideline, criterion A tends to look at the translation as a whole (eg stylistic, literal and idiomatic
meanings conveyed), while criterion B tends to assess the conformity of the single section with the
original text (eg grammatical accuracy of translation, apparent understanding of source language syntax
and vocabulary).

While it may not always be possible to give the full range of marks for a single sense unit, the range of
marks necessary for differentiation is present over the whole exam.

By way of example, the marking of different translations of the sense unit οὐ θαυμάζω ὅτι μὲν ὀργίζεσθε,
ὦ ἄνδρες στρατιῶται found in a Xenophon passage (SL specimen papers), would be as follows:
• “I am not surprised that you are angry, o soldiers”: A=3, B=3.
• “I am not surprised there is anger, o citizen men”: A=2 (the meaning has been partially
   communicated; errors impair the translation), B=3.
• “We are not surprised that you would become angry, o soldiers”: A=3, B=2 (some vocabulary and
   grammar are rendered appropriately).
• “Anger is among you, soldiers, and I would be unsurprised”: A=2 (the meaning has been partially
   communicated), B=1 (limited grammar is rendered accurately).
• “We do not understand why you are so sad, o citizens”: A=1 (the translation conveys some meaning),
   B=1 (limited grammar is rendered accurately).

Square brackets [ ] indicate that the words in the sense unit have been inserted out of the order of the
text.
                                          –4–                 M19/2/GREEK/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



                                      (A) Meaning

      How well has the student communicated the meaning of each sense unit?

Marks                                        Level descriptors

  0        The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.


           The meaning has not been communicated adequately.
  1
           The translation conveys some meaning; errors impair the translation significantly.


           The meaning has been partially communicated.
  2
           The translation is mostly logical; errors impair the translation.

           The meaning has been fully communicated.
  3
           The translation is logical; errors do not impair the translation.



                             (B) Vocabulary & Grammar

How correctly has the student rendered vocabulary and grammar in relation to each
                                   sense unit?

Marks                                        Level descriptors

  0         The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

            Vocabulary and grammar are not rendered adequately.
  1         Limited vocabulary is rendered appropriately for the context.
            Limited grammar is rendered accurately.

            Vocabulary and grammar are rendered adequately despite inaccuracies.
  2         Some vocabulary is rendered appropriately for the context.
            Some grammar is rendered accurately and effectively.

            Vocabulary and grammar are rendered correctly.
  3         Most vocabulary is rendered appropriately for the context.
            Most grammar is rendered accurately and effectively.
                                                –5–          M19/2/GREEK/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Text                                                                            A         B
1.   ὁ μὲν δὴ Δερκυλίδας … ἐβουλεύετο
2.      ταῦτα διαπραξάμενος
3.      καὶ λαβὼν … ἐννέα πόλεις
4.      ἐν ὀκτὼ ἡμέραις
5.      ὅπως ἂν μὴ … βαρὺς εἴη τοῖς συμμάχοις
6.      ἐν τῇ φιλίᾳ χειμάζων
7.      ὥσπερ Θίβρων
8.      μηδ᾽ αὖ Φαρνάβαζος … κακουργῇ τὰς Ἑλληνίδας πόλεις
9.      καταφρονῶν τῇ ἵππῳ
10.     πέμπει οὖν πρὸς αὐτὸν
11.     καὶ ἐρωτᾷ πότερον
12.     βούλεται εἰρήνην ἢ πόλεμον ἔχειν
13.     ὁ μέντοι Φαρνάβαζος … σπονδὰς εἵλετο
14.     νομίσας τὴν Αἰολίδα ἐπιτετειχίσθαι
15.     τῇ ἑαυτοῦ οἰκήσει Φρυγίᾳ

                                                                                45        45
Total                                                                                90
