N11/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                      November 2011



           BUSINESS AND MANAGEMENT



                      Standard Level



                               Paper 2




24 pages
                              –2–            N11/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                              –3–             N11/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The markbands on pages 3–4 should be used where indicated in the markscheme.

 Section A             Section B
(d) questions         (c) questions
                                                         Level descriptors
         Marks 0–5


                 0                    • No knowledge or understanding of relevant issues,
                                        concepts and theories.
                                      • No use of appropriate terminology.
                                      • Little knowledge and understanding of relevant issues,
                                        concepts and theories.
                1–2                   • Little use of appropriate terminology.
                                      • No reference is made to the information in the stimulus
                                        material. The response is mainly theoretical.
                                      • A description or partial analysis/examination with
                                        relevant knowledge and/or understanding of relevant
                                        issues, concepts and theories.
                                      • Some use of appropriate terminology.
                3–4
                                      • Some reference is made to the information in the
                                        stimulus material, not just to the name of the
                                        organization.
                                      • A balanced analysis/examination with accurate, specific
                                        well-detailed knowledge and understanding of relevant
                                        issues, concepts and theories.
                                      • An analysis/examination that uses appropriate
                 5
                                        terminology throughout the response.
                                      • Explicit references are made to the information in the
                                        stimulus material.
                                   –4–              N11/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



 Section B
(d) questions                            Level descriptors
 Marks 0–7

      0         • No knowledge or understanding of relevant issues, concepts and
                  theories.
                • No use of appropriate terminology.
                • Little knowledge and understanding of relevant issues, concepts and
                  theories.
    1–2         • Little use of appropriate terminology.
                • No evidence of judgments and/or conclusions.
                • No reference is made to the information in the stimulus material.
                • A description with some knowledge and/or understanding of
                  relevant issues and concepts.
                • Some use of appropriate terminology.
    3–4         • No evidence of judgments and/or conclusions.
                • Some reference is made to the information in the stimulus material,
                  not just to the name of the organization.
                • The response is mainly theoretical.
                • A response with relevant knowledge and understanding of relevant
                  issues, concepts and theories.
                • A response that uses relevant and appropriate terminology.
    5–6         • Evidence of judgments and/or conclusions that are little more than
                  unsubstantiated statements that has balanced analysis and
                  demonstrates understanding.
                • Explicit references to the information in the stimulus material are
                  made at places in the response.
                • A response with accurate, specific well-detailed knowledge and
                  understanding of relevant issues, concepts and theories.
                • A response that uses appropriate terminology competently
     7            throughout the response.
                • A response that includes judgments and/or conclusions that is well
                  supported and underpinned by a balanced analysis.
                • Explicit references to the information in the stimulus material are
                  made throughout the response.
                                                   –5–               N11/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                               SECTION A

1.   (a)   (i)    Identify two appropriate sources of finance for Fang to purchase a
                  lorry.                                                             [2 marks]

                  Appropriate sources of finance would include:
                  • a medium-term bank loan
                  • a hire-purchase (lease)
                  • personal savings.


                  Award [1 mark] for each relevant and applicable source of finance for
                  Fang’s lorry purchase identified up to a maximum of [2 marks].

           (ii)   Define the term overhead costs.                                                  [2 marks]

                  Overhead costs are the indirect recurring costs of running a business that are
                  not linked directly to the goods or service produced and sold. Overhead
                  costs can include payments for the rent of premises, utility bills, and
                  employees’ salaries.


                  Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

                  Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and
                  understanding.

                  Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
                  understanding similar to the answer above.

                  For only a relevant: example or application to the stimulus award [1 mark].
                                           –6–             N11/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   Prepare a monthly cash-flow forecast for the first six months of operation of
      Fang’s business.                                                              [6 marks]

      All figures are in US$.

                      September       October   November December      January    February
       Cash sales           1000         1000        1000    1100         1200        1300
       Government         10 000
       loan
       Total               11 000        1000       1000        1100       1200        1300
       receipts
       Payments
       Monthly                  400       400        400         400        400         400
       rent
       Monthly                  200       200        200         200        200         200
       salary
       Monthly                   50        50         50          50         50          50
       supplies
       Monthly                   42        42         42          42         42          42
       interest
       Overhead                   0       200          0         200          0         200
       costs
       Purchases                  0      1500        500         500        500         500
       Total                    692      2392       1192        1392       1192        1392
       payments
       Net cash            10 308      –1 392       –192        –292          8         –92
       flow
       Opening                    0    10 308       8916        8724       8432        8440
       balance
       Closing             10 308        8916       8724        8432       8440        8348
       balance
                                               –7–             N11/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


      Apply Own Figure Rule (OFR): if a candidate makes an error in one row and
      carries it through the remainder of the forecast, that is only one error.

      [1 mark]
      The candidate conveys some understanding of what a cash-flow forecast is, but
      otherwise the forecast is largely inaccurate, incomplete, or illegible.

      [2 to 3 marks]
      A cash-flow forecast is drawn, but either it is not in a generally accepted format or
      it is untidy, and the forecast contains two or more errors.

      [4 to 5 marks]
      The cash-flow forecast is drawn essentially correctly and neatly in a generally
      accepted format. Award [5 marks] if there is one error, [4 marks] if there are two
      errors. If the candidate produces an accurate cash-flow forecast (that is, the final
      closing balance is correct and the means by which the candidate arrived at that
      figure is clear and logical), but does not use a generally accepted format,
      award [5 marks].

      [6 marks]
      The cash-flow forecast is drawn accurately and neatly in a generally accepted
      format, and is error free.

(c)   Explain XIAN Technology’s requirement that Fang present them with
      financial accounts every three months.                            [5 marks]

      Generally, the purpose of accounts is to provide information for stakeholders –
      shareholders/partners, lenders, suppliers, etc. who have a right or insist on seeing
      them. Accounts also allow businesses to monitor their own activities and prevent
      fraud. XIAN Technology insists on seeing Fang’s accounts every three months for
      financial reasons as well as for reasons of public image.

      Financial reasons could include:
      XIAN Technology will be extending credit to Fang’s franchise. Were Fang to
      mismanage her business and it fail, XIAN Technology could stand to take credit
      losses. Seeing the financial accounts would alert XIAN Technology to the
      possibility that Fang’s business will not survive.      In addition, typically a
      franchisee must pay a fee or percentage based upon sales to the franchisor. If this
      were the case, receiving financial accounts would allow XIAN Technology to
      monitor if Fang is paying the appropriate fee.

      Public image reasons could include:
      Xian Technology certainly has an interest in a more general sense in seeing
      Fang’s business survive.      Were it to fail, it would reflect negatively on
      XIAN Technology. Presumably with greater business expertise than Fang,
      XIAN Technology could step in to provide Fang with support on the first sign of
      trouble, which the accounts would reveal.

      Accept any other relevant explanation.
                                             –8–               N11/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


      [1 to 2 marks]
      The answer displays some basic knowledge and understanding of the
      requirements for Fang’s accounts – the answer is mainly theoretical. There is no
      reference to Xian Technology.

      [3 to 4 marks]
      The requirement for Fang’s accounts is explained with reference to
      Xian Technology. Only one aspect of finance or public image is clearly
      presented.

      [5 marks]
      The requirement for Fang’s accounts is explained with reference to
      Xian Technology. The two main aspects of finance and public image are clearly
      presented.

(d)   Analyse the impact on Fang’s business if new competition leads to a decrease
      in her gross profit margin.                                                  [5 marks]

      Were increased competition to reduce Fang’s gross profit margin, she would either
      have to sell more ovens to have the same gross profit or would, in all likelihood,
      experience a loss of overall profitability and profits. If she had lower profitability
      and profits, her return on investment would decline and, if serious enough, could
      have a major negative impact on the business. Promotional expenses might be cut,
      which could reduce sales. Cash flow could be strained, perhaps to the point of
      hurting her relationship with Xian Technology. If that occurred, the balance sheet
      would deteriorate. In a worse case scenario, Fang could no longer make a profit,
      eventually leading to a closure of the business.

      If Fang could offset the decline in margins with higher sales volume, that would,
      nevertheless put additional strain on the business. There would be an increased need
      for working capital to support the larger volume of trading. More ovens would have
      to be ordered, sold, and delivered, all of which add to the complexity of the business.
      Ineffectiveness or lack of capacity for these more complex activities could prevent
      Fang’s business from executing its business model.

      Accept any other relevant analysis.


      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                   –9–              N11/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   (a)   (i)    Define the term competition-based pricing.                                      [2 marks]

                  Competition-based pricing is a price set by a company for a product to
                  compete with another company’s pricing. Production and distribution costs
                  are ignored to drive demand towards another brand. This method of pricing
                  can cause a long-term decrease in product perception and decrease a
                  product’s value for future profits.


                  Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

                  Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and
                  understanding.

                  Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
                  understanding similar to the answer above.

                  For only a relevant: example or application to the stimulus award [1 mark].

           (ii)   Identify two increases in fixed costs that AM would incur to meet the
                  new EU quality standards.                                             [2 marks]

                  The two increases in fixed costs are (1) salaries for the quality experts and
                  (2) lease payments on new equipment.


                  N.B. Do not accept the increase in the higher quality materials because it is
                  not a fixed cost.

                  Award [1 mark] for each correct fixed cost identified up to a maximum of
                  [2 marks].
                                             – 10 –            N11/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   Calculate for 2010 (show all your working):

      (i)    the contribution to AM’s fixed costs of a wheelchair sold in Europe    [1 mark]

             US$200 (sales price) – US$60 (variable cost per wheelchair)
             = US$140 (contribution)


             Award [1 mark] for the correct workings and [1 mark] for the correct
             calculation.

      (ii)   AM’s overall net profit for both markets.                              [3 marks]

              3 090 000 total sales
             −1 242 000 variable costs = (60 ×10 200)+(60 ×10 500)
             −1 500 000 fixed costs

             US$348 000 = 2010 net profit


             Award [1 mark] for the correct variable cost calculation.

             Award [1 mark] for the correct answer.

             Award [1 mark] for the correct workings.
                                              – 11 –          N11/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(c)   Using an appropriate layout, prepare a report showing the increase in costs
      and the impacts on profitability for AM if Aaliyah decides to proceed with
      Option 1.                                                                   [7 marks]

       To: Aaliyah Ashrafuzzman
       From: Candidate
       Re: Decision to improve the quality of all wheelchairs and continue to sell in
       Europe

       The decision to continue to sell in Europe will involve the following cost
       increases:
       • A 20 % increase in variable costs per wheelchair, from US$60 to US$72
          (US$60 × 1.2)
       • An increase in fixed costs of US$220 000 = (4× (quality experts salary)
          US$22 000 + (new equipment lease) US$132 000).

       Sales revenue will increase from US$200 per chair sold in Europe to US$212.
       Sale price and sales revenue per chair will remain the same in Bangladesh.

       AM will see the following changes in its profit and loss, assuming sales volume
       remains the same as last year:

               Year              Last Year             New Year
               Sales revenue      3 090 000             3 212 400
               Variable costs     1 242 000     40.2 %  1 490 400      46.4 %
               Fixed costs        1 500 000     48.5 %  1 720 000      53.5 %
               Net profit           348 000     11.3 %      2000       0.06 %

       The impact of the increase in costs, both variable and fixed, will be a
       significant decrease in net profit. Because of the increase in variable costs, the
       already low contribution from sales in Bangladesh will contract from US$40 to
       US$28 (in Bangladesh wheelchair sells for US$100 and variable cost with
       Option 1 is US$72). Although the contribution in Europe will remain the
       same, the higher fixed costs can only be made up for by increased sales. (It
       would take sales of an additional 1572 wheelchairs (wheelchairs in Europe sell
       for US$212, contribution is (212 – 72) = US$140) in Europe to equal the
       increase in fixed costs in Europe (220 000/140) and more sales in Europe to
       compensate for the reduced contribution from sales in Bangladesh.)

       These figures have not taken into account any increases in selling expenses,
       which we should anticipate if we are to realize any increases in sales. Given
       that the projected profits, without an increase in sales, are virtually zero, any
       increase in selling expenses would result in negative profit if those sales do not
       materialize.

       These data strongly suggest that we need immediately to begin formulating a
       sales strategy for Europe.

      Accept other valid components of the report. It is not expected that the candidates
      answer will look exactly as above or contain all the above points.
                                            – 12 –            N11/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


      N.B. Candidates are not expected to make any recommendation.

      [1 to 2 mark]
      The candidate conveys a basic understanding of some of the impacts of the
      increase in costs for AM, but otherwise the report mainly quotes from the
      stimulus.

      [3 to 4 marks]
      The candidate conveys some understanding of the impacts of the increase in costs
      for AM. Some calculations may be present but the answer is mainly qualitative.

      [5 to 6 marks]
      The answer shows a clear understanding of the impacts of the increase in costs
      and decline in profitability for AM. Quantitative data is included. For [6 marks],
      the answer must be written in the style of a report.

      [7 marks]
      The answer is written in the style of a report and shows a clear and detailed
      understanding of the impacts of the increase in costs and decline in profitability
      for AM. Quantitative data is included and is all correct and includes a calculation
      of net profit for strategic Option 1.

(d)   Analyse the two growth options facing AM by applying the Ansoff matrix.               [5 marks]

      Using the Ansoff matrix, AM has four options: market penetration, product
      development, market development, and diversification. Of the four, the evidence
      from the stimulus material suggests that market penetration is the best option:
      existing market (Europe and Bangladesh) and existing product (wheelchair –
      although it will be slightly improved, it is not a new product).

                        Existing            New
                        products          products


        Existing         Market            Product
        market         penetration       development



         New           Market
                                        Diversification
        market       development
                                       – 13 –             N11/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


For several reasons, this appears to be the best decision that the company can
make. Its alternatives do not offer the same benefits:

Product development: the company has a steady and solid customer base with its
current (slightly upgraded) product. To develop a new product would be
expensive, requiring both market research and designing a new product.
Given that AM is in the wheelchair business and already has considerable
knowledge of the market, it seems unlikely that there is some large, unfilled gap
that would yield large profits quickly. Rather, product development would likely
be a long-term proposition.

Market development: market development always has inherent risks, especially
when the market being developed is foreign. To enter a foreign market requires
market research to make sure that the marketing mix is suitable for the market.
Even then, there are risks about operating in a foreign market, where a culture can
be different. Furthermore, a new distribution system has to be developed.
While these risks can be overstated, especially when the market AM is
considering is neighbouring India, with which it has many cultural similarities,
compared to Europe, the contribution would be significantly lower than in
Europe. Under the old cost structure, the contribution in India would be US$65
versus US$140 in Europe (under the new cost structure). Without factoring in the
costs of marketing wheelchairs in India (those figures are not available from the
stimulus material), to break-even, AM would have to sell 16 616 wheelchairs in
India, whereas AM stands basically to break-even if it can merely achieve the
same sales in units this year as last.

Diversification: diversification is not a realistic option for AM, given that they are
unwilling even to make two varieties of wheelchairs.

Given the above consideration and the fact that AM already has a presence there,
market penetration in Europe seems to be the best option. It is not without risks,
however, AM will have to work hard to return to former levels of profits.

Accept any other relevant analysis.


N.B. It is not expected that the candidates incorporate all of the above
points/issues.

Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                  – 14 –            N11/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                              SECTION B

3.   (a)   Describe one reason why technological innovation has been important for
           Bauli.                                                                  [2 marks]

           While Bauli has probably innovated in a number of areas in recent years,
           especially in the use of information technologies, the stimulus specifically refers
           to two areas where innovation has been important: (1) using improved
           technologies to achieve uniform quality of its product and (2) using improved
           technologies to increase the shelf-life of its product. Achieving uniform quality of
           product enhances its organization’s reputation for consistency, and consumers are
           not disappointed by a “bad” or “off” panettone. Increasing the shelf-life of the
           product lessens Bauli’s requirement to hire temporary workers, as full-time
           workers can produce the cakes well before the peak seasonal demand.

           Accept any other relevant description.


           N.B. It is not expected that the candidates incorporate all of the above.

           Award [1 mark] for a basic description that conveys partial knowledge and
           understanding.

           Award [2 marks] for a full, clear description that conveys knowledge and
           understanding through application to the stimulus.

     (b)   (i)   Explain one advantage and one disadvantage for Bauli of hiring
                 temporary workers.                                             [4 marks]

                 Advantages and disadvantages for Bauli of hiring temporary workers could
                 include:
                 Advantages                            Disadvantages
                 Company hires workers only when Temporary workers typically have
                 they need them, thus giving the less loyalty to the company, which
                 company flexibility.                  may affect their performance and
                                                       productivity.
                 With temporary workers supporting Temporary workers have to be
                 operations, full-time workers do not trained, which incurs cost and takes
                 become overworked, which can lead time.
                 to loss of focus (mistakes) and
                 burnout.
                 Temporary workers cease working
                 when their temporary contract
                 expires. There are not the costs
                 typically associated with redundancy.
                                        – 15 –            N11/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


       Mark as 2+2.

       Award [1 mark] for each appropriate advantage/disadvantage for Bauli of
       hiring temporary workers identified and [1 mark] for an appropriate
       explanation that directly refers to Bauli up to a maximum of [2 marks].

(ii)   Explain one difference between internal and external growth.                    [2 marks]

       Internal growth occurs when a business focuses on increasing sales, market
       share, or scale of operations by modifying its marketing mix in order to
       penetrate further the market, to develop new markets, or to diversify.
       Internal growth can occur with new or existing products.

       External growth occurs when a business achieves growth objectives by
       acquisition of other business. The reasons are the same: increasing sales,
       market share, or scale of operations. Modifying its marketing mix, in this
       instance, is very similar but achieved by other means: penetrate further the
       market by horizontal integration, to develop new markets by acquiring
       businesses that operate in them, or to diversify into “new” products by
       acquiring businesses that already produce them.

       Differences between internal and external growth include:
       • external growth is generally more rapid
       • external growth more often requires external financing
       • external growth more often includes dilution of ownership (though if
          internal growth expansion is financed by a capital share issue dilution
          can occur)
       • external growth requires merging corporations, which can sometimes be
          difficult
       • external growth involves more financial risk.

       In contrast to the above points, internal growth is generally slower, can
       more often be financed internally, is less likely to lead to dilution, and is
       organic. It involves less financial risk. However, internal growth does not
       preclude the competition from responding, which external growth often
       takes care of by eliminating (via acquisition).

       Accept any other relevant explanation.


       N.B. It is not expected that the candidates incorporate all of the above.

       Award [1 mark] for a basic explanation that conveys partial knowledge and
       understanding.

       Award [2 marks] for a full, clear explanation that conveys knowledge and
       understanding through application to the stimulus.
                                             – 16 –             N11/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(c)   Analyse the benefits for Bauli of developing a broader product mix.                  [5 marks]

      The benefits to Bauli of the development of a broader product mix include:
      • developing a group of products (e.g. including the Colombo cake) will increase
        brand awareness of Bauli
      • reducing the danger of relying on one single product: diversification of revenue
        streams (especially for seasonal goods such as the Christmas panettone)
      • having products at different stages of the product life cycle (as one product
        gets to the end of its product life cycle, other products should be reaching
        maturity and generating profits for reinvestment and for shareholders)
      • having a broad range of products with seasonal peaks at different times of year
        reduces the requirement for temporary workers.

      However, managing the product mix for a company is very demanding and
      requires constant attention. Michele Bauli must provide accurate and timely
      analysis of his company’s product mix so the appropriate adjustments can be
      made to the product line and individual products. In addition, in terms of
      operations, marketing, and possibly distribution, managing multiple products
      increases complexity and costs.

      Accept any other relevant analysis.


      N.B. It is not expected that the candidates incorporate all of the above.

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.

(d)   With reference to Bauli, evaluate the benefits of small versus large
      organizations.                                                       [7 marks]

      Generally speaking, the advantages and disadvantages (strengths and limitations)
      of small and large organizations include:

      Possible disadvantages of a small organization include:
      • competition by bigger organizations
      • not enough financial resources
      • changing demographics particular to location
      • lack of expertise of specialists
      • difficulty in gaining a significant market share
      • fluctuation in the economy
      • liability issues.
                                       – 17 –            N11/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Possible advantages of a small organization include:
• it can be started at a very low cost
• it can easily serve specialized niches
• it is typically easier to respond to the marketplace quickly
• small business proprietors tend to be intimate with their customers and clients,
  which results in greater accountability and maturity
• independence is another advantage of owning a small organization
• freedom to operate independently is a reward for small organization owners
• small business owners have the satisfaction of making their own decisions
  within the constraints imposed by economic and other environmental factors.

Accept any other relevant point.

N.B. It is not expected that the candidates incorporate all of the above.

Possible disadvantages of a large organization include:
• it requires large amounts of capital
• it has difficulty in serving specialized niches, which are often profitable
• it is often difficult or unwieldy to respond to the marketplace quickly
• large businesses often do not have a “human face” to customers
• large businesses, even when independent, affect more stakeholders, which
  functions as a constraint
• they are often bureaucratic in character.

Possible advantages of a large organization:
• they often have more capital than their rivals
• they have easier access to finance
• they have continuity apart from the principals
• they enjoy the expertise of specialists
• they often have significant market share
• they typically can better withstand fluctuations in the economy
• they have greater resources to do market research and to innovate.

By themselves, bulleted points of advantages and disadvantages do not constitute
an evaluation. Candidates must mention some advantages and disadvantages of
small and large organizations and synthesize these ideas to produce an evaluative
response.

With respect to the stimulus, Bauli specifically has the advantage of resources to
innovate, to purchase rivals to gain market share, and to develop a broad product
line. Small organizations can fill niche markets and, in the case of panettone,
charge a premium price. Workforce and industrial planning is also significantly
easier for small organizations.


Candidates must come to a judgment/conclusion.

Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 4.
                                                  – 18 –            N11/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   (a)   Define the term partnership.                                                            [2 marks]

           A partnership is a type of organization made up of no more than 20 owners
           (depending on the country of origin). A partnership will normally have unlimited
           liability for its owners and key functions will be shared out according to the
           partnership agreement.


           Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

           Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and
           understanding.

           Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
           understanding similar to the answer above.

           For only a relevant: example or application to the stimulus award [1 mark].

     (b)   (i)   Explain why quality control may become more important for Liturgi.                [4 marks]

                 Quality control is a system for ensuring the maintenance of proper standards
                 in a product, for example through inspections. Quality control may become
                 more important for Liturgi because, by going into the market for
                 high-quality, organic olive oil, they will be reaching out to consumers who
                 want a higher quality product and are willing to pay a premium price.
                 However, if Liturgi does not meet these high consumer expectations,
                 the product will not sell and the Liturgi brand could suffer. In light of the
                 fact that the olive farmers themselves, who know the raw materials that go
                 into the product better than anyone, are worried that their olive trees do not
                 yield sufficiently high-quality olives, Liturgi needs to be especially careful.
                 Liturgi will need to have inspectors randomly check the product at
                 production facilities.

                 Accept any other relevant explanation.


                 Award [1 to 2 marks] for a basic explanation of quality control that conveys
                 partial knowledge and understanding. If there is no application to the
                 stimulus, award no more than [2 marks].

                 Award [3 to 4 marks] for a full, clear explanation that conveys knowledge
                 and understanding of quality control and has explicit application to the
                 stimulus.
                                               – 19 –           N11/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


      (ii)   Calculate the gross profit per litre for the two types of olive oil.             [2 marks]

             For the organic olive oil: €15 × 0.6 = €9.

             For the regular olive oil: €3 × 0.4 = €1.2.

             Award [1 mark] for each correct calculation. Working not required.

(c)   Using two elements of the marketing mix other than place, analyse Liturgi’s
      challenge to produce the new organic olive oil.                             [5 marks]

      Producing the new organic olive oil is a marketing challenge for Liturgi, as shown
      by the 4Ps of the marketing mix (apart from place):

      In terms of promotion, it means that Liturgi must establish its brand and
      reputation in a new market where it is not competing yet. Advertising campaigns
      may be expensive, even if they only target specific customers (e.g. expensive
      restaurants in Europe). On the other hand, in the long term this investment in
      promotion may prove beneficial, once Liturgi has established itself, as that market
      seems particularly lucrative.

      In terms of pricing, the partners have already calculated a retail price of €15
      per litre, however they may need to later review this in the light of both internal
      and external factors (internal factors such as the quality of the organic olive oil
      itself, external factors such as the responses of competitors in the market they
      want to penetrate).

      In terms of product, the marketing challenge is about the fact that Liturgi will
      have two products: the traditional, good-quality olive oil, as well as the new,
      organic olive oil. This form of product diversification has advantages (e.g. as they
      are less dependent on one single product for their revenue), but also disadvantages
      (e.g. as two farmers already think that they will not be able to take part because of
      the quality of their olive trees, which may affect the whole partnership itself).

      Accept any other relevant analysis.


      Candidates may also write about People, Process, Packaging and Physical
      evidence – this is acceptable and they should be rewarded accordingly.

      N.B. Candidates are only asked to use and apply two elements of the marketing
      mix. If a candidate uses only one P, award a maximum of [3 marks].

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                              – 20 –            N11/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(d)   Discuss the effectiveness of the two types of distribution channels for Liturgi.         [7 marks]

      Liturgi’s current distribution (the farm shop plus sales via telephone and internet
      orders) is effective in that, with limited overhead costs directly attributable to
      distribution, it is relatively inexpensive to operate; it is also simple. However, the
      method of distribution does not aggressively reach out to consumers, who must
      drive to the farm shop or contact Liturgi via internet or telephone, and largely
      limits the geographic range of sales to customers within driving distance to the
      farm shop (to be sure, telephone and internet sales reach out across Spain, but
      most sales are at the farm shop).

      The new method of distribution (to the restaurants across Europe) will reach a
      much broader geographic area and will be more “customer-friendly”, as the sales
      person will contact business and arrange for shipment of the product to them.
      However, the costs of distribution will increase, as will its complexity, because of
      issues such as transport, logistics and storage. This may prove more expensive
      than the partners initially thought, though initial investments may prove beneficial
      in the long term.

      Accept any other relevant discussion.


      N.B. Candidates are asked to discuss both distribution channels. If a candidate
      discusses only one, award a maximum of [4 marks]

      To access top marks, the discussion must end with a conclusion which could be,
      for example, about the fact that the new distribution channel requires substantial
      investment.

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 4.
                                                  – 21 –            N11/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


5.   (a)   Identify two examples of contemporary changes in work patterns and
           practices other than the adoption of the four-day working week.    [2 marks]

           Examples of contemporary changes in work patterns and practices include:
           • working from home
           • teleworking
           • flexitime.

           Award [1 mark] for each work pattern or practice identified up to a maximum of
           [2 marks].

     (b)   (i)   Explain one impact that the four-day working week in the public sector
                 may have on the private sector in Utah.                                [2 marks]

                 The impact of the four-day working week in the public sector could impact
                 the private sector in a number of ways, including a reduction in
                 demand/business volume on Fridays for a variety of businesses that provide
                 support services for government personnel, including: parking garages,
                 petrol stations, commercial carpool services, and restaurants.

                 On the other hand, because most employees of the state government now
                 have three-day weekends and have lower expenditure in the areas just noted,
                 state employees could increase their discretionary spending in areas such as
                 recreation, entertainment, and home improvement.

                 Another area of the private sector that will be affected is day care
                 (child care). Presumably, some private sector day care centres will shift to a
                 schedule that matches the government schedule, resolving the problem that
                 some state employees are currently experiencing and allow the operators of
                 those day care centres to enjoy the benefits of a four-day working week.

                 Accept any other relevant explanation.


                 N.B. It is not expected that the candidates incorporate all of the above.

                 Award [1 mark] for identifying one relevant and correct impact, such as
                 those listed above or some other appropriate response and award [1 mark]
                 for an appropriate explanation thereof.
                                        – 22 –            N11/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(ii)   Distinguish between the public sector and the private sector.                     [4 marks]

       The public sector, sometimes referred to as the state sector, is a part of the
       state that deals with either the production, delivery and allocation of goods
       and services by and for the government or its citizens, whether national,
       regional or local/municipal.

       The private sector (also called commercial sector) is that part of the
       economy that is both run for private profit and is not controlled by the state.

       Accept any other relevant distinction.


       Award [1 mark] if the candidate correctly indicates that public sector refers
       to state or government.

       Award an additional [1 mark] if the candidate indicates that the private
       sector refers to non-governmental enterprises.

       Award an additional [1 mark] mark per term (public sector and private
       sector) for a full, clear response that conveys knowledge and understanding
       through development or exemplification or application to the stimulus,
       up to a maximum of [2 marks].
                                             – 23 –            N11/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(c)   Analyse the value of the social and environmental audit to two different
      stakeholders of the government of the state of Utah.                     [5 marks]

      A social and environmental audit evaluates the social and environmental effects of
      an organization’s economic actions and communicates these effects to
      stakeholders and to society at large. These types of audits are commonly used in
      the context of business, or corporate social responsibility, although any
      organization, including NGOs, charities, and government agencies may engage in
      social accounting. Social and environmental audits emphasize the notion of
      corporate accountability and are intended to quantify social and environmental
      performance and environmental position. In this way they perform an analogous
      function to financial audits. A social and environmental audit report ideally
      contains a statement of social and environmental performance and a social and
      environmental position, and may also aim to define what needs to be done to
      sustain or improve on indicators of such performance and position.

      A social and environmental audit provides considerable value to all of the
      stakeholders of the government of the state of Utah, that is, to all groups involved
      with the state’s activities. It provides useful information to the governor and
      legislators to make decisions regarding the social programs the state sponsors.
      Preparing the social and environmental audit stimulates the state employees by
      making them aware of the government’s efforts at social and environmental
      responsibility.   The private sector learns how the government faces its
      responsibilities with regard to human resources and the environment, which is a
      good indicator of how the state government is run. The social and environmental
      audit shows the citizens of Utah the government’s philosophy and the impact on
      society and the environment of how the state operates its affairs. If the audit
      reveals an unsatisfactory level of social or environmental responsibility, citizens
      can take action to influence politicians to make changes in the state’s approach to
      these matters.

      Although most argue that a social and environmental audit benefits everyone,
      because it communicates to all stakeholders the social and environmental
      performance and position of an organization, some stakeholders may resent the
      findings of an audit. For example, while the four-day working week was largely
      affirmed by the audit, those businesses negatively affected by its implementation,
      such as those that provide support services for government personnel (parking
      garages, petrol stations, commercial carpool services, and restaurants), may
      believe that the audit has no value or negative value. In addition, different
      stakeholders can have a different view of social and environmental responsibility.
      Those with lesser concern for social and environmental responsibility may not
      like the cost of the performance of the audit.

      Accept any other relevant analysis.


      N.B. It is not expected that the candidates incorporate all of the above.

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                              – 24 –            N11/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(d)   Discuss two possible areas of conflict between two stakeholders when the
      government of the state of Utah imposed a four-day working week for most
      state employees.                                                         [7 marks]

      When answering this question, candidates should provide two areas of conflict,
      identify (for each conflict) the two stakeholders affected, and discuss the nature of
      the conflicts. Examples of conflicts between stakeholders might include

       Stakeholder #1               Conflict                   Stakeholder #2
       Businesses affected          Government’s decision      Businesses affected
       positively by the four-      to have the four-day       negatively by the four-
       day working week.            working week.              day working week.
       Citizens who visited         Friday closure of          The government,
       government offices on a      government offices.        which made the decision
       Friday.                                                 to close government
                                                               offices.
       State employees who          Determination of which     Senior government
       must still work five days    state agencies would       officials who decided
       a week.                      operate on a four-day      that those employees
                                    schedule and which on      would remain on a
                                    a five-day schedule.       five-day schedule.

       Pressure groups for          Decision to perform a      Pressure groups for lesser
       greater social and           social and                 role of government in
       environmental                environmental audit.       public life.
       responsibility.
       State employees with         Problem of procuring       The government,
       young children.              extended day care.         which made the decision
                                                               to close government
                                                               offices.

      Accept any other relevant discussion.


      If a candidate discusses only one area of conflict, award a maximum of [4 marks]
      (and, if only one area of conflict is identified, the response would otherwise have
      to be excellent, including the explicit identification of the stakeholders, to receive
      [4 marks]).

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 4.
