N11/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                       November 2011



      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN A
            GLOBAL SOCIETY



                         Higher Level



                               Paper 3




7 pages
                              –2–             N11/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                                  –3–              N11/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Examiners should be aware that in some cases, candidates may take a different approach, which if
appropriate should be rewarded. If in doubt check with your Team Leader.

In the case of an “identify” question read all answers and mark positively up to the maximum marks.
Disregard incorrect answers. In the case of a “describe” question, which asks for a certain number of
facts e.g. “describe two kinds”, mark the first two correct answers. This could include two descriptions,
one description and one identification, or two identifications. In the case of an “explain” question,
which asks for a specified number of explanations e.g. “explain two reasons”, mark the first two
correct answers. This could include two full explanations, one explanation, one partial explanation, etc.

“ITGS terminology refers to both the IT technical terminology and to the terminology related to social
and ethical impacts.”


1.   Describe two multimedia features that could be included on Carmen’s web site.           [4 marks]

     •   examples of products (images) with descriptions (text)
     •   animations i.e. showing pictures being combined/stitched together
     •   voice commentary
     •   music included in products
     •   animations/video demonstrations
     •   RSS (Really Simple Syndication)
     •   interactive applets.

     Award [1 mark] for each multimedia element in a particular feature identified up to a
     maximum of [2 marks] per feature. Award an additional [1 mark] for the relevant
     description of each feature up to a maximum of [2 marks].
                                               –4–              N11/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   (a)   Explain how SSL (Secure Socket Layer) and encryption (line 58) are used to
           ensure that confidential data can be sent across the Internet when a customer
           purchases a product from the Foto Creativa web site.                          [6 marks]

           The following points must be made with clear reference to the Foto Creativa
           web site.

           SSL
           • protocol
           • cryptographic
           • works at the transport layer
           • added on to other transport protocols such as HTTP or FTP
           • prevents eavesdropping
           • prevents forgery
           • can examine data travelling in both directions
           • SSL certificate provide the user with not forgeable proof of the identity of
             the website you are connecting to.
           • SSL is being replaced by a more modern Protocol called TLS (transport Layer
             Security)


           Encryption
           • transformation of data
           • to a form unreadable by unauthorized people
           • uses a key
           • key used with algorithm to encrypt/decrypt
           • key only known to authorized recipient
           • public key used to encrypt
           • private key used to decrypt.

           [1–2 marks]
           A limited response that indicates very little understanding of either SSL or
           encryption and uses little or no appropriate subject terminology.

           [3–4 marks]
           A reasonable explanation that demonstrates some understanding of SSL and
           encryption. Some relevant examples and appropriate subject terminology are
           used within the response.

           [5–6 marks]
           A detailed explanation of SSL and encryption with examples and/or evidence of
           research with appropriate subject terminology used throughout the response.
                                            –5–              N11/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   Sergio has recommended to Carmen that she use open source software
      instead of a commercial web content management system (Web CMS) to
      develop the web site.      Analyse the possible consequences of this
      recommendation (lines 60–61, 98).                                    [8 marks]

      Answers may include:
      • the total cost might be less because open source software is free
      • open source software is customizable
      • open source software allows anyone to change the source code
      • open source software may be updated more regularly than commercial
        software
      • some open source products can be of better quality than commercial software
        due to larger developer base and testers
      • popular open source products have many freelance developer who can modify
        source code
      • altering open source software requires a high level of programming expertise
      • open source software may be less well tested than commercial products
      • open source software comes with no guarantees
      • open source software comes with no support – many open source products
        provide support (at a cost)
      • the quality of open source software may or may not be as good as a
        commercial equivalent
      • there may be compatibility issues
      • examples of open source software are quoted, e.g. OpenCms.

      [1–2 marks]
      A limited response that indicates very little understanding of the topic and uses
      little or no appropriate subject terminology.

      [3–5 marks]
      A reasonable analysis that demonstrates some understanding of the topic.
      Some relevant examples are used to support analysis within the response. There is
      some use of appropriate subject terminology in the response. At the lower end of
      the band the answer may be descriptive and lack detail.

      [6–8 marks]
      To enter this band, there must be a clear, detailed analysis of this issue which
      demonstrates a thorough understanding of the topic. There should be too an
      understanding that open source software allows access to program source code
      and the consequences of that. Relevant examples are used to support analysis
      within the response. There is appropriate subject terminology throughout
      the response.
                                               –6–              N11/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   Discuss how e-marketing techniques can be used to promote Foto Creativa’s
     web site and its products (lines 62–73).

     Use information from the case study and give examples of techniques used by the
     companies that you have investigated.                                           [12 marks]

     Answers may include:
     • sign up customer for short period – may encourage longer term relationship
     • use of Internet methods such as Google AdWords
     • web site optimization – make it easy for customer to see what is being looked for,
       plus other ideas
     • analytical tools – these are widely available – allows focussed campaigns
     • search engine optimization – may require knowledge or payment
     • domain name choice – may be something to do with what the company does
     • internal links
     • to direct attention to promotions
     • exchange links with other web sites – requires contacting other companies
     • post information on other web sites such as blogs/forums/mailing list – may be
       dumped as spam
     • pop ups – these can be irritating and might be counterproductive
     • registering on social networking sites (Facebook, Twitter)
     • RSS options for new updates
     • bulk emailing (could be irritating and qualified as spam).
                                                 –7–               N11/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                 No knowledge or understanding of IT issues and concepts or use of
                      0
                                 IT terminology.
                                 A brief and generalized response with very little knowledge and
                  1–3 marks      understanding of IT issues and concepts with very little use of
                                 IT terminology.
                                 A response that may include opinions, conclusions and/or
                                 judgments that are no more than unsubstantiated statements.
                                 The response will largely take the form of a description with a
                                 limited use of IT terminology and some knowledge and/or
                                 understanding of IT issues and/or concepts.
                  4–6 marks
                                 If no reference is made to the information in the stimulus material,
                                 award up to [4 marks].
                                        At the top end of the band the description is sustained.
                                        At the lower end of the band a tendency towards fragmentary,
                                        common sense points with very little use of IT terminology.
                                 A response that demonstrates opinions, conclusions and/or
                                 judgments that have limited support.
                                 The response is a competent analysis that uses IT terminology
                                 appropriately. If there is no reference to IT terminology the
                                 candidate cannot access this markband.
   Opinion
                                 There is evidence that the response is linked to the information in
   discuss,
                                 the stimulus material.
  evaluate,
                                        At the top end of the band the response is balanced,
   justify,       7–9 marks
                                        the response is explicitly linked to the information in the
 recommend
                                        stimulus material and there may be an attempt to evaluate it
 and to what
                                        in the form of largely unsubstantiated comments. There is
    extent
                                        also evidence of clear and coherent connections between the
                                        IT issues.
                                        At the lower end of the band the response may lack depth,
                                        be unbalanced or tend to be descriptive. There may be also
                                        implicit links to the information in the stimulus.
                                 There must be evidence of independent research for candidates to
                                 reach this markband.
                                 A detailed and balanced (at least one argument in favour and one
                                 against) response that demonstrates opinions, conclusions and/or
                                 judgments that are well supported and a clear understanding of the
                                 way IT facts and ideas are related.
                                 Thorough knowledge and understanding of IT issues and concepts.
                10–12 marks
                                 Appropriate use of ITGS terminology and application to specific
                                 situations throughout the response. If there is no reference to
                                 ITGS terminology candidates cannot access this markband.
                                 The response is explicitly linked to the information in the stimulus
                                 material.
                                        At the lower end of the band opinions, conclusions and/or
                                        judgment may be tentative.

“ITGS terminology refers to both the IT technical terminology and to the terminology related to social
and ethical impacts.”
