N11/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                      November 2011



              SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
                ANTHROPOLOGY



                        Higher Level



                               Paper 1




7 pages
                              –2–            N11/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                                   –3–               N11/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.   Describe the decisions that women make when choosing an egg donor.                           [6 marks]

     This question requires a primarily descriptive answer and much of the material can be found in the
     text itself. In essence, the question asks candidates to make clear their understanding of how a
     woman such as Giovanna can give birth to a child she will carry and be the social mother of through
     the donation of an egg from her friend. A key point to note here is that Giovanna will have no
     genetic connection to the child.

     In Flora’s case the biological connection between the child she hopes to conceive with her new
     husband is one that links her genetic material indirectly through her daughter and a younger
     generation to herself. Flora’s own genetic material is, in part, to be found in the egg her daughter
     will provide. However, this genetic material also contains some elements of Flora’s first husband
     (with whom she conceived her now adult daughter and whose egg she is going to use to have a
     child with her second husband). This means that if Flora is successful and conceives a child using
     her daughter’s egg and her second husband’s sperm then the child will also have some genetic
     material from Flora’s first husband. In this case some genetic connections are expressed and others
     suppressed in the desire to produce a child.

     Some candidates may compare the cases of Giovanna and Flora and note that Flora makes use of a
     resource (her daughter’s eggs) that is not available to Giovanna (who is not someone who appears
     to have children with suitable genetic material to offer her). In the absence of a biological link to a
     donor Giovanna has chosen a friend and so the decision in her case is mediated through a
     social relation. There may well be a hint of “genetic hierarchy” at work here as the first choice may
     be for a woman to seek an egg with a genetic link to herself and in the absence of this to then seek
     an egg donor with some other form of connection to the woman.

     In short, both women make use of what is available to them from their own social or familial
     networks when deciding who to use as an egg donor. Both women also rationalize and justify their
     decisions in terms that make sense to them and which serve to minimize the differences between
     themselves and the egg donor in each case. As far as possible, therefore, each woman seeks to
     eliminate differences between herself and her egg donor and to emphasize similarities.

     Both women also choose to know who their egg donor is rather than opt for an anonymous donor as
     is made clear in the case of Giovanna. In this respect both women also make the decision to be
     in control of as much as they can in the process of becoming mothers using new
     reproductive technologies.

     Some candidates may also consider generalizing to discuss some possible ethical issues that may
     arise in the considerations of the genetic transfers that take place in fertility clinics and the scope
     that individuals have (or should have) to decide what is acceptable to them. However, any such
     discussion must be closely related to the material in the text itself and refer to the cases of Giovanna
     and Flora.

     Candidates do not need to cover all the points above (and they may choose alternative equally valid
     ways of approaching the question) but the answer does have to be focused and in the candidate’s
     own words to obtain full marks.
                                   –4–              N11/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Marks                        Level descriptor
    0 The work does not reach a standard described by the
      descriptors below.
  1–2 There is an attempt to organize the response and identify
      relevant points or examples, but the response relies too
      heavily on quotations from the text and/or limited
      generalizations are offered.
  3–4 The response is organized, identifies and explains some
      relevant points or examples, and offers generalizations.
  5–6 The response is organized, identifies and explains detailed
      relevant points or examples, and links them to generalizations,
      demonstrating good anthropological understanding.
                                                   –5–               N11/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   Incorporating theoretical perspectives in your answer, explain how the women’s
     decisions make kinship “natural” and biology “social”.                         [6 marks]

     This question moves the candidates from a primarily descriptive answer to one that requires more
     by way of analysis. It also offers scope for candidates to demonstrate their detailed, relevant,
     knowledge of social and cultural anthropology from the curriculum.

     The answer to this question requires candidates to analyse and interpret the understandings and
     rationalizations of Giovanna and Flora for their choices when selecting egg donors for themselves
     and their fertility treatments. In Giovanna’s case the “naturalizing” strategy is one of eliding ethnic
     and biological categories by suggesting that a woman who has a shared ethnic background
     (an Italian American) and has a shared cultural upbringing is sufficiently “genetically” alike to
     Giovanna to constitute a suitable egg donor. While this may be a rationalization that Giovanna
     makes for herself it is clearly biologically not possible for a shared culture to be “genetically
     encoded” in this way. This is what the author of the text means by stating that Giovanna has
     “socialized genetics”. Further, Giovanna makes clear that as she will be the one gestating the baby,
     her role in the “creation” of the child is a biological one and thus that she will be the child’s mother
     in this (limited) biological way as well as the child’s social mother.

     In Flora’s case the intergenerational complexities and the shared genetic material between herself
     and her daughter require some careful consideration. Flora will be giving birth to her own genetic
     grandchild (a child produced with her daughter’s egg and her second husband’s sperm), but this
     child will be Flora’s child and a step-sibling to her daughter (the egg donor) in social terms,
     even though the child is Flora’s grandchild and her daughter’s child in biological terms.
     Flora’s daughter will not consider herself the mother of this child, she will be the child’s half-sister.

     Some candidates may note that this social understanding of the child Flora hopes to have using her
     daughter’s egg and husband’s sperm is necessary to avoid any possible hint of inappropriate
     step-father and step-daughter relations, as the child that will be produced is in fact biologically that
     of the step-father and step-daughter. This situation is avoided by prioritizing the understanding of
     the egg Flora will use from her daughter as really her own (as the adult daughter and egg donor was
     Flora’s child), just one that is coming to her via a “generational detour”. Further, Flora can make
     sense of this relationship by referring to her own cultural background where grandparents often take
     on the role of parenting their grandchildren. In this sense, if Flora gives birth to her own biological
     grandchild she is simply taking an already established social practice (grandparents caring for
     grandchildren) one logical and technologically possible step further. In this way too, Flora can
     argue that she is not doing something odd or unusual but something that in some ways is already
     common practice.

     Candidates should note that the author does not express a moral position on the practices and
     choices of Giovanna and Flora. She simply notes what the women are doing and how the women
     explain and justify their actions in terms that derive from their social contexts and their “folk”
     understandings of genetics.

     In terms of kinship studies candidates may note that the terms in common usage “mother”, “father”,
     “daughter” etc. are not the same and unchanging everywhere. There is no reason to assume any
     biological essentialism and it is clear from this text that individuals can and do invest these terms
     with the meanings and significance that makes sense to them about their circumstances and
     crucially, helps them to justify their desires.
                                             –6–              N11/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The interrelationships between the biological and the social are key to the understanding of
this passage. Stronger candidates may reflect on the assumptions of the biological given on which
the social understanding of kinship is constructed and yet note that the biological is invested with
social meanings. This suggests that there is no essential biological given either and that the social
and biological understandings of kin and kinship make each other and are equally open to
reinterpretation and reconfiguration over time and as technological advances make possible.

This knowledge should clearly refer to relevant theoretical works or perspectives.

     Marks                            Level descriptor
           0 The work does not reach a standard described by the
             descriptors below.
         1–2 The response is mainly descriptive and relies on quotations,
             but may demonstrate limited understanding of relevant
             anthropological issues and concepts.
         3–4 The response demonstrates some understanding of relevant
             anthropological issues and concepts or theory, or the response
             recognizes the viewpoint of the anthropologist, but not all
             of these.
         5–6 The response demonstrates a critical understanding of relevant
             anthropological issues, concepts and theory, and recognizes
             the viewpoint of the anthropologist.
                                                –7–             N11/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   Compare and contrast the social and cultural changes discussed in the text with
     social and cultural changes in one society you have studied in detail.          [8 marks]

     Candidates may choose any social group where social and cultural change has taken place in some
     clearly defined way thus making possible discussion of both similarities and differences with the
     case presented in the text. The candidates do not have to choose a social group where there has
     been a focus on changes in kinship understandings or practices, but may choose a group where any
     form of carefully described social and cultural change has led to new ways of understanding the
     social realm and/or new forms of social relations.

           Marks                          Level descriptor
                 0 The work does not reach a standard described by the
                   descriptors below.
               1–2 Comparative ethnography is presented in limited detail and its
                   relevance is only partly established. It is not identified in
                   terms of place, author or historical context. The response may
                   not be structured as a comparison.
               3–4 Comparative ethnography is presented in limited detail but its
                   relevance is established. The comparative ethnography is
                   identified in terms of place, author and historical context,
                   or the response is clearly structured as a comparison.
               5–6 Comparative ethnography is presented and its relevance is
                   successfully established. The comparative ethnography is
                   identified in terms of place, author and historical context,
                   and the response is clearly structured as a comparison.
                   Either similarities or differences are discussed in detail,
                   but not both.
               7–8 Comparative ethnography is presented and its relevance is
                   successfully established. The comparative ethnography is
                   identified in terms of place, author and historical context,
                   and the response is clearly structured as a comparison.
                   Similarities and differences are discussed in detail. The
                   response demonstrates good anthropological understanding.
