8823 – 2016M/2017M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

November / Novembre / Noviembre de 2023


        English A: language and literature
         Anglais A : langue et littérature
          Inglés A: Lengua y Literatura


         Higher level and standard level
        Niveau supérieur et niveau moyen
           Nivel Superior y Nivel Medio

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1



5 pages/páginas
                                            –2–                             8823 – 2016M/2017M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                               –3–                           8823 – 2016M/2017M


General marking instructions

 These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking. They are not offered
 as an exhaustive and fixed set of features which all answers must include.

 Answers which do not follow the approach suggested in the guiding question, but have provided
 an alternative formal or technical focus should be rewarded appropriately in line with the
 assessment criteria.


Instructions générales pour la notation

 Ces notes ne sont que simples lignes directrices pour aider les examinateurs lors de la notation.
 Elles ne peuvent en aucun cas être considérées comme un ensemble fixe et exhaustif de
 caractéristiques que les réponses doivent présenter.

 Les réponses qui ne suivent pas l’approche suggérée dans la question d’orientation, mais qui ont
 adopté un autre angle technique ou formel doivent être récompensées de manière appropriée,
 conformément aux critères d’évaluation.


Instrucciones generales para la corrección

 El objetivo de estas notas para los examinadores es servir de directrices a fin de ayudar en la
 corrección. No deben considerarse un conjunto fijo y exhaustivo de características que deban
 estar presentes en todas las respuestas.

 Las respuestas que no sigan el enfoque recomendado en la pregunta de orientación, pero
 posean un enfoque alternativo, de carácter formal o técnico, también deberán ser valoradas
 de acuerdo con los criterios de evaluación.
                                                –4–                           8823 – 2016M/2017M


1.

                                             Text type

                                               Appeal

                          Elements of the text significant for analysis

     • the use of imagery (nature, green colour, low-angle shots of elephants in which many are
       eating etc.) to complement and support the written text
     • the manner in which the text functions as an appeal through the use of pathos, emotive
       language and the passive voice (“was captured”, “imported” etc.)
     • the use of informative language (facts, statistics etc.) and an infographic with simplified
       figures and icons to provide information, enhance tone, and appeal to the audience
     • the use of capitalisation (“Veterinarian”, “Caregiver”, “YOU” etc.), bold font and enlarged
       quotation to draw the reader’s attention
     • the use and effect of anthropomorphism (e.g., the characterisation of the “geriatric
       residents” with human names, “arthritis” and “stiff joints”)
     • the use of photographs (Tange, Billie, Billie’s trunk reaching for watermelon, Minnie,
       Debbie) to emphasize the elephants’ unique personalities
     • the use of anecdote and narrative voice to underline the message of the text and
       encourage contribution to the charity
     • the sense of familiarity created with the audience through the tone (the subtle appeal of a
       personal letter from the CEO, the shortening of the organisation’s name to “The
       Sanctuary” etc.)
     • the manner in which an atmosphere of security and safety is created through the allusion
       to a care home for the elderly (“residents”, “Caregiver”, “safe haven” etc.)
     • the inclusion of transactional details and structural elements to underline the legitimacy
       and reliability of the text (e.g., columns, sub-titles, enumeration)
     • the self-praising nature of the text (“well-maintained”, “restaurant-grade”, “gold-standard”
       etc.) highlighting the Sanctuary’s superior approach to animal care juxtaposed with the
       broader issue of wild animals in captivity
     • the addition and effect of the logos of accredited animal-care organizations (Association
       of Zoos and Aquariums and Global Federation of Animal Sanctuaries) to increase the
       credibility of The Elephant Sanctuary.
                                                –5–                            8823 – 2016M/2017M


2.

                                             Text type

                                           Sports column

                           Elements of the text significant for analysis

     • the manner in which a distinct tone and narrative voice is created in the text through the
       author’s appreciation for the sport of netball and criticism of Australian sporting culture
       (e.g., negative representation of sporting fans and of certain sports such as UFC)
     • the use of image and text to represent netball as a dynamic and vibrant sport apparent in
       the vivid action and colour of the image (Higher-ability candidates may highlight the static
       nature of players in the image and how this is used to further criticise the failure of
       Australia’s other more high-status sports)
     • the use of informal language, colloquialisms and idioms such as “Aerial Ping-Pong" and
       “cop a spray” to engage the audience and generate humour
     • the use of quotation and exclamation throughout the text to engage the audience in the
       topic as well as create a stereotypical image of the average Australian sporting fan
     • the use of rhetorical question in the title and the text to encourage participation in the
       debate and provide a reflection on Australian sporting culture
     • the use and effect of figurative language such as extended metaphor, personification and
       simile (“the favourite child… its siblings”, “like hens’ teeth” etc.)
     • the use of “we” and “our” to build a rapport with the audience and evoke a sense of
       commonality and ownership over the sport of netball
     • the use of direct address (e.g., “you should get down…”) to encourage audience
       participation while highlighting the local nature of the text
     • the use of short sentences to intensify the sharpness of the tone (“we all like it” etc.)
     • the use and effect of informative language common to a sports report (e.g., the nickname
       of national team, the name and time of the national competition, where it is being
       televised)
     • the use of irony and humour to criticise current sporting culture in Australia (e.g., imagery
       of the UFC fighter punching the author, netball having “a merry old time”)
     • the use of patriotism to stoke national pride (e.g., “our national hearts”, “our national
       team”) along with the suggestion of an Australian sporting family
     • the manner in which the author does not provide a satisfactory answer to the question
       posed in the title and how this affects the meaning of the text.
