No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de
tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris,
sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de
tutorat ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement
supérieur, des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes
d’études, des gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des
développeurs d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la
procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse suivante :
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios
de apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores
de aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u
ofrezcan recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este
enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia:
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.
Mathematics
Higher level
Paper 3 – discrete mathematics

Tuesday 10 November 2020 (afternoon)


1 hour


Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y Answer all the questions.
y Unless otherwise stated in the question, all numerical answers should be given exactly or
  correct to three significant figures.
y A graphic display calculator is required for this paper.
y A clean copy of the mathematics HL and further mathematics HL formula booklet is
  required for this paper.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [50 marks].




                                                                                              8820 – 7207
     3 pages                                              © International Baccalaureate Organization 2020
                                                      –2–                                           8820 – 7207


Please start each question on a new page. Full marks are not necessarily awarded for a correct answer
with no working. Answers must be supported by working and/or explanations. In particular, solutions
found from a graphic display calculator should be supported by suitable working. For example, if
graphs are used to find a solution, you should sketch these as part of your answer. Where an answer is
incorrect, some marks may be given for a correct method, provided this is shown by written working.
You are therefore advised to show all working.

1.   [Maximum mark: 8]

     Solve the recurrence relation un + 2 = 8 un + 1 − 16 un , given that u1 = 4 and u2 = 48 .


2.   [Maximum mark: 12]

     Christine and her friends live in Winnipeg, Canada. The weighted graph shows the location of
     their houses and the time, in minutes, to travel between each house.

                                    D                 24               E

                                                      32           7            15
                         17             10
                                                                           25
                                                      21                                F
                               12            H                         G
                  C
                                                           32    13
                                                 14                           21
                               25


                                                 B          11     A

     Christine’s house is located at vertex C.

     (a)   (i)	Use Dijkstra’s algorithm to find the shortest time to travel from C to F, clearly
                showing how the algorithm has been applied.

           (ii)   Hence write down the shortest path from C to F.[7]

     A new road is constructed that allows Christine to travel from H to A in t minutes.
     If Christine starts from home and uses this new road her minimum travel time to A
     is reduced, but her minimum travel time to F remains the same.

     (b)   Find the possible values of t .[5]
                                                   –3–                                             8820 – 7207


3.   [Maximum mark: 13]

     (a)   (i)	Write down the remainder when 142022 is divided by 7.

           (ii)   Use Fermat’s little theorem to find the remainder when 142022 is divided by 17.[5]

     (b)   (i)	Prove that a number in base 13 is divisible by 6 if, and only if, the sum of its digits
                is divisible by 6.

           (ii)   The base 13 number 1y93y25 is divisible by 6. Find the possible values of
                  the digit y .[8]


4.   [Maximum mark: 6]

     Solve the system of linear congruences

                                   x ≡ 7 (mod 29) and 3x ≡ 1 (mod 31) .


5.   [Maximum mark: 11]

     G is a simple, connected, planar graph with 9 vertices and e edges.

     (a)   Find the maximum possible value of e .[2]

     The complement of G has e ′ edges.

     (b)   Find an expression for e ′ in terms of e .[2]

     (c)   Given that the complement of G is also planar and connected, find the possible
           values of e .[2]

     H is a simple graph with v vertices and e edges.

     (d)   Given that both H and its complement are planar and connected, find the maximum
           possible value of v .[5]




