No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic
or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without written permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of
any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties,
including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study
services, preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping
services or teacher resource digital platforms and app developers, is not
permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license. More
information on how to request a license can be obtained from http://
www.ibo.org/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-
third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni
par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation
écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation
commerciale de tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit.
L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs,
des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou d’aide aux études,
des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des
gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs
d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations
sur la procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à
l’adresse http://www.ibo.org/fr/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni
por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin que medie la
autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines
comerciales de todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El
uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales,
profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o ayuda para el
estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan
recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del
IB. En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una
licencia: http://www.ibo.org/es/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.
M19/1/AXENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX




English A: literature – Higher level – Paper 1
Anglais A : littérature – Niveau supérieur – Épreuve 1
Inglés A: literatura – Nivel superior – Prueba 1

Thursday 16 May 2019 (afternoon)
Jeudi 16 mai 2019 (après-midi)
Jueves 16 de mayo de 2019 (tarde)

2 hours / 2 heures / 2 horas


Instructions to candidates
 Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Write a literary commentary on one passage only.
 The maximum mark for this examination paper is [20 marks].

Instructions destinées aux candidats
 N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
 Rédigez un commentaire littéraire sur un seul des passages.
 Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est de [20 points].

Instrucciones para los alumnos
 No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
 Escriba un comentario literario sobre un solo pasaje.
 La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [20 puntos].




                                                                                             2219 – 0065
     3 pages/páginas                                     © International Baccalaureate Organization 2019
                                                      –2–                   M19/1/AXENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX

Write a literary commentary on one of the following:

1.

                 Annabel was now in demand for small parts in films, always of the same type: she was
          called for wherever a little slip of a thing was needed – the typist who just happened to return to
          the office for the parcel she had forgotten when the fatal argument was in progress in the boss’s
          room next door, the little housemaid whose unforeseen amorous exchanges with the delivery
      5   boy waylaid the flight plans of the kidnappers, the waif on the underground railway who was one
          of those who never got home to her lodgings at Poplar; and then she played a more prominent
          part as the nurse wrongfully accused of stealing drugs, and who woke up by and by in a private
          room of a hospital in Bangkok, under the watchful eyes of a ‘nurse’ whom she recognized as a
          former patient of hers; and she played many other parts. Her eyes were not large, but on the
     10   screen they came out so, by some mystery. By some deeper, more involved mystery, another
          ten years were to pass before Luigi Leopardi, whom many of his friends called ‘V’ – pronounced
          ‘Voo’ – because his real name was Vincenzo, the Italian producer, transformed her eyes, on
          picture-screens, into those of a Cat-Tiger. (The film company’s press secretary first described
          her as ‘The Cat-Tiger’ in the publicity that preceded the film The House on the Piazza with
     15   which she made her first big success. But before her film was released Luigi had changed this
          to ‘English Lady-Tiger’, as she was henceforth described on the billing and many other places.)
                 But in those earlier times when she began to be in demand in English films, she had no
          means of knowing that she was, in fact, stupid, for, after all, it is the deep core of stupidity that it
          thrives on the absence of a looking-glass. Her husband, when she was in his company with his
     20   men friends, and especially with Billy O’Brien, tolerantly and quite affectionately insinuated the
          fact of her stupidity, and she accepted this without resentment for as long as it did not convey
          to her any sense of contempt. The fact that she was earning more and more money than her
          husband seemed to her at that time a simple proof that he did not want to work. The thought
          of his laziness nagged her against all contrary evidence and emerged in unpleasant forms,
     25   unforeseen moments, embarrassing, sometimes in public, from her sharp little teeth:
                 ‘Sorry, I’ve got to go home to bed. I’m the worker of the family.’
                 And more and more, Frederick stayed at home all day in their Kensington flat, living on her
          money, reading book after book – all the books he had never had leisure to read before. He had
          craved for this contribution to his life. There were few parts suited to his acting talents, so far
     30   as talent, continually unapplied, can be said to exist. Frederick, however, held to a theory that
          a random collision of the natal genes had determined in him a bent for acting only substantial
          parts in plays by Strindberg, Ibsen, Marlowe and Chekov (but not Shakespeare); and so far
          as that went he was right, everything being drably right in the sphere of hypotheses, nothing
          being measurably or redeemably wrong. In fact, his decision about what parts he was suited to
     35   perform on the stage of the theatre did not matter; he was never considered for any parts in the
          plays he wanted to act in.

                                                                Muriel Spark, The Public Image, Virago Press
                             –3–                    M19/1/AXENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX

2.

                            [March]

          Eight months on, grief burns itself out,
          leaves quiet, smearing ash. A face,
          a spit-damp rag. A blackened field
          in rain. My smile’s willed

     5    and brief. All right then, I insist—
          a productive day. And schedule
          carefully: work, tea with a friend,
          a run. I will pretend

          a busy breathlessness, which is,
     10   I’m sure, its own reward. And do
          all—headlong, a little grim—
          but later at home

          recall only chatter as limp
          as boiled food. Its own reward?
     15   Well, the other option’s sitting tight,
          trusting summer heat

          will coax some movement out of me,
          asleep, cold-blooded on a rock.
          Is grief’s aftermath also grief—
     20   a latter, deadened trough,

          a kind of char that’s part of burning?
          If so, fire ephemerals—blooms
          that follow forest fires—ought
          to flare shortly. If not,

     25   this ash-dark face is mine, not grief’s—
          is, in fact, me. And you? All but
          gone. Transcribed in scorch. A wound
          the new bark curls around.

                          From An Elegy by Benjamin Grossman, 2016 Jacar Press
