M23/1/AXENG/BP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                  May / Mai / Mayo de 2023


                    English A: literature
                    Anglais A : littérature
                     Inglés A: Literatura


         Higher level and standard level
        Niveau supérieur et niveau moyen
           Nivel Superior y Nivel Medio

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1



5 pages/páginas
                                            –2–              M23/1/AXENG/BP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                               –3–             M23/1/AXENG/BP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


General marking instructions

 These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking. They are not offered
 as an exhaustive and fixed set of features which all answers must include.

 Answers which do not follow the approach suggested in the guiding question, but have provided
 an alternative formal or technical focus should be rewarded appropriately in line with the
 assessment criteria.


Instructions générales pour la notation

 Ces notes ne sont que simples lignes directrices pour aider les examinateurs lors de la notation.
 Elles ne peuvent en aucun cas être considérées comme un ensemble fixe et exhaustif de
 caractéristiques que les réponses doivent présenter.

 Les réponses qui ne suivent pas l’approche suggérée dans la question d’orientation, mais qui
 ont adopté un autre angle technique ou formel doivent être récompensées de manière
 appropriée, conformément aux critères d’évaluation.


Instrucciones generales para la corrección

 El objetivo de estas notas para los examinadores es servir de directrices a fin de ayudar en la
 corrección. No deben considerarse un conjunto fijo y exhaustivo de características que deban
 estar presentes en todas las respuestas.

 Las respuestas que no sigan el enfoque recomendado en la pregunta de orientación, pero
 posean un enfoque alternativo, de carácter formal o técnico, también deberán ser valoradas
 de acuerdo con los criterios de evaluación.
                                                –4–              M23/1/AXENG/BP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


1.

                                            Literary form

 Play - Drama

                           Elements of the text significant for analysis

 • monologue form e.g direct address: ‘Do you ever…; ‘wonder what you were doing’, revealing
   more than he realises/intends e.g. about loss of status
 • characterisation of Roger and, perhaps,Tim. e.g. How he is easily distracted, how his mind
   wanders, ‘Third assistant store manager’ vs ‘he’s sitting up in his fancy glass office’
 • contrasts e.g. before and after e.g. ’Not the old normal. The old normal is long gone.’; ‘fancy
   car’ and ‘office’ vs ‘third assistant store manager’ to reveal Roger’s change in status/self
   perception
 • the creation of/revelation of Internal conflict: ‘I should really go for a run’; ‘I’m considering
   exercising’ to suggest Roger’s dislocated mental state
 • the use of implied relationships: e.g. ‘we actually went to high school together’ to reveal
   Roger’s bitterness and sense of dislocation
 • how humour is created: e.g. the reference to the ‘celebrity on the beach’
 • creation of source of anger e.g. ‘not the actual store manager’; ‘Apparently it also says I’m the
   guy you can yell at’, perhaps linked to Roger’s loss of status
 • repressed outrage: e.g. ‘just so you know’; ‘and I know better than to go up against store
   policy’, again linked to his lowly status and compare with ‘Roger from before’
 • change of register: e.g. ‘she’s not dealing with your complaint to your satisfaction’ vs ‘gonna’,
   ‘Oh right’ used to show how Roger has to put on a front at work
 • roger’s lack of identity revealed by ‘I’ve got a badge and it says my name is Roger and I’m
   happy to help’
 • how language is used (colloquialism/idiomatic) e.g. ‘that’s a whole nother story’; ‘kind of’; ‘well
   okay’ used to create the feeling of spontaneous speech
 • the contrasts between reality vs virtual reality: e.g. mundane job as ‘third assistant store
   manager’ vs the links to fantastic/fake events e.g. ‘what they found when they cut open...’; the
   ‘celebrity on the beach’ perhaps to show Roger’s desperation to escape the reality of his
   mundane job/directionless life
 • presentation of time e.g. ‘You realize that time has sort of…and it’s forty minutes later’ and
   adverbials of time, place, action: e.g. mentions of Monday morning; ‘so on and so on and
   eventually you realize, perhaps to suggest time drifting/repetition/lack of direction
 • sentence structure e.g.: So you pick up your phone…why am I telling you that?’’ to create the
   illusion of natural speech.
                                                –5–             M23/1/AXENG/BP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


2.

                                           Literary form

 Prose Fiction: Short Story

                          Elements of the text significant for analysis

 • the creation of the setting through metonymy, alliteration, sound, musical aspect: e.g. ‘A swirl
   of wet leaves’; ‘ghostly music’; ‘Whoof! Whoof’; ‘mother bird’s warning call and the twitter…’;
   ‘its steaming breath hissed at her’
 • the motif of returning home: e.g. ‘Once she had known every…’; ‘the river she knew so well’;
   ‘Still it was the home of her girlhood and she knew every inch of the way’
 • the use of allusion to the myth of the Odyssey: e.g. ‘someone waiting for her’
 • the symbol of the dog: e.g. ‘an ownerless dog, huddled, wet and shivering…’ feeling of
   ‘kinship’
 • the use of diction and imagery in the representation of the journey: e.g. ‘The wind and rain
   and darkness’ that accompanied the ‘the walk of three bush miles’
 • the presentation of feeling: e.g. ‘Wind and rain and darkness lay before her’; ‘She drew her
   cloak tightly round her’; ‘her forebodings fled’
 • atmosphere, sense of mystery: e.g. ‘the night-hidden trees’; ‘someone would have been
   waiting...’; ‘she saw no sign of life’; ‘remembering their gruesome task’; ‘Was it someone she
   had known?’
 • the sense of alienation: e.g. ‘Once she had known’; ‘there was only one ticket to collect’;
   ‘unheeded by the sleeping town’; ‘This traveller was a stranger to him’
 • characterisation: e.g. problems with expressing herself: e.g. ‘Her questions resolved itself into
   a request for the time…’
 • point of view: e.g. third person
 • the ominous mood: e.g. ‘There was the silent tenseness’; ‘warning call’; ‘disturbed nestlings’
 • communication: e.g. ‘If her letter had been received…’; ‘“Wet night!” He said at length…’; ‘But
   perhaps the porter had a message’ and how this creates suspense and tension
 • personification: e.g. ‘blear eyed lantern’.
