© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
English A: literature – Higher level – Paper 1
Anglais A : littérature – Niveau supérieur – Épreuve 1
Inglés A: Literatura – Nivel Superior – Prueba 1
3 May 2023 / 3 mai 2023 / 3 de mayo de 2023
Zone A afternoon    Zone B morning     Zone C afternoon
Zone A après-midi   Zone B matin       Zone C après-midi
Zona A tarde        Zona B mañana      Zona C tarde

2 h 15 m

Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y Write a guided analysis of text 1.
y Write a guided analysis of text 2.
y Use the guiding question or propose an alternative technical or formal aspect of the text to focus
  your analysis.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [40 marks].

Instructions destinées aux candidats
y N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
y Rédigez une analyse dirigée du texte 1.
y Rédigez une analyse dirigée du texte 2.
y Utilisez la question d’orientation ou proposez une autre manière d’aborder le texte en
  choisissant un aspect technique ou formel sur lequel concentrer votre analyse.
y Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est de [40 points].

Instrucciones para los alumnos
y No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
y Escriba un análisis guiado del texto 1.
y Escriba un análisis guiado del texto 2.
y Utilice la pregunta de orientación o proponga otro aspecto técnico o formal del texto en el que
  centrar su análisis.
y La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [40 puntos].




                                                                                               2223 – 0049
      3 pages/páginas                                      © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
                                                       –2–                                            2223 – 0049


Write a guided analysis of the following text.

1.        The following is an extract from the novel A Strange and Sublime Address by Amit Chaudhuri. A
          family in Kolkata (formerly known as Calcutta) is relaxing after Sunday lunch.


          Later, after washing their hands, they went up to the second and topmost storey of the house.
          Sandeep’s mother and Mamima reclined on the large bed. Their conversation was a transparent
          stream that occasionally trickled into desert patches of silence. Chhotomama1 turned on the radio,
          which began to babble immediately like the local idiot:
    5             ‘Both grandson and grandfather love eating Thin Arrowroot Biscuits.’
                  ‘Nothing’s as kind to your skin as Boroline Antiseptic Cream.’
                  He lay back on the small bed, secure as a soldier in his trench, with the newspaper in his
          hands; he folded it several ways and made it crackle festively. His face and arms drowned in the
          black and white ocean of the newspaper, surfacing intermittently. Sighing regretfully Chhotomama
10        fell asleep, the newspaper covering his face. When the breath came up from his nostrils, the
          newspaper rose and fell lightly, as if it were breathing as well. On the big bed, Mamima and
          Sandeep’s mother began to dream, sprawled in vivid crab-like postures. His aunt lay on her
          stomach, her arms bent as if she were swimming to the edge of a lake; his mother lay on her back,
          her feet (one of which had a scar on it) arranged in the joyous pose of a dancer.
15                A mournful song now came on the radio. It was an old radio, a wedding-gift, shaped like
          a box, with outdated knobs and dials. When Sandeep was younger, he had thought there were
          little men, talented homunculi2, inside the box of the radio, who performed those songs. But that
          seemed long ago. Beside the radio, there was a clock with a white face which always ran ten
          minutes fast. Every night, the time was readjusted, and every morning, with great accuracy, it had
20        gained ten minutes. At about half past four, when the clock said twenty to five, the grown-ups woke
          and stretched their arms like reluctant children. The Sunday lunch, then the Sunday nap – and the
          thought of Monday, that difficult day, was aborted. The radio crackled with the nervous, breathless
          sound of football commentary; dust had settled on the furniture and floor of the house.
                  Calcutta is a city of dust. If one walks down the street, one sees mounds of dust like sand-
25        dunes on the pavements, on which children and dogs sit doing nothing, while sweating labourers
          dig into the macadam with spades and drills. The roads are always being dug up, partly to
          construct the new underground railway system, or perhaps for some other obscure reason, such
          as replacing a pipe that doesn’t work with another pipe that doesn’t work. At such times, Calcutta
          is like a work of modern art that neither makes sense nor has utility, but exists for some esoteric
30        aesthetic3 reason. Trenches and mounds of dust everywhere give the city a strange, bombed-out
          look. The old houses, with their reposeful walls, are crumbling to slow dust, their once-gleaming
          gates are rusting. Dust flakes off the ceilings in offices; the buildings are becoming dust, the roads
          are becoming dust.



1
        Chhotomama: Sandeep’s uncle
2
        homunculi: very small human creatures
3
        esoteric aesthetic: specialized artistic


          –     By what means, and to what effect, does the author create the atmosphere in this passage?
                                                   –3–                                2223 – 0049


Write a guided analysis of the following text.

2.    The following text is a poem by Edward Thomas.


                                                 The Owl

                              Downhill I came, hungry, and yet not starved;
                              Cold, yet had heat within me that was proof
                              Against the North wind; tired, yet so that rest
                              Had seemed the sweetest thing under a roof.

                          5   Then at the inn I had food, fire, and rest,
                              Knowing how hungry, cold, and tired was I.
                              All of the night was quite barred out except
                              An owl’s cry, a most melancholy cry

                              Shaken out long and clear upon the hill,
                        10    No merry note, nor cause of merriment,
                              But one telling me plain what I escaped
                              And others could not, that night, as in I went.

                              And salted was my food, and my repose,
                              Salted and sobered, too, by the bird’s voice
                        15    Speaking for all who lay under the stars,
                              Soldiers and poor, unable to rejoice.


      –     How, and to what effect, is tone used to shape the meaning of the poem?




Disclaimer:
Content used in IB assessments is taken from authentic, third-party sources. The views expressed within them belong to their
individual authors and/or publishers and do not necessarily reflect the views of the IB.

References:
1.            A STRANGE AND SUBLIME ADDRESS by Amit Chaudhuri. Copyright © 2015, Amit Chaudhuri,
              used by permission of The Wylie Agency (UK) Limited.
2.            Thomas, E., 1915. The owl. [online] Poetry Foundation. Available at:
              https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/53777/the-owl-56d23364d7256 [Accessed 10 June 2022].
