© International Baccalaureate Organization 2021

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2021

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2021

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Mathematics: applications and interpretation
Standard level
Paper 2

Tuesday 2 November 2021 (morning)


1 hour 30 minutes


Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y A graphic display calculator is required for this paper.
y Answer all the questions in the answer booklet provided.
y Unless otherwise stated in the question, all numerical answers should be given exactly or
  correct to three significant figures.
y A clean copy of the mathematics: applications and interpretation formula booklet is
  required for this paper.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [80 marks].




                                                                                              8821 – 7205
     8 pages                                              © International Baccalaureate Organization 2021
                                                           –2–                                         8821 – 7205


Answer all questions in the answer booklet provided. Please start each question on a new page.
Full marks are not necessarily awarded for a correct answer with no working. Answers must be
supported by working and/or explanations. Solutions found from a graphic display calculator should
be supported by suitable working. For example, if graphs are used to find a solution, you should sketch
these as part of your answer. Where an answer is incorrect, some marks may be given for a correct
method, provided this is shown by written working. You are therefore advised to show all working.

1.   [Maximum mark: 16]

     A group of 1280 students were asked which electronic device they preferred. The results per
     age group are given in the following table.

                                                            Age

           Preferred device                11–13           14–16           17–18              Total

                   Laptop                  143              160             153                456
                    Tablet                 205              224             131                560
            Mobile phone                    72              128                64              264
                     Total                 420              512             348               1280

     (a)     A student from the group is chosen at random. Calculate the probability that the student

             (i)       prefers a tablet.

             (ii)      is 11–13 years old and prefers a mobile phone.

             (iii)     prefers a laptop given that they are 17–18 years old.

             (iv)      prefers a tablet or is 14–16 years old.                                                [9]

     A  ​χ​2​  test for independence was performed on the collected data at the 1 % significance level.
     The critical value for the test is 13.277.

     (b)     State the null and alternative hypotheses.                                                       [1]

     (c)     Write down the number of degrees of freedom.                                                     [1]

     (d)     (i)	Write down the  ​χ​2​  test statistic.

             (ii)      Write down the p-value.

             (iii)     State the conclusion for the test in context. Give a reason for your answer.           [5]
                                                       –3–                                              8821 – 7205


2.   [Maximum mark: 16]

     The admissions team at a new university are trying to predict the number of student
     applications they will receive each year.

     Let n be the number of years that the university has been open. The admissions team
     collect the following data for the first two years.

                           Year, n         Number of applications received in year n

                               1                             12 300
                               2                             12 669

     (a)   Calculate the percentage increase in applications from the first year to the second year.           [2]

     It is assumed that the number of students that apply to the university each year will follow a
     geometric sequence,  ​un​ ​  .

     (b)   (i)	Write down the common ratio of the sequence.

           (ii)    Find an expression for  ​un​ ​  .

           (iii)   Find the number of student applications the university expects to receive
                   when  ​n = 11​ . Express your answer to the nearest integer.                                [4]

     In the first year there were 10 380 places at the university available for applicants.
     The admissions team announce that the number of places available will increase
     by 600 every year.

     Let  ​vn​ ​  represent the number of places available at the university in year n .

     (c)   Write down an expression for  ​vn​ ​  .                                                             [2]

     For the first 10 years that the university is open, all places are filled. Students who receive a
     place each pay an $80 acceptance fee.

     (d)   Calculate the total amount of acceptance fees paid to the university in the
           first 10 years.                                                                                     [3]

     When  ​n = k​ , the number of places available will, for the first time, exceed the number of
     students applying.

     (e)   Find k .                                                                                            [3]

     (f)   State whether, for all  ​n > k​ , the university will have places available for all applicants.
           Justify your answer.                                                                                [2]




                                                                                                       Turn over
                                                  –4–                                            8821 – 7205


3.   [Maximum mark: 20]

     A wind turbine is designed so that the rotation of the blades generates electricity. The turbine
     is built on horizontal ground and is made up of a vertical tower and three blades.

     The point A is on the base of the tower directly below point B at the top of the tower. The height
     of the tower, AB, is 90 m. The blades of the turbine are centred at B and are each of length 40 m.
     This is shown in the following diagram.

                                                                              diagram not to scale




                                                                   40

                                  blade                B




                                                  90
                                                                  C

                                                                  h

                                 ground
                                                       A

     The end of one of the blades of the turbine is represented by point C on the diagram. Let h
     be the height of C above the ground, measured in metres, where h varies as the blade rotates.

     (a)   Find the

           (i)    maximum value of h .

           (ii)   minimum value of h .                                                                   [2]

     The blades of the turbine complete 12 rotations per minute under normal conditions, moving at
     a constant rate.

     (b)   (i)	Find the time, in seconds, it takes for the blade [BC] to make one complete
                rotation under these conditions.

           (ii)   Calculate the angle, in degrees, that the blade [BC] turns through in one second.      [3]

(This question continues on the following page)
                                                         –5–                                           8821 – 7205


(Question 3 continued)

     The height, h, of point C can be modelled by the following function. Time, t , is measured
     from the instant when the blade [BC] first passes [AB] and is measured in seconds.

                                         ​h(t) = 90 − 40 cos (72​t​∘​)​ ,  ​t ≥ 0​

     (c)   (i)	Write down the amplitude of the function.

           (ii)   Find the period of the function.                                                            [2]

     (d)   Sketch the function  ​h(t)​  for  ​0 ≤ t ≤ 5​ , clearly labelling the coordinates of the maximum
           and minimum points.                                                                                [3]

     (e)   (i)	Find the height of C above the ground when  ​t = 2​  .

           (ii)   Find the time, in seconds, that point C is above a height of 100 m, during each
                  complete rotation.                                                                          [5]

     Looking through his window, Tim has a partial view of the rotating wind turbine. The position
     of his window means that he cannot see any part of the wind turbine that is more than 100 m
     above the ground. This is illustrated in the following diagram.


                                 blade                    B




                                                                           C




                                 ground
                                                           A

     (f)   (i)	At any given instant, find the probability that point C is visible from Tim’s window.

           The wind speed increases. The blades rotate at twice the speed, but still at a constant rate.

           (ii)   At any given instant, find the probability that Tim can see point C from his window.
                  Justify your answer.                                                                        [5]




                                                                                                       Turn over
                                                  –6–                                              8821 – 7205


4.   [Maximum mark: 14]

     A large water reservoir is built in the form of part of an upside-down right pyramid with a
     horizontal square base of length 80 metres. The point C is the centre of the square base
     and point V is the vertex of the pyramid.

                                                                              diagram not to scale
                                                                  P
                                  80

                                                    C
                                                                                6
                                        60                    O

                                          M


                                              N




                                                        V

     The bottom of the reservoir is a square of length 60 metres that is parallel to the base of
     the pyramid, such that the depth of the reservoir is 6 metres as shown in the diagram.

(This question continues on the following page)
                                                    –7–                                             8821 – 7205


(Question 4 continued)

     The second diagram shows a vertical cross section, MNOPC, of the reservoir.

                                                                                diagram not to scale
                                                    80
                      M                                                           P
                                                    C
                                                                                      6

                              N                                            O
                                                    60

     (a)   Find the angle of depression from M to N.[2]

     (b)   (i)	Find CV.

           (ii)   Hence or otherwise, show that the volume of the reservoir is 29 600 m3.[5]

     Every day 80 m3 of water from the reservoir is used for irrigation.

     Joshua states that, if no other water enters or leaves the reservoir, then when it is full there is
     enough irrigation water for at least one year.

     (c)   By finding an appropriate value, determine whether Joshua is correct.                           [2]

     To avoid water leaking into the ground, the five interior sides of the reservoir have been
     painted with a watertight material.

     (d)   Find the area that was painted.                                                                 [5]




                                                                                                   Turn over
                                                       –8–                                             8821 – 7205


5.    [Maximum mark: 14]

      Arianne plays a game of darts.




                                                  O




      The distance that her darts land from the centre, O, of the board can be modelled by a
      normal distribution with mean 10 cm and standard deviation 3 cm.

      (a)     Find the probability that

              (i)     a dart lands less than 13 cm from O.

              (ii)    a dart lands more than 15 cm from O.                                                     [3]

      Each of Arianne’s throws is independent of her previous throws.

      (b)     Find the probability that Arianne throws two consecutive darts that land more than
              15 cm from O.                                                                                    [2]

      In a competition a player has three darts to throw on each turn. A point is scored if a player
      throws all three darts to land within a central area around O. When Arianne throws a dart
      the probability that it lands within this area is 0.8143.

      (c)     Find the probability that Arianne does not score a point on a turn of three darts.               [2]

      In the competition Arianne has ten turns, each with three darts.

      (d)     (i)	Find the probability that Arianne scores at least 5 points in the competition.

              (ii)    Find the probability that Arianne scores at least 5 points and less than 8 points.

              (iii)   Given that Arianne scores at least 5 points, find the probability that Arianne
                      scores less than 8 points.                                                               [7]




References:

© International Baccalaureate Organization 2021
