M14/1/AXENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


                    May / mai / mayo 2014

         ENGLISH / ANGLAIS / INGLÉS A:
          LITERATURE / LITTÉRATURE /
                 LITERATURA

                       Standard Level
                       Niveau Moyen
                        Nivel Medio

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2



6 pages/páginas
                              –2–         M14/1/AXENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.



Ces remarques pour la notation sont confidentielles. Leur usage
est réservé exclusivement aux examinateurs participant à cette
session.

Ces remarques sont la propriété de l’Organisation du
Baccalauréat International. Toute reproduction ou distribution
à de tierces personnes sans l’autorisation préalable du centre de
l’évaluation de l’IB est interdite.



Estas notas para la corrección son confidenciales y para el uso
exclusivo de los examinadores en esta convocatoria de exámenes.

Son propiedad del Bachillerato Internacional y no se pueden
reproducir ni distribuir a ninguna otra persona sin la
autorización previa del centro de evaluación del IB.
                                              –3–           M14/1/AXENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX/M



Examiners: please note that the term “comparison”, both in the descriptors and in the
marking notes, includes the discussion of relevant “contrasts” as well.

The features of the “very good to excellent” answers assume that those for “adequate to good”
are included.

Drama

1.   An adequate to good answer will identify, describe and comment on both the presentation and
     importance of minor characters, and make an attempt at meaningful comparison. Examiners
     should accept any definition of “minor” characters, including characters who do not appear on
     stage.

     A very good to excellent answer may also explore in greater detail the way or ways in which
     at least one minor character from each work studied contributes to those works.


2.   An adequate to good answer will identify and comment on the effects of examples of direct
     communication of a character with the audience, comparing the uses by one playwright with
     those of the other(s). Methods could include soliloquy, asides, use of chorus/narrator, among
     others.

     A very good to excellent answer may also explore and analyse in greater detail and depth the
     impact of instances of direct communication.


3.   An adequate to good answer will identify and comment on the effects of examples of the use
     of sound and/or light, offering a comparison of their use by the playwrights.

     A very good to excellent answer may also discuss in greater detail and with deeper insight the
     impact that the uses of sound and/or light have in the works.
                                             –4–           M14/1/AXENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX/M



Poetry

4.   An adequate to good answer will identify and discuss appropriate examples of imagery and
     compare how they convey one or more kinds of love. Examiners should be open to a
     multiplicity of definitions and approaches to love.

     A very good to excellent answer may also offer a more detailed and precise analysis and a
     more nuanced appreciation of the use of imagery to convey love.


5.   An adequate to good answer will show some understanding of what constitutes formal and/or
     informal language and will discuss apt examples, comparing the level of formality and how it
     affects the communication of the subject matter in each case.

     A very good to excellent answer may also explore and analyse in greater depth the examples
     of formal and/or informal language, comparing with more subtlety how they affect
     communication of the subject matter.


6.   An adequate to good answer will identify and discuss suitable examples of how rhyme and/or
     rhythm are used by poets, analysing and comparing their effects on the organization of the
     poems. (Candidates may discuss the effect of making no use of rhyme.) The analysis of
     effects is more important than the correct definition of terms.

     A very good to excellent answer may also analyse in greater detail examples of the use of
     rhyme and/or rhythm and the nature of their effects.
                                              –5–          M14/1/AXENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX/M



Prose: novel and short story

7.   An adequate to good answer will compare how and how successfully events identified as
     being “key” have contributed to the development of one or more central characters.

     A very good to excellent answer may also discuss in greater detail and with more subtlety
     how an event identified as “key” can contribute the development of the central characters.


8.   An adequate to good answer will identify and describe examples of the use of weather,
     explaining and comparing how they have been employed.

     A very good to excellent answer may also analyse in greater detail the ways in which the
     writers have used the weather, perhaps showing, where applicable, that these uses may
     contribute to more than one aspect of a work.


9.   An adequate to good answer will identify whether the texts have a single plot, or one or more
     subplots, commenting on and comparing the effects achieved by these authorial choices.
     Examiners should be open to various interpretations of what constitutes plot and sub plot.

     A very good to excellent answer may also indicate in greater detail the effectiveness of a
     single plot or more than one plot for those particular works.
                                                –6–          M14/1/AXENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX/M



Prose other than fiction

10.   An adequate to good answer will discuss the authors’ choices of where to begin and will
      compare the effects of those beginnings at particular points. Examiners should be open to
      many interpretations of what constitutes a beginning.

      A very good to excellent answer may also investigate in greater detail and sophistication the
      impact of beginning at a particular point.


11.   An adequate to good answer will identify each author’s tone, discussing and comparing some
      ways in which tone reveals a particular attitude towards the content of the work.

      A very good to excellent answer may also show a more nuanced and detailed understanding
      of how tone reveals writers’ particular attitudes toward the content of their works.


12.   An adequate to good answer will discuss and compare some ways in which a physical journey
      may be interpreted as an allegory for a spiritual or symbolic, or other kind of journey (eg one
      where knowledge, wisdom, maturity, etc. is acquired) in the chosen works.

      A very good to excellent answer may also show a more nuanced and detailed understanding
      of ways in which physical journeys may be regarded as allegories.
