No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic
or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without written permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of
any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties,
including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study
services, preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping
services or teacher resource digital platforms and app developers, is not
permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license. More
information on how to request a license can be obtained from http://
www.ibo.org/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-
third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni
par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation
écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation
commerciale de tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit.
L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs,
des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou d’aide aux études,
des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des
gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs
d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations
sur la procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à
l’adresse http://www.ibo.org/fr/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni
por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin que medie la
autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines
comerciales de todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El
uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales,
profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o ayuda para el
estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan
recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del
IB. En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una
licencia: http://www.ibo.org/es/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.
M19/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




Global politics
Higher level and standard level
Paper 1


Wednesday 8 May 2019 (afternoon)


1 hour 15 minutes


Instructions to candidates
yyDo not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
yyAnswer all the questions.
yyThe maximum mark for this examination paper is [25 marks].




                                                                                             2219 – 5951
     4 pages                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2019
                                                     –2–                    M19/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Unit 2      Human rights

    Nature and evolution of human rights: Developments in human rights over time and space

Read all the sources carefully and answer all the questions that follow.

Source A               “Expelling Roma1 migrants”, a cartoon by Paresh Nath, The Khaleej Times (2013).




                               [Source: © Paresh Nath Courtesy of Cagle Cartoons]



Source B                Adapted from “Why is EU free movement so important?”, an article by
                        Sonia Sodha, www.bbc.co.uk (2015).

Free movement of people – alongside free movement of goods, services and capital – is one of the four
founding principles of the European Union2 (EU). It gives all citizens of EU countries the right to travel,
live and work wherever they wish within the EU.

Where did the idea of free movement of people come from? The EU was formed as European leaders
came together after the Second World War, wanting to prevent another catastrophic war. The idea was
that allowing people to move across the continent – from countries where there were no jobs to countries
where there were labour shortages – would not only boost European growth, but would help prevent war
by getting people to mix more across borders.

 Over time, the idea of Europe as an economic union evolved into a more political project. According to
 a Belgian political scientist at the London School of Economics, the Treaty of Maastricht3 “changed the
 nature of the EU from an economically-oriented project towards a more politically-oriented project.”
 He explains that one of the important outcomes was that we had something called European Citizenship.
“Before that, European rights were only for people that were economically active, that moved across
 borders to work or to provide a service in economic terms. After that it became much more of a political
 concept whereby every European citizen had certain rights to free movement”.

                          [Source: adapted from “Why is EU free movement so important?”
                           by Sonia Sodha, 2015, www.bbc.co.uk. Used with permission.]
                                                    –3–                    M19/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Source C                Adapted from “France: UN expert says new terrorism laws may undermine
                        fundamental rights and freedoms”, a news article from United Nations
                        Human Rights, Office of the High Commissioner (2018).

An independent expert on the protection of human rights in the context of countering terrorism, who
visited France at the Government’s invitation, acknowledged the serious and ongoing security
challenges being experienced by France, and the indisputable necessity of providing security for all
citizens. The expert underlined that France’s counter-terrorism action must continue to be rooted in,
and comply with international law including human rights, humanitarian and refugee law. Echoing the
recommendations of the United Nations Global Strategy on Counter-terrorism adopted by consensus by
all 193 States, she stressed that effective counter-terrorism measures and the protection of human rights
are not conflicting goals, but complementary.

She has praised efforts by France to combat terrorism but has raised concerns about the effect
anti-terrorism laws have on the enjoyment of fundamental human rights including liberty, privacy,
association, movement and religious freedom. She was particularly mindful of the effects of these laws
on the full enjoyment of rights by French citizens of the Muslim faith highlighting, as an example, the
closure of mosques as a limitation on the enjoyment of religious freedom.

        [Source: from: https://www.ohchr.org/en/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=23130&LangID=E
                        © 2019 United Nations. Reprinted with the permission of the United Nations]



Source D               “Global Challenges to Human Rights Today”, a lecture delivered by Zeid Ra’ad
                        Al Hussein, the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (2017).

[…] the universality of rights is being contested across much of the world. It is under broad assault from
terrorists, authoritarian leaders4, populists5 and those who claim to support “traditional values”. All seem
only too willing to sacrifice, in varying degrees, the rights of others for the sake of power. Their combined
influence has grown at the expense of the liberal order6.

Two months ago, I visited Facebook7 in the US, to discuss how it determines content online, specifically
with respect to freedom of expression, and removal of incitement to hatred. Rather than use the
international standard, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which regulates the
freedom of expression, the company appears to be using as a guide the US Constitution. But it’s not the
applicable law in most countries. Facebook simply did not know which countries are legally bound by the
Covenant; and had never thought to ask.

I also travelled to Libya […] a country so broken and dangerous that the UN cannot maintain a
permanent presence. Thousands of people, mainly migrants, are subjected to slavery, trafficking and
sexual violence, and almost anyone may be the object of unnecessary violence.

Our inability over decades to communicate to a wider audience, comprehensibly, simply, humbly, the
supreme importance of universal human rights, has left the door open to the enemies of rights. Their
claims, that human rights are simply a vehicle for Western values and interests, have stifled progress
and cut off the formation of a popular base for rights world-wide.

Today, the legitimacy and necessity of human rights faces a test. There is growing ignorance of the
origins of this rights architecture and fewer of the WWII generation alive to remember why this rights
architecture came to exist.

        [Source: from: https://www.ohchr.org/en/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=23130&LangID=E
                        © 2019 United Nations. Reprinted with the permission of the United Nations]




                                                                                                     Turn over
                                                       –4–                   M19/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

1
     Roma: an ethnic group of traveling people who originated in northern India
2
     European Union: The European Union (EU) is a political and economic union of
     certain European states
3
     Treaty of Maastricht: a treaty agreed by all European member states in 1993 which
     includes a section about political union and economic and monetary union
4
     authoritarian leaders: an individual who takes control of all the decisions, with little or
     no input from members of the group
5
     populist(s): a person, particularly a politician, who aims to appeal to ordinary people
     who feel that their concerns are ignored by established elite groups
6
     liberal order: the idea that international relations are organized around a number of
     principles such as multilateral institutions, free markets and liberal democracy and
     led by the US and its allies
7
     Facebook: an online social networking website with company headquarters in
     Silicon Valley, US.



1.      Identify what Source A says about the nature of human rights.                               [3]


2.      With explicit reference to Source B and to one example you have studied, suggest why free
        movement of people is viewed as important.                                                  [4]


3.      Compare the challenges to human rights as described in Source C and Source D.               [8]


4.     To what extent do you agree with the claim that conflict poses the greatest threat to the
       evolution of rights? Use all the sources and your own knowledge.                            [10]




