M17/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                       Markscheme


                               May 2017


                 Business management


                         Standard level


                               Paper 2




23 pages
                               –2–                M17/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is the property of the International Baccalaureate
and must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Global Centre, Cardiff.
                                                  –3–             M17/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The following are the annotations available to use when marking responses.

             Annotation                  Explanation               Associated shortcut

                           AE - Attempts Evaluation                          Alt+7


                           BOD - Benefit of the doubt                        Alt+0


                           CKS - Clear Knowledge Shown


                           Cross - Incorrect point


                           DES - Descriptive                                 Alt+2


                           EE - Effective evaluation                         Alt+4


                           GA - Good Analysis


                           GD - Good Definition


                           GEXA - Good Example


                           GEXP - Good Explanation                           Alt+9

                 GP        GP - Good Point                                   Alt+5

                           H Line - Underline tool


                           Highlight - Highlight tool


                           IR - Irrelevant

                           IU - Inappropriate Use


                           LD - Lacks Depth


                           LLS - Lacks Logical Structure
                                               –4–                M17/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



                          NAQ - Not Answered Question                    Alt+6


                          NBOD - No benefit of the doubt                 Alt+8


                          NE - Not enough

                          On Page Comment - On page                      Alt+3
                          comment tool

                          P - Paragraphing


                          PE - Poorly expressed


                          QuestionMark - Unclear


                          SEEN_Small - Seen


                          Tick Colourable                                Alt+1


                          TV - Too vague


                          UR - Unbalanced Response


You must make sure you have looked at all pages. Please put the      annotation on any blank page,
to indicate that you have seen it.
                                         –5–               M17/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The markbands and assessment criteria on pages 5–7 should be used where indicated in
the markscheme.

    Marks     Level descriptor

      0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

     1–2      •   Little understanding of the demands of the question.
              •   Few business management tools (where applicable), techniques and
                  theories are explained or applied, and business management
                  terminology is lacking.
              •   Little reference to the stimulus material.

     3–4      •   Some understanding of the demands of the question.
              •   Some relevant business management tools (where applicable),
                  techniques and theories are explained or applied, and some
                  appropriate terminology is used.
              •   Some reference to the stimulus material but often not going beyond
                  the name of a person(s) and/or the name of the organization.

     5–6      •   Understanding of most of the demands of the question.
              •   Relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques
                  and theories are explained and applied, and appropriate terminology
                  is used most of the time.
              •   Some reference to the stimulus material that goes beyond the name
                  of a person(s) and/or the name of the organization.
              •   Some evidence of a balanced response.
              •   Some judgments are relevant but not substantiated.

     7–8      •   Good understanding of the demands of the question.
              •   Relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques
                  and theories are explained and applied well, and appropriate
                  terminology is used.
              •   Good reference to the stimulus material.
              •   Good evidence of a balanced response.
              •   The judgments are relevant but not always well substantiated.

     9–10     •   Good understanding of the demands of the question, including
                  implications, where relevant.
              •   Relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques
                  and theories are explained clearly and applied purposefully, and
                  appropriate terminology is used throughout the response.
              •   Effective use of the stimulus material in a way that significantly
                  strengthens the response.
              •   Evidence of balance is consistent throughout the response.
              •   The judgments are relevant and well substantiated.
                                                  –6–                M17/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Assessment criteria for Section C

Criterion A: Knowledge and conceptual understanding
This criterion addresses the extent to which the candidate demonstrates knowledge and
understanding of the given concepts and relevant business management content (theories,
techniques or tools, depending on the requirements of the question).

Marks    Level descriptor
  0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
  1      Superficial knowledge of the given concepts is demonstrated. Business
         management content is not selected or the content selected is irrelevant.
  2      Satisfactory understanding of one or both of the given concepts is demonstrated.
         Some business management content selected is relevant. The relevant content is
         satisfactorily explained.
  3      Good understanding of one or both of the given concepts is demonstrated.
         The business management content selected is relevant, though it may not be
         sufficient. The relevant content is generally well explained, though the explanation
         may lack some depth or breadth.
  4      Good understanding of both of the given concepts is demonstrated. The business
         management content selected is relevant, sufficient and well explained.


Criterion B: Application
This criterion addresses the extent to which the candidate is able to apply the given concepts
and the relevant business management content (theories, techniques or tools, depending on
the requirements of the question) to his or her chosen real-world organization(s). The real-
world organization(s) must not be the organization featured in the prescribed case
study for paper 1.

Marks    Level descriptor
  0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
  1      The given concepts and/or any relevant business management content are
         connected to the real-world organization(s), but this connection is inappropriate or
         superficial.
   2     The given concepts and/or relevant business management content are connected
         appropriately to the real-world organization(s), but this connection is not developed.
   3     The given concepts and relevant business management content are generally well
         applied to explain the situation and issues of the real-world organization(s), though
         the explanation may lack some depth or breadth. Examples are provided.
   4     The given concepts and relevant business management content are well applied to
         explain the situation and issues of the real-world organization(s). Examples are
         appropriate and illustrative.
                                                   –7–                M17/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion C: Reasoned arguments
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate makes reasoned arguments. This
includes making relevant and balanced arguments by, for example, exploring different
practices, weighing up their strengths and weaknesses, comparing and contrasting them or
considering their implications, depending on the requirements of the question. It also
includes justifying the arguments by presenting reasonable evidence or other support for the
claims made.

Marks     Level descriptor
  0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
  1       Statements are made but these are superficial.
  2       Relevant arguments are made but these are mostly unjustified.
  3       Relevant arguments are made and these are mostly justified.
  4       Relevant, balanced arguments are made and these are well justified.


Criterion D: Structure
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate organizes his or her ideas with
clarity, and presents a structured piece of writing comprised of:

•   an introduction
•   a body
•   a conclusion
•   fit-for-purpose paragraphs.

Marks     Level descriptor
  0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
  1       Two or fewer of the structural elements are present, and few ideas are clearly
          organized.
    2     Three of the structural elements are present, or most ideas are clearly organized.
    3     Three or four of the structural elements are present, and most ideas are clearly
          organized.
    4     All of the structural elements are present, and ideas are clearly organized.


Criterion E: Individuals and societies
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate is able to give balanced
consideration to the perspectives of a range of relevant stakeholders, including individuals
and groups internal and external to the organization.

Marks     Level descriptor
  0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
  1       One individual or group perspective is considered superficially or inappropriately.
  2       One relevant individual or group perspective is considered appropriately, or two
          relevant individual or group perspectives are considered superficially or
          inappropriately.
    3     At least two relevant individual or group perspectives are considered appropriately.
    4     Balanced consideration is given to relevant individual and group perspectives.
                                                    –8–               M17/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                               Section A
1.   (a)   Define the term price skimming.                                                             [2]

           Price skimming is setting prices high when introducing a new product to the market.
           This strategy typically works only for a limited time, as competitors will respond to
           the new product with innovations to their own products. As competitors introduce
           new products in response, demand for the original company’s product (the company
           price skimming) falls, and prices must be lowered.


           Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.


           Award [1] for a basic definition conveying the idea that price skimming involves setting a high
           price for a new product. Award and additional [1] mark for extra relevant information, such
           as the idea that the product is unique or differentiated from competitors’ products or that the
           price will fall over time. Maximum award: [2].



     (b)   (i)    Calculate the values of X and Y in Table 1 (no working required).                    [2]

                  X = $2200 (millions of dollars)
                  Y = $1500 (millions of dollars)


                  Award [1] mark for each correct answer up to a maximum of [2].

           (ii)   Construct a profit and loss account for SE for 2015 and 2016.                        [4]

                                                                  2015            2016
                  Sales revenue                                   4300            5100
                  Cost of goods sold                              2100            2300
                  Gross profit                                    2200            2800
                  Expenses                                        1200            1300
                  Net profit before interest and tax              1000            1500


                  Award [4] if both profit and loss accounts are correct. Award [3] if the
                  candidate correctly formats both profit and loss accounts, but has one
                  mathematical error.
                  If a candidate does not correctly format the profit and loss accounts or has two
                  mathematical errors, award [2]. Award [1] if the candidate demonstrates
                  some understanding of a profit and loss account but otherwise has numerous
                  errors.


                  Own figure rule applies. Many candidates will probably rough out a P & L on scratch
                  paper to produce answers for 1(b)(i) and then neatly reproduce the P & L on the
                  examination paper. If a candidate makes a mathematical error in (b)(i) and makes the
                  same error in (b)(ii), apply the OFR.
                                               –9–                 M17/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(c)   Calculate net current assets (working capital) for 2016 (show all your working).                  [2]

      Net current assets (working capital) is calculated by subtracting current liabilities
      from current assets (all in millions of dollars):
      Current assets − Current liabilities = Net current assets
      $700 − $300 = $400



      Writing out “current assets – current liabilities = net current assets” is not sufficient for getting
      the [1] for correct working. Candidates must write out $700 – 300 = 400.



      Award [1] for the correct working and [1] for the correct answer. Award up to a
      maximum of [2].
                                                 – 10 –             M17/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   (a)   Outline two appropriate external short-term sources of finance for Anubis other
           than loans from family and friends.                                                    [2]


           The sources of finance suggested must be external and short term – therefore the only four
           rewardable answers are:

             •       Trade credit
             •       Factoring
             •       Overdraft
             •       Short-term bank loan

           Award [1] per correct source identified up to a maximum of [2]. However, if a candidate
           outlines overdraft and short-term bank loan, maximum award [1].


           Award [1] per correct source identified up to a maximum of [2].

     (b)   Using the information above, prepare a fully labelled cash flow forecast from
           January to March 2018.                                                                 [5]

                                       Jan         Feb        Mar
           Opening balance              8000        2000       1000
           Inflows:
           Sales                      300 000    300 000    300 000
           Tax refund                              3000
           Total cash inflows         300 000    303 000    300 000

           Outflows:
           Rent                         2000
           Packaging                   15 000     15 000     15 000
           Wages                       50 000     50 000     50 000
           Cost of sales              220 000    220 000    220 000
           Heating and lighting         4000       4000       4000
           Delivery                    15 000     15 000     15 000
           Total cash outflows        306 000    304 000    304 000

           Net cash flow              <6000>     <1000>      <4000>
           Closing balance              2000       1000      <3000>


           Award [1] if the candidate has some idea of an annual cash-flow forecast but
           otherwise has numerous errors. Award [2] if the cash flow has three or more errors
           or has a largely inaccurate format. Award [3] if it is largely formatted correctly
           and/or has two errors. Award [4] for a correctly formatted forecast with just one
           error. Award [5] for a correctly formatted and mathematically correct forecast.
                                          – 11 –               M17/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(c) Comment on the predicted cash flow for Anubis for 2018.                                 [3]

    The cash flow forecast is a cause for concern. The forecast covers the first three
    months of 2018 but the closing balance worsens each month and is forecasted to be
    negative in March. Thereafter, Anubis faces lower gross profit margin because of
    lower retail prices of phone cases and higher wages costs. Given that the market is
    increasingly competitive, Anubis may not be able to generate sufficient additional
    sales revenue to offset the lower gross profit margin. Thus, the situation for Anubis
    is not promising.


    Award [1] for recognition that the business’s cash flow position is predicted to
    deteriorate.

    Award [1] for each additional relevant comment related to the stimulus and
    specifically referring to it, up to [2]. Maximum award: [3].


    N.B. The candidate’s commentary should be based upon the cash flow numbers that were
    produced in 2(b). Examiners should follow a procedure similar to the Own Figure Rule.
    Even if the candidate’s cash flow numbers are extremely inaccurate, the candidate can still
    comment on them. The comment should be logically dependent on the numbers produced in
    2 (b).
                                                 – 12 –              M17/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                              Section B
3.   (a)   Outline two common steps taken by a business in recruitment.                           [2]

           Common steps taken by a business in the process of recruitment include:
           • identifying position
           • evaluating the requirements for the position
           • developing a job description
           • determining recruitment plan
           • determining search committee
           • advertizing position
           • reviewing applicants and developing a list to interview
           • conducting interviews
           • selecting the candidate that best fits the description
           • offering position and negotiating terms.

           Accept any other relevant step in the process of recruitment.


           Award [1] for each step identified up to a maximum of [2].

     (b)   (i)   Explain two disadvantages for Wire of introducing a piece rate system of
                 wages for its cleaning staff.                                                    [4]

                 • Housekeepers may stop worrying as much about the quality of the job they
                   do, instead only worrying about the number of rooms they can clean per
                   hour to achieve greater earnings.
                 • The piece rate method may also discourage teamwork in the workplace
                   because individual housekeepers simply want to complete more of their
                   own work.
                 • The increased stress that results from having to clean more rooms may
                   result in increased staff turnover and make it more difficult to recruit
                   housekeepers in the future.
                 • Staff may become demotivated because they now have to clean more
                   rooms for less pay.
                 • The piece rate system could damage Wire’s relationship with its customers
                   such as Dales as the bad press could lead Wire’s customers not to renew
                   contracts.

                 N.B. Piece rates are usually considered a motivator, not a de-motivator.
                 Candidates may be awarded marks for saying piece rates demotivate
                 provided that have a clear and logical explanation based upon the
                 circumstances of the case.

                 Mark as 2+2.

                 Award [1] for stating a disadvantage and an additional [1] for its explanation
                 with reference to Wire. Award a maximum of [2].
                                              – 13 –             M17/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


      (ii)    Calculate the financial impact on cleaners employed by Wire from the
              introduction of the piece rate system in 2016 (show all your working).             [2]

              Wages earned in time-based system = $6 × 8 × 5 = $240 per week [1].

              Wages earned using new piece rate system = $2 × 20 × 5 = $200 per week [1].

              Financial impact on cleaners = $40 per week. The question does not specify a
              time frame. Therefore, accept any time frame as long as the candidate is
              consistent. For example, $6 x 8 = $48 and $2 x 20 =$40. Financial impact on
              cleaners =$8 per day.


      (iii)   Calculate the change in cleaning costs per room from the introduction of the
              piece rate system used by Wire.                                                    [2]

              Cleaning wage cost per room in old system = $6 × 8 divided by 13 rooms
              = $3.69 per room [1].

              New system: $2 per room, therefore the change in cleaning costs = $1.69 per
              room [1].

              Own Figure Rule applies.



(c)   Recommend if Dales should stop outsourcing the cleaning of hotel rooms.                   [10]

      If Dales stops outsourcing its cleaners then costs will rise. Outsourcing did cut costs
      per room from 5 % of room revenues to 2 % – this is likely to be reversed if they stop
      outsourcing, unless of course they operate the same system as used by Wire: a
      piece rate system. Costs could, in the short run, increase – Dales will now be
      responsible for training and recruitment costs, which are unavoidable. These costs
      could be significant, especially since in 2016 Dales’s profits decreased from $24 m
      to $4 m. This increase in costs could cause them to make a loss at least in the short
      term.

      However, stopping outsourcing will not deal with Dales’s other problems – wage
      rates at Dales are below the average for the hotel industry. Consequently, staff
      turnover is high. Recruitment is difficult due to the number of hotels in the area and
      the wages paid.

      Cessation of outsourcing of cleaners will have no impact on these issues.

      Hotel guests may find that their rooms are cleaned to a higher standard if Dales
      returns to having cleaners only clean 13 rooms per day rather than 20. However, if
      Dales sticks with the piece rate system adopted by Wire then nothing will really
      change and poorly cleaned rooms may continue to be an issue.

      Hotel guests are critical not just about room cleanliness but also about food quality
      and poor customer service across the hotel. Cleaner rooms may help reduce the
      fall in room bookings but unless other concerns such as food quality and customer
      service are challenged then insourcing of cleaners may do little to arrest the decline
      in bookings.
                                                – 14 –             M17/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


        Certainly, it is a step in the right direction, but Dales’s problems appear deeper than
        just poorly cleaned rooms and unless these are dealt with the future looks grim.

        Dales operates in a highly competitive market and unless it offers wages on par with
        rival hotels then staff turnover will remain high. Continued high labour turnover will
        not help it establish better customer care and may be a significant factor in the poor
        quality of food sold in the hotel. Dales is positioned as a high-price and high-quality
        hotel – guests that pay high prices expect good food, polite staff and a clean room.


        In order to reach the top bands of the markscheme candidates must demonstrate
        that insourcing will only solve one of Dales’s problems and must discuss the
        importance of the other factors in contributing to their falling room occupancy rates.


        Accept any other relevant evaluation.

        The table below should be followed (along with the markbands on page 5).

        These mark awards in the table below should be viewed as maximums. That is, just
        because a candidate has one argument for outsourcing and one argument against
        does not mean that they will automatically get a 4. One strong argument for one
        side and merely a weak or nominal argument for the other side might result in a 3.

 Maximum                  Should Dales stop outsourcing?               Judgments/conclusion
Mark award
     3               One argument for or against. Not merely an                  N/A
                              assertion, but an argument
    4                           One argument for and                             N/A
                                one argument against
                      Or, two or more arguments for one side of
                           argument and none for the other
    5                  Two arguments for one side, one for the                   N/A
                                         other
    6                Two arguments for, two arguments against                     No
                                                                        judgments/conclusions
   7–8                Two arguments for, two arguments against         Judgments/conclusions
                     plus a conclusion that is more than nominal –     based upon analysis
                           actually flows out of the analysis.         and explanation in the
                                                                       body of the response
                      Largely effective use of business language
                                    and the stimulus
  9–10                Two arguments for, two arguments against         Two arguments for, two
                     plus a conclusion that is more than nominal –     arguments against plus
                           actually flows out of the analysis.           a conclusion that is
                                                                        more than nominal –
                       Rich use of business language, business         actually flows out of the
                               theory and the stimulus                         analysis.


        Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 5.
                                                  – 15 –               M17/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   (a)   Describe one characteristic of a niche market.                                       [2]

           Characteristics of a niche market include that they:
           • are narrow
           • are smaller than most markets or a fraction of a market
           • often require specialized processes (marketing or operations) to fill the niche
           • more specific in terms of features or quality of the product or service
           • given the above niche markets or segments may be characterized as having
             higher final prices to consumers.

           Accept other relevant characteristics of a niche market. Candidates are not
           expected to word their responses exactly as above.


           Award [1] for identification of a characteristic of a niche market.
           Award [2] for a full, clear description of the characteristic. Meaningful
           exemplification would qualify as a description deserving two marks.

     (b)   With reference to SV, explain one advantage and one disadvantage of using
           secondary market research.                                                           [4]

           Advantages of secondary market research include:
           • Efficient in terms of time – the data on wine consumption patterns, for example,
             has already been collected by someone else and is available.
           • Effective in terms of cost – often, secondary research is free and, when not, is
             typically less expensive than the process of gathering primary research.
           • Often, ample secondary research exists. On certain topics or related to certain
             markets, secondary research can be extensive. It has allowed SV to consider
             new geographical markets which it may not have considered before.
           • Others have often thought through many of the core issues and a business can
             benefit from the insights of experts of collated data and written about them.

           Disadvantages of secondary research include:
           • Lack of precise focus on the issue or problem concerning a business
           • Lack of timeliness – often secondary research is outdated
           • Uncertainty about the quality of the data collection/research.


           Mark as 2+2.

           Award [1] for each advantage and disadvantage identified and award an additional
           [1] each if explained with application to SV.
                                             – 16 –               M17/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(c)   Given the intense competition, explain two pricing strategies SV might consider.            [4]

      Pricing strategies that SV might consider include:
      • Cost-plus (mark-up) – SV may want to return to this pricing strategy, which
         guarantees that for each bottle of wine it sells the business is covering its per unit
         costs. However, SV’s brand identity might suffer if it lowered prices.
      • Penetration – SV could use this pricing strategy as it enters new markets.
         Penetration pricing would allow SV to attract first-time customers in new markets
         with lower-than-normal pricing. Once some brand loyalty develops, SV could
         then raise prices.
      • Psychological – Whereas psychological pricing sometimes refers to pricing below
         certain thresholds ($9.99 rather than $10.00) for a psychological effect, another
         form of psychological pricing is pricing a product high as a way of suggesting that
         the product is of high quality or value. SV might try to strengthen its brand
         identity with psychological pricing along this line, especially as the competition is
         intense.
      • Loss leader – SV could try a loss-leader strategy, whereby it sells one of its wines
         at very low prices in an attempt to get consumers to buy SV wines. Other
         varieties of SV wines, however, would be priced in a fashion to compensate for
         the losses on the one type. This strategy, like others involving attracting
         customers through low prices, could weaken SV’s brand identity.
      • Price discrimination – SV might consider is price discrimination, where SV sets
         the prices based upon the market that it is entering. For example, SV might
         charge more for wines in New York City than in Charlotte, NC. Both cities (major
         banking centres in the United States) have upscale buyers. Nevertheless, prices
         of virtually all types of goods and services cost less in Charlotte than in
         New York.
      • Premium pricing – Though premium pricing is not in the guide, candidates are
         free to use it if they wish. Premium pricing occurs when a business inflates its
         prices precisely to enhance brand value. Consumers think that, by paying more,
         they are getting a better product.
      • Promotional pricing – setting pricing very low for a short period to get customers
         to buy your product, often for the first time.
      • Value-based pricing – setting a price based upon what consumers perceive the
         value of the product to be rather than on the actual cost to produce.

      Accept other pricing strategies as long as there is a clear indication of why this may
      be acceptable to SV. Do not accept predatory pricing.
      N.B. Candidates must actually name pricing strategies. “Lowering prices” and “Increasing
      prices” are not pricing strategies.


      Mark as 2+2.

      Award [1] for each appropriate pricing strategy explained and [1] for application to
      the stimulus.
                                            – 17 –              M17/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(d)   Recommend which of Option 1 and Option 2 SV should consider in order to
      increase sales.                                                                          [10]

      SV is considering two options:

      Option 1: open a business-to-consumer (B2C) e-commerce “store”.

      This option would involve selling wines online to consumers. They currently sell
      directly to customers at the vineyard.

      Benefits of this approach include:
      • SV can reach a wide market area.
      • The website and consumer traffic on the website is relatively inexpensive
        advertizing. It is important for a new company trying to enter new markets to
        keep costs of entry low.
      • Promotion and advertizing can easily be extended via social network sites.
      • Online offers can reach much wider target markets.
      • From a consumer perspective, B2C e-commerce also has benefits, especially the
        convenience and ability to compare prices and explain the differences between
        wines sold to make an informed decision. Important in a premium market.

      B2C e-commerce also has disadvantages, which include:
      • SV would have to address consumer concerns that its site is secure.
      • SV would have to incur costs making sure that the site is secure.
      • Competitors can easily track what SV is doing to promote and sell its products
      • Setting up the website and establishing the procedures for fulfilling orders could
        be expensive. New supply chains to reach new customers may have to be
        created adding to short-term costs.
      • Alcohol is a heavily regulated product, especially in the United States, and it
        could be complicated and cumbersome for SV making sure that it is in
        compliance with federal and state laws (and laws regarding alcohol vary from
        state to state).
      • SV would also have to make sure that selling wines online did not conflict with the
        premium brand identity that SV otherwise tries to maintain.

      Option 2: sell SV wines to wholesalers serving the whole of the US market for
      premium wines.

      Advantages of this approach include:
      • The wholesaler stores the product, thereby reducing storage costs for SV.
      • The wholesaler purchases in bulk and then breaks the bulk purchases into
        smaller batches for the retailers. This process means that SV does not have to
        concern itself with small orders by individual retailers. This may be important in a
        premium market.
      • Because SV wants to sell over long distances – the entire United States – this
        approach pushes much of the complicated processes of distribution to
        wholesalers.

        However, working with wholesalers has disadvantages:
      • Wholesalers sell the products of many companies, and their loyalties and highest
        priorities may be with other brands.
      • Working with wholesalers adds another intermediary and mark-up, which can
        lead to higher prices to consumers (who may respond by purchasing other
        products) or to thinner margins for SV.
                                              – 18 –               M17/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


        • Working through wholesalers and distributing across the United States, SV may
          not be able to afford national promotion. If it cannot, it will have to rely on the
          wholesalers and retailers for much of its promotion. Can SV be confident that the
          wholesales will position SV’s new wines positively? How will they check?

        Overall, option 2 is possibly the longer term option, involves considerable costs, is
        potentially the greater risk, but the profits could be considerable over option 1.
        Option 1 is a market penetration strategy effectively trying to sell the same product
        in the same market via an online channel. Initially, customers who would have
        bought directly from the vineyard could go online instead. Overall sales may
        increase marginally. This will change over time as the e-commerce store becomes
        more sustainable but from the information given in the stimulus, option 2 would
        seem to have the greater market potential for growth. (Market development to use
        the Ansoff terminology but direct application to the matrix is not expected.)

        Balance in the context of this question means having at least one advantage and
        one disadvantage for each option (and, thus, addressing both options).


        Accept any other relevant evaluation.
        These mark awards in the table below should be viewed as maximums.

 Maximum                   Option 1                Option 2           Judgments/conclusion
Mark award
     3                        One option unbalanced                             N/A
     4               One option balanced (one argument for and                  N/A
                     one argument against) or both options in an
                                unbalanced fashion
    5                    One balanced and one unbalanced                        N/A
    6                              Both balanced                                 No
                                                                       judgments/conclusions
   7-8                                 Balanced                       Judgments/conclusions
                                                                      based upon analysis
                      Largely effective use of business language      and explanation in the
                                   and the stimulus                   body of the response
   9-10                                Balanced                       Judgments/conclusions
                                                                      based upon analysis
                                                                      and explanation in the
                       Rich use of business language, business        body of the response
                               theory, and the stimulus


        Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 5.
                                                  – 19 –               M17/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


5.   (a)   Outline two features of an autocratic leadership style.                                    [2]

           • Decision making in an organization is restricted to a very small group of select
             individuals.
           • Limited consultation and discussion in an organization given by autocratic
             leadership.
           • Communication tends to be downward and one-way only.


           Award [1] for each correct feature identified.

     (b)   Apply Daniel Pink’s motivation theory to the programmers at Gen Y.                         [6]

           Daniel Pink’s motivation theory identifies that there are three key drivers, or factors,
           that influence motivation for cognitive or thinking tasks leading to improved
           performance for a business. The three key drivers are:
           • mastery
           • autonomy
           • purpose.

           From the stimulus we can argue that, before Petra’s potential involvement, Gen Y
           allows for:
           • Purpose – high-quality reports providing innovative market research. The
               business is providing revolutionary work for its clients. This would act as a
               motivator for Gen Y programmers as they are carrying out ground-breaking work.
           • Autonomy – Gen Y allows for employees to work on individual dream projects.
               They are also empowered to make their own decisions.
           • Mastery – there is evidence from the stimulus that Gen Y has used cognitive
               training. This would presumably build capacity to develop and refine skills of the
               programmers, again boosting motivation according to Pink and allowing them to
               be more creative.


           Award [1] if there is some or partial understanding shown of Pink’s motivation
           theory, the answer is not complete and not applied to Gen Y.

           Award [2] if there is a much better understanding of Daniel Pink’s theory. All three
           drivers of motivation are identified. There is no application to Pink with the answer
           being merely theoretical. Just mentioning the name of the business does not
           constitute application.

           Award [3] when three drivers are identified and one is applied to the stimulus or two
           drivers identified and both applied to the stimulus.

           Award [4] when three drivers are identified and two applied to the stimulus.

           Award [5] when three drivers are identified and three applied to the stimulus.

           N.B. For mark awards in the [3-5] range, the application does not have to be
           exactly as above. For example, some candidates may argue that the ability to work
           on their dream projects may provide purpose and/or also means autonomy.

           Award [6] when three drivers are identified and three are applied to the stimulus
           largely as outlined above. Each application must be to a different element of the
           stimulus.
                                             – 20 –              M17/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(c)   Explain one reason, other than increased sales revenue, why it is important that
      Gen Y generates new revenue streams.                                                        [2]

      Gen Y’s core business is the creation of innovative market research data reports.
      The business also allows employees to work on “dream projects” during the working
      week. In order to remain innovative and sustainable, Gen Y will need to secure new
      finance through new revenue streams to ensure that the creative and innovative
      energy continues to flow. New revenue streams will also allow Gen Y to continue to
      motivate workers through their Pink motivational model, which could be expensive to
      finance given the cognitive training required. The company has not yet made a
      profit, so generating alternative revenue streams would be essential, especially if
      salary costs need to rise to attract new talent in the future.


      Award [1] if a reason other than increasing sales revenue is given and explained,
      with reference to Gen Y for [2].


(d)   Discuss whether Zack should sell Petra half of his shares with her conditions.             [10]

      By selling his shares to Petra, Zack faces concerns not only of ownership but also
      that the culture of Gen Y – which by assumption has led to the success and
      motivation of employees – will have to be systematically changed. It is uncertain at
      this stage whether this change in culture will bring forward any improvements.

      In common with many other start-ups, profit for Gen Y remains elusive despite the
      considerable sums invested. Zack has tried to finance “dream projects” to turn
      inventions into innovation but without success. The harsh reality is that without
      funding coming into the business, the long-term sustainability of Gen Y is in doubt.
      If he does not take some action now and invite Petra into the business, then all jobs
      and intellectual property at Gen Y are under threat. Some programmers may leave
      the company if they sense that for some reason the opportunity to work on dream
      projects is cut back. Taking on Petra as a partner may weaken Zack’s control but
      will ensure in the short term that Gen Y remains viable.

      However, to receive this funding, Petra has added conditions that Zack must accept.
      These conditions will not be popular in an organization where there are strong links
      to Daniel Pink’s motivational theory. A leadership style change to autocratic will
      impact on the autonomy currently enjoyed by the employees. The purpose may
      also be affected, as Petra will wish to have a strong influence in the type of vision or
      direction, she wishes to see Gen Y move to. The ending of innovative and
      revolutionary “dream projects” may be the first casualty. Motivation could be
      destroyed.

      Further, the insistence on specific targets for programmers may impose
      deadlines/restrictions, which may be too much for the employees to take who have
      been empowered to make their own decisions.

      The short-term situation is difficult for Zack. He has to balance the financial issues
      present in the case study with the idealism and motivation of his workforce. Petra’s
      conditions, whilst restrictive, may save Gen Y. Zack may be forced to sell this idea
      of Petra receiving half his shares to his employees. Some employees may quit and
      be hired by competitors but perhaps they may not have been committed to Gen Y
      and Zack’s purpose. Either way, Zack will find it difficult to turn down Petra’s offer.
                                          – 21 –              M17/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


 Maximum           Discuss whether Zack should sell Petra         Judgments/conclusion
Mark award          half of his shares with her conditions.
     3            One argument for or against. Not merely an                N/A
                           assertion, but an argument
    4                         One argument for and                          N/A
                             One argument against
                   Or, two or more arguments for one side of
                        argument and none for the other
    5               Two arguments for one side, one for the                 N/A
                                      other
    6             Two arguments for, two arguments against                   No
                                                                   judgments/conclusions
   7–8             Two arguments for, two arguments against       Judgments/conclusions
                  plus a conclusion that is more than nominal –   based upon analysis
                        actually flows out of the analysis.       and explanation in the
                                                                  body of the response
                   Largely effective use of business language
                                 and the stimulus
  9–10             Two arguments for, two arguments against       Two arguments for, two
                  plus a conclusion that is more than nominal –   arguments against plus
                        actually flows out of the analysis.         a conclusion that is
                                                                   more than nominal –
                    Rich use of business language, business       actually flows out of the
                            theory and the stimulus                       analysis.


         Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 5.
                                                  – 22 –              M17/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                               Section C
Please mark the candidate response using the assessment criteria on pages 6 to 7.

Additional examiner guidance may be added during standardization.

6.    With reference to an organization of your choice, examine the impact of globalization on
      innovation.

7.    With reference to an organization of your choice, examine the impact of ethics on
      organizational strategy.

8.    With reference to an organization of your choice, discuss the ways in which culture can
      promote or inhibit change.


Candidates can use any change in the organization provided the nature of the change is well explained
and applied.
It is important that the candidate explain what existed before the change rather than just assert that
change has occurred.

In Q7 and Q8, the exact content is not specified. It is expected that the candidates select their content
like their chosen strategy or the exact change and fully and clearly explain and apply the relevant
theoretical terms and content throughout.

Additional guidance in relation to the assessment criteria

For each criterion, the aim is to find the descriptor that conveys most accurately the level
attained by the candidate, using the best-fit model. It is not necessary for every single aspect
of a level descriptor to be met for that mark to be awarded.

• The highest level descriptors do not imply faultless performance and should be achievable
  by a candidate.
• A candidate who attains a high level of achievement for one criterion will not necessarily
  reach high levels of achievement for the other criteria and vice versa.

If only one concept is addressed:
Criteria A, B, C and E: award up to a maximum [3].
Criterion D: full marks can be awarded.

Where the question asks for the impact of two concepts on content, examiners must allow
for unbalanced treatment of the two concepts throughout a candidate’s response. One
concept may be more significant than the other.

It is expected that under the introduction, the candidates introduce the chosen organisation,
explain nature of the relevant concepts to be use when discussing the impact.


Criterion A
It is expected that the candidate use the relevant concepts throughout the response to
demonstrate the understanding of the concept. It is not sufficient just to define/ describe the
concept in the introduction.
                                                 – 23 –             M17/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B
For [2]: “…connection is not developed” should be treated the same as superficial.

Criterion C
1+1 arguments are expected per concepts.
• Questions 6 to 8 require consideration of the impact of one concept on a second concept
   – therefore accept 2+2 arguments for a balanced response.
• Justification is through logic or data.
• For [2] there is no balance as there are no counter arguments at all, or the arguments are
   all one-sided then this would be unjustified.
• For [3] there is some balanced arguments – some of which are justified.
The arguments and the counter arguments must be relevant/ appropriate for the
question. Do not accept any counter argument which does not address the question.

Criterion D
• Introductions need to be concise and related to the question.
• The candidate’s response does not to have explicit headings for each structural element.
• A body is the area in which the substance of arguments occur. It is usually located
   between the introduction and the conclusion.
• Fit-for-purpose paragraph means that ideas are presented in a clear academic way. For
   example, one idea per paragraph.

Criterion E
• One example of an “individual” could be an individual consumer or an individual manager.
   However this could not be considered with a “group” of consumers or a management
   team.
• For [4], a balanced response: need to look at the perspectives of both individual and
   group(s). The chosen individual, group needs to be applicable and relevant to the
   question with specific explanation.
• Candidates need to go beyond stating the stakeholder.
• Candidates need not explicitly say “stakeholder”.
• Candidates should support their assertions on the impact on or the impact of their chosen
   stakeholders. The support does not have to come in real figures but with some evidence
   of impact for example, ‘the market share increased’ ‘staff turnover decreased’, ‘fewer
   defects were evident’.

In the event that, when answering paper 2, section C, a candidate chooses an organization from some
other part of the exam (for example, an organization in the stimulus of section B), their response should
be marked as follows:
A – 1 mark maximum, as the candidate might understand the essence of the two concepts but the
content selected is irrelevant
B – 0 marks, as there is no connection to a real organization.
C – 0 marks, as statements cannot be even superficial as the statements are not about a real
organization.
D – 2 marks maximum. Even with technically perfect presentation, the ideas are not about a real
organization. Award [2] if the response is well written with an introduction, fit-for-purpose paragraphs,
and a conclusion. Award [1] mark if the essay is missing one of those elements, provided that the
response is otherwise of a reasonable standard of writing and organization.
E – 1 mark, for inappropriate consideration of stakeholders. Award [1] if a candidate demonstrates some
understanding of what a stakeholder is through either definition or exemplification.
