M17/3/BUSMT/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS




Business management
Case study: Utopia


For use in May 2017




Instructions to candidates
yyCase study booklet required for higher level paper 1 and standard level paper 1 business
  management examinations.




                                                                                              2217 – 5001
     4 pages                                              © International Baccalaureate Organization 2017
                                                –2–               M17/3/BUSMT/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

                                                   Utopia




     John Ariki is an entrepreneur who owns 100 % of the shares of the private limited company
     Utopia, a holiday resort located on the island of Ratu, in the Pacific Islands. Utopia offers a
     once-in-a-lifetime tourist experience. Frequent visitors are film stars. Utopia is positioned as
     a unique experience in the Pacific Islands and offers exceptional levels of comfort and service.
 5   When guests rent a villa, Utopia provides a private boat and crew to transport them around
     the island at any time, day or night. Utopia relies heavily on word of mouth for promotion. On
     several occasions, video clips of Utopia have gone viral on the internet.

     The original business plan for Utopia in 2000 included twelve villas, the first of which John built
     himself. Local craftsmen built the remainder using traditional materials. John has revised the
10   business plan and the resort now has 24 villas. He believes that a major factor in the success
     of Utopia is local craftsmanship. John insists that the villas reflect the culture of the Pacific
     Islands. For example, he deliberately resists pressure from external stakeholders to expand
     Utopia’s capacity.

     Utopia obtains ingredients for meals (served at the villas) on a just-in-time (JIT) basis from
15   neighbouring islands and award-winning coffee from the island of Aora. Even though coffee
     growers from Indonesia and Papua New Guinea have offered to supply Utopia with their finest
     coffee at much lower prices, John’s passion for ethically produced fair trade Aora coffee has
     caused him to refuse all alternatives. John is willing to pay his coffee suppliers in Aora prices
     well above those determined on the commodity markets. He believes that the beautiful location,
20   the local craftsmen and materials, and the local food and coffee together form the basis for the
     Utopia brand. John has a paternalistic approach to leadership.

     The success of Aora coffee served at Utopia inspired John to open a café in 2006 in the nearest
     main town on Ratu. He called the café JAC and owns it as a sole trader. JAC is product
     oriented. It offers espresso and high-quality food, and roasts its coffee beans on site, which
25   enhances the coffee drinking experience. John would like to educate coffee drinkers about
     the coffee. At the café, JAC has tastings, brochures, interactive displays and other attractions.
     Visiting JAC has become an important tourist activity in the region and JAC is now a famous
     brand. Using coffee beans from Aora, JAC began to win awards as a roaster and to distribute
     ground coffee in a number of neighbouring Pacific Islands.

30   The growth of JAC took John by surprise. In order to concentrate on Utopia, in 2011 he handed
     over the day-to-day operation of JAC to his twin children, Paul and Liza.
                                               –3–                M17/3/BUSMT/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

     Paul graduated from an IB school in Australia in 2008. He travelled worldwide to develop
     his business and life skills. He spent time in Seattle working in a youth hostel and became
     fascinated with Seattle’s coffee culture. Paul’s business thinking was inspired by a small
35   chain of coffee roasters and retailers that make significant donations to charities with the
     aim of eradicating human trafficking. Paul was not interested in a multinational coffee chain
     headquartered in Seattle. At JAC, Paul is in charge of marketing and operations. He has a
     special interest in product development and is constantly looking for ways to contribute to the
     local community.

40   Liza is JAC’s human resource manager and is in charge of finance. She is entrepreneurial and
     a visionary, and is frequently looking for new ways to expand the business. Unlike her father
     and brother, Liza imagines business opportunities on more than a local level. Liza argues that,
     given JAC’s considerable capacity for growth and brand loyalty, the business is not reaching its
     full potential and not following its original business plan. She argues that JAC could enter many
45   coffee markets around the world.

     In 2016, a natural disaster occurred on Ratu, damaging seven villas and destroying the
     remaining seventeen. Although John’s customers could continue to rent the seven remaining
     villas, Utopia experienced a sudden and substantial decrease in bookings. Later in that
     financial year, Utopia recorded its first financial loss in sixteen years. John decided to create
50   a crisis management plan and carry out contingency planning for cost, time, risks and safety.
     Believing that businesses should finance internal growth from internal sources, John refused
     offers of help to rebuild Utopia from external investors. Only internal sources of finance were
     used. John believed that outside investors would interfere with his vision for Utopia and JAC.

     Thinking of all his business interests (Utopia and JAC), John realized that he has to consider
55   new revenue streams. The natural disaster damaged Utopia’s positioning and threatened
     its long-term viability. He has asked Liza and Paul for advice on future options for growth.
     However, it was made clear that John would still decide on which option would be chosen and
     that the vision and social responsibility of Utopia and JAC would not be compromised.

     Paul is considering developing the brand of Utopia by selling customized souvenirs produced
60   by a three-dimensional (3D) printer. Improved internet connections and technology make the
     expensive 3D printing process a possibility. The gross profit margins on these customized
     souvenirs would be high, despite the fixed costs of the equipment. In addition, gaining
     experience with 3D printing might enable them to recognise and think about more opportunities
     for its use throughout John’s businesses. Capital expenditure of $10 000 would be required to
65   set up this untested printing service. Liza, however, is concerned that some people will perceive
     the souvenirs as inauthentic or cheap, which would devalue the Utopia brand.

     Liza favours expansion through the sale of JAC coffee to other markets, initially the Pacific
     islands of Fiji, Samoa and New Zealand. Her market research includes stratified sampling of
     these three markets. The market research has indicated some profit potential in Fiji and Samoa
70   and considerable profits in New Zealand. A concern for Liza is the challenge of delivering coffee
     beans from Aora to the three markets in a timely fashion so that the beans remain fresh (were
     cafés to serve coffee brewed from unfresh beans, the reputation of JAC’s coffee could suffer).
     JAC would also face many external factors in creating new distribution channels. Possible
     approaches to selling in these new markets could be through a strategic alliance, a joint venture
75   or franchising.




                                                                                              Turn over
                                                   –4–               M17/3/BUSMT/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

        John met with Liza and Paul to discuss their growth options. The rebuilding of Utopia in
        2016 cost more and took longer than originally anticipated. John knows that changes in the
        organizational structure and legal ownership of Utopia and JAC are inevitable regardless of
        which option(s) he chooses. Alternative suitable sources of finance should also be considered.
   80   While talking with Liza and Paul, John sketched out new possible organizational charts.


Additional terms not in the guide

Commodity market
Fair trade


Companies, products, or individuals named in this case study are fictitious and any similarities with
actual entities are purely coincidental.
