M17/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




Global politics
Higher level and standard level
Paper 1


Friday 28 April 2017 (afternoon)


1 hour 15 minutes


Instructions to candidates
yy Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
yy Answer all the questions.
yy The maximum mark for this examination paper is [25 marks].




                                                                                              2217 – 5951
     4 pages                                              © International Baccalaureate Organization 2017
                                                         –2–                      M17/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Unit 1      Power, sovereignty and international relations

                                                Global governance

Read all the sources carefully and answer all the questions that follow.

Source A                  Photo: People from 14 Pacific Island nations call for action against climate
                          change as part of the 350.org Pacific Warrior Day of Action (2013).




                               Please go to: www.abc.net.au/news/2013-03-04/
                               pacific-warriors-climate-change-action/4550898




Source B                  Adapted from “Paris climate change agreement: the world’s greatest diplomatic
                          success”, The Guardian, a UK daily newspaper, (2015).

The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) is one of the last remaining
forums in the world where every country, however small, is represented. With all 196 nations having a
say, the historic UN climate deal finalized in the Paris agreement has proven that compromise works.  
Developed and developing countries alike are required to limit their emissions to relatively safe levels.
Finance will be provided to poor nations to help them cut emissions and cope with the effects of extreme
weather. Countries affected by climate-related disasters will gain urgent aid.

The agreement concludes 23 years of international UN attempts to achieve collective action on this
global problem, following disagreement and failure, the refusal of the biggest producers to take part,
ineffective agreements, and ignored treaties.  In Paris the presence of the biggest ever gathering of
world leaders empowered their negotiators to move away from firmly established positions.  Some of the
smallest countries had difficulty in keeping up with the key meetings – many did not have the personnel
to attend them all – so small island states, the EU, and many of the least developed countries formed a
“coalition of high ambition”, negotiating together, with an agreed common interest. This was hailed as a
key factor in the end agreement.

 [Source: Adapted from: http://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/13/paris-climate-deal-cop-diplomacy-developing-
                                                     united-nations]
                                                   –3–                    M17/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Source C                Adapted from “Understanding COP211 and beyond: The US finds its voice on
                        climate change after two decades of failed diplomacy”, from the website of
                        The Brookings Institution, an American think tank which conducts research and
                        education in the social sciences (2015).

Until recently, climate diplomacy has challenged US presidents.  The three presidents before
Barack Obama struggled to reconcile domestic and international pressures, including from close
allies who pressed the United States for action.  The US was unable to commit to emission reduction
goals necessary for effective global action.  The absence of the US – the world’s largest producer
of greenhouse gases, and the wealthiest nation – weakened global climate negotiations, creating a
diplomatic stalemate2 and blocking global progress.

Since then, three factors have emerged that a motivated president has been able to exploit.  For the first
time US emissions are decreasing as a result of market forces and government policies, enabling the US
to take credit for progress and to commit to further reductions that would have seemed unrealistic just a
decade ago.  Fears that emission control would make US industry less competitive have been overcome
thanks to increased cooperation between the US and China.  Thirdly a new international plan calls for
countries to make commitments that will not, this time, be held as binding under international law. This
has created a more flexible negotiating environment and laid the groundwork for an agreement with the
US.


Source D                Adapted from “Gridlock3: the growing breakdown of global cooperation”, by
                        Thomas Hale, David Held and Kevin Young, summarising the argument in their
                        book: Gridlock: Why Global Cooperation is Failing When we Need it Most (2013).

Global co-operation is gridlocked3 across a range of issues.  The UN is paralyzed in the face of
growing insecurities across the world, and international cooperation seems to be increasingly difficult at
precisely the time when it is needed most.  In areas such as financial market instability, global poverty
and inequality, biodiversity losses, water deficits and climate change, multilateral and transnational
cooperation is now increasingly ineffective or almost non-existent.

The number of states has increased significantly in the last 70 years, so that the most basic costs of
global governance have grown.  As power shifts from West to East and North to South, a broader range
of participation is needed to deal effectively with nearly all global issues. The range of problems that
require co-operation has also evolved. Problems are both now more extensive (affecting more countries
and individuals within countries), and intensive (penetrating deeper into domestic politics and daily life).

It is hard to see how this situation can be solved given failures of current global leadership, the
weaknesses of non-governmental organizations in converting popular campaigns into institutional
change and reform, and the domestic political landscapes of the most powerful countries.  The USA
is sharply divided, Europe is preoccupied with the future of the Euro, and China is absorbed by the
challenge of sustaining economic growth.




1
    COP21 – 21st Conference of the Parties of the UN Framework Convention on
    Climate Change (UNFCCC) in Paris, December 2015
2
    stalemate: a situation where no progress can be made
3
    gridlocked: at a standstill, unable to make progress




                                                                                                  Turn over
                                                                                       –4–                               M17/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

1.        With reference to Source A, identify three ways in which non-state actors can influence
          global politics.                                                                                                                       [3]


2.        Using Source C and one example you have studied, explain the reasons why
          international co-operation may be problematic for some states.                                                                         [4]


3.        Contrast what Source B and Source D reveal about international co-operation on
          global issues.                                                                                                                         [8]


4.        “The challenge of addressing complex global issues is changing the relationships of
          power among actors in global politics.”  With reference to Sources A­ to D and your own
          knowledge, to what extent do you agree with this claim?                                                                               [10]




Acknowledgments:

Source A: www.abc.net.au/news/2013-03-04/pacific-warriors-climate-change-action/4550898
Source B: www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/13/paris-climate-deal-cop-diplomacy-developing-united-nations
Source C: www.brookings.edu/blogs/planetpolicy/posts/2015/11/24-us-voice-climate-change-after-failed-diplomacy-sussman
Source D: www.opendemocracy.net/thomas-hale-david-held-kevin-young/gridlock-growing-breakdown-of-global-cooperation
