M17/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                               May 2017


                         Global politics


           Higher level and standard level


                               Paper 1




10 pages
                           –2–              M17/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use
of examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Global Centre, Cardiff.
                                                     –3–           M17/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The following are the annotations available to use when marking responses.

          Annotation                      Explanation                 Associated shortcut

                        CKS - Clear Knowledge Shown                  Alt+0

             CON        CON - Contradiction

                        Cross - Incorrect point                      Alt+1

                        DES - Descriptive


                        DET - Relevant detail


                        DEV - Development


                        EE - Effective evaluation                    Alt+2


                        GA - Good Analysis                           Alt+3


                        GEXA - Good Example

              GP        GP - Good Point
             GSEv       GSEv - Good Source Evaluation                Alt+4

                        H Wavy - Wavy underline tool


                        Highlight - Highlight tool


                        IR - Irrelevant


                        LNK - Good linkage                           Alt+5


                        NAQ - Not Answered Question

                        NExa - No Examples
                                                –4–               M17/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



                       Not Relevant - Vertical wavy line

            NSEv       NSEv - No Source Evaluation                  Alt+6

                       On Page Comment - On page comment tool

              PU       PU - Point Unfinished

                       Repeat - Repetition

              RQ       RQ - Repeats question

                       SEEN_Small - Seen


                       TCE - Theory is clearly explained


                       TNCE - Theory is Not Clearly Explained


                       Tick Colourable                              Alt+7

                       TV - Too vague


                       U - Understanding

              UA       UA - Unfinished answer

                       UR - Unbalanced Response                     Alt+8


                       VL - Very limited


                       WARG - Well argued                           Alt+9


You must make sure you have looked at all pages. Please put the      annotation on any blank page,
to indicate that you have seen it.
                                                   –5–                 M17/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Unit 1     Power, sovereignty and international relations

Bulleted lists in this markscheme indicate likely points that candidates may include in their answer:
they are not exhaustive, and examiners should credit other valid points not listed.

                                           Global governance

1.   With reference to Source A, identify three ways in which non-state actors can influence
     global politics.                                                                                   [3]

     Answers may include:
     • Non-state actors can help empower individuals and groups and provide opportunities for action.
       From the photo, it can be deduced that those represented are (1) from indigenous communities;
       (2) include many young people; and (3) are demonstrating in a non-standard way, in a non-
       standard place
     • Non-state actors often address important global and regional issues in a direct and locally
       based way. The fact that the individuals in the photo are standing in the ocean brings home the
       importance of water. Candidates might add that unusual demonstrations of this type may
       become more mainstream in future
     • Non-state actors can help to raise awareness through organized campaigning and publicity eg
       social media coverage (eg powerful visual images of the effects of climate change)
     • Non-state actors can specifically help people who might not otherwise have much of a voice in
       politics (eg indigenous communities, young people, etc)
     • Non-state actors can encourage cooperation between states (eg this example demonstrates 14
       Pacific island nations working together)
     • Non-state actors can “fight” issues but in non-violent ways (eg they can put pressure on local,
       national and international leaders and opinion makers, so influencing domestic policies).

     Other relevant points related to the ways non-state actors influence global politics can also be
     rewarded.

     Award [1] for each relevant point up to a maximum of [3].
                                                 –6–                M17/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   Using Source C and one example you have studied, explain the reasons why international
     cooperation may be problematic for some states.                                       [4]

     Answers may include, but are not limited to:
     • the difficulty of reconciling domestic and international pressures
     • fears of lack of competitiveness if emission controls are adopted
     • fear of being constrained by international law
     • unwillingness to commit to targets that they were unlikely to meet, or that were perceived as
       unrealistic, leading to fears of damage to state reputation if targets not met
     • domestic political obligations (eg requirement for Senate ratification)
     • states’ leadership may not be motivated to cooperate.

     Other relevant points not listed should also be rewarded.

     Candidates are not expected to make four separate points in order to achieve full marks. For each
     valid explained point a maximum of [2] may be awarded, up to a total of [4]. If there is no
     reference to another example studied, award a maximum of [3].
                                                  –7–                 M17/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   Contrast what Source B and Source D reveal about international cooperation on global
     issues.                                                                                          [8]

     Potential points of contrast:
     • The UN is represented as working in Source B, but as “paralysed” in Source D
     • Source B is generally optimistic whereas Source D is generally more pessimistic: Source B
       focuses on the overcoming of difficulties, and the possibility of co-operation, whereas Source
       D has a more negative view of institutions and highlights a lack of success in attempts at
       collective action
     • The influence of larger states (eg the USA and China) comes across more clearly in Source D
       than in Source B
     • Source B focuses on the role of leadership (“key meetings of world leaders”), whereas
       Source D lays bare the failures of global leadership
     • Source B focuses on the actions of states, whereas Source D also refers to other actors
       (eg NGOs)
     • Source B focuses on the issue of climate change, whereas Source D refers to other global
       political issues, such as poverty and inequality
     • Source D focuses on the logistical difficulties of co-operation (eg increased costs), whereas
       Source B identifies some ways in which these difficulties have been overcome.

     Do not expect all of the above, and allow other valid points. Award [2] per effective point of
     contrast up to a maximum of [8].

     For a response which focuses significantly on one source with only minimal reference to the other
     source, award a maximum of [5]. For responses that discuss the sources separately, rather than
     in a running contrast, award a maximum [6].
                                                 –8–                 M17/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



4.   “The challenge of addressing complex global issues is changing the relationships of power
     among actors in global politics.” With reference to Sources A to D and your own
     knowledge, to what extent do you agree with this claim?                               [10]

     Question 4 is assessed according to the mark bands that follow, in conjunction with these marking
     notes.

     Source material may include, but is not limited to:
     Source A
     • Non-state groups can encourage cooperation between different states and actors, so increasing
       their power by working together (eg the collective action of the 14 Pacific Island nations)
     • Climate change can radically impact on countries (eg by physically destroying low lying island
       nations) but previously these smaller less powerful states may not have had a voice in global
       politics which membership of the UN, and the rise of global media have given them.

     Source B
     • The seriousness of issues such as climate change has obliged states to co-operate.
     • The importance given to international agreement on climate change shows that states are still
       the most powerful actors in global politics
     • The urgency and global nature of issues such as climate change has forced increased co-
       operation and diplomatic efforts
     • The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) is an unusual
       example of democratic co-operation where every country is represented and has an equal say.

     Source C
     • Issues of state power were key to the agreements referred to, suggesting that states remain the
       most important actors in global politics
     • The source highlights the impact and power of individual leaders such as US presidents
     • An increased need for cooperation is evident, eg between the US and China
     • A new international framework has been agreed that will create a less binding and more flexible
       negotiating environment (freedom from international law).

     Source D
     • International cooperation is very problematic and difficult; there are increasingly more states and
       more actors involved and more extensive and intensive issues to solve
     • The source cites numerous examples of failure to solve new global issues, by the UN in
       particular. Effective governance is now more important than ever in tackling issues, yet
       institutions are rarely able to make progress
     • NGOs are often unable to impact meaningfully on institutions; they struggle to convert popular
       campaigns into institutional change
     • National and regional preoccupations (such as the future of the Euro) continue to divert
       attention from co-operation on global issues.
                                            –9–                M17/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Own knowledge could include, but is not limited to:
• The world is increasingly interdependent and complex; even the issues themselves are often
  highly interrelated (eg migration and climate change). More incentive to cooperate, but also
  more risk to states (realist perspective)
• Social media has increased our awareness of how interconnected we are. NGOs are now more
  important and can shame states into action
• Importance of other types of power rather than just military power (eg soft power)
• More actors involved / more diverse groups involved, eg those that are directly affected by the
  effects of global warming.
• States remain the most powerful actors in global politics due to their financial and military
  resources.
• The ability of non-state actors to successfully address complex global issues can be limited by
  the national interests of states.

Do not expect all of the above, and reward other relevant points and/or examples not listed.

If only source material or only own knowledge is used, the response can only be awarded a
maximum of [6].

To achieve the maximum [10], responses must refer to all four sources.
                                            – 10 –               M17/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Markbands for question 4

The aim is to find the descriptor that conveys most accurately the level attained by the student,
using the best-fit model. The mark awarded should be one that most fairly reflects the balance of
achievement against the descriptor. It is not necessary for every single aspect of a level descriptor
to be met for that mark to be awarded.

  Marks      Level descriptor
    0         • The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
   1–2        • There is a very limited understanding of the demands of the question.
              • There is little relevant knowledge.
              • The response is mostly descriptive and may contain unsupported
                generalizations.
   3–4        • There is limited understanding of the demands of the question, or the
                question is only partially addressed.
              • Some knowledge is demonstrated, but this is not always relevant or
                accurate, and may not be used appropriately or effectively.
              • Counterclaims, or different views on the question, are not identified.
   5–6        • The response shows an understanding of the demands of the question.
              • Knowledge is mostly accurate and relevant, and there is some limited
                synthesis of own knowledge and source material.
              • Counterclaims, or different views on the question, are implicitly identified but
                are not explored.
   7–8        • The response is focused and shows a good understanding of the demands
                of the question.
              • Relevant and accurate knowledge is demonstrated, there is a synthesis of
                own knowledge and source material, and appropriate examples are used.
              • Counterclaims, or different views on the question, are explored.
   9–10       • The response is clearly focused and shows a high degree of understanding
                of the demands of the question.
              • Relevant and accurate knowledge is demonstrated, there is effective
                synthesis of own knowledge and source material, with appropriate
                examples integrated.
              • Counterclaims, or different views on the question, are explored and
                evaluated.
