M17/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/T




Information technology in a global society
Higher level and standard level
Paper 2


Thursday 18 May 2017 (morning)


1 hour 15 minutes



                                   ARTICLE
Instructions to candidates
 Do not open this booklet until instructed to do so.
 This booklet contains the article required for information technology in a global society
  higher level and standard level paper 2.




                                                                                                2217 – 5514
     3 pages                                                © International Baccalaureate Organization 2017
                                                 –2–                   M17/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

 Themes: Business and employment, home and leisure, politics and government

IT system: use of smartphones, WiFi, gps positioning and video streaming to operate drones

     Small drones1 that anyone can fly are transforming all kinds of activities. These drones are widely
     available, easy to assemble and increasingly affordable.

                        Figure 1: A smartphone communicating with a drone via WiFi




                                            [Source: www.parrot.com]


     A typical drone is controlled using an app2 installed on a GPS-enabled smartphone. The drone
     also has a GPS receiver. The drone and the smartphone communicate using WiFi (see
 5   Figure 1). The user combines both video streamed from the drone’s camera and GPS data to
     gather information about the drone’s location. The user can also send GPS coordinates to the
     drone, making the drone fly to that point.

     With their ability to fly to precise locations and hover, drones have many potential uses for
     businesses and government departments, and also as a leisure activity for members of the public.
                                                    –3–                 M17/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

10     Filmmakers and photographers use them to take aerial shots; engineers use them to inspect
       pipelines and electrical power cables; emergency services use them to monitor dangerous
       environments such as nuclear reactors, disaster sites and fires; government departments are
       starting to use drones to reconstruct crime scenes and patrol borders; construction companies take
       videos of building sites and houses for sale; some retailers are even experimenting with drones to
15     deliver items to customers.

       However, there are concerns about the social and ethical implications of these uses. Some
       owners fly drones without considering the consequences. They may not bother to follow the safety
       guidelines and assume that they are unlikely to run into problems or get caught.

       Concerns have been expressed over the use of information gathered by drones operated by
20     government departments, such as the police. There is also a worry that unauthorized people could
       intercept and misuse data such as video being sent from the drone to the controller, or that the
       drones themselves could be hijacked or used to carry out unethical or illegal activities.

                                             [Source: CBS NEWS]




1
     drones: a drone is a flying robot that can be remotely controlled or can fly
     autonomously
2
     app: application software, typically small, specialized programs downloaded
     onto mobile devices; apps can also run on the internet, on a computer, or
     on a cell/mobile phone or other electronic device
