M17/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                               May 2017


                 Information technology
                    in a global society


           Higher level and standard level


                               Paper 2




20 pages
                           –2–               M17/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use
of examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Global Centre, Cardiff.
                                                   –3–                  M17/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The following are the annotations available to use when marking responses.


 Annotation      Explanation                               Comment                             Short cut

               Correct point       Use for identify, state, outline, describe                    Alt+0
               Incorrect point     Use for identify, state, outline, describe
               Benefit of the      Answer is close enough to give some credit, indicates
               doubt               that you see some merit in it.
               No benefit of
   NBOD                            Not quite enough to earn any credit.
               doubt
                                   Indicates that the text has been noted, but no credit has
                                   been given, or used on a blank page to ensure that RM
               Seen
                                   Assessor and/or staff in Cardiff know that you have
                                   seen the page
     OC        Off course          Content not relevant to the question.                         Alt+8
                                   Point is unclear, or not specific enough to answer the
               Too vague                                                                         Alt+1
                                   question.
                                   Repeats a point previously made, not necessarily
               Repetition                                                                        Alt+2
                                   worded in the same way.
                                   This is used to indicate a reference to the stimulus
    REF        Reference                                                                         Alt+3
                                   material, article or the Case Study (Paper 2 or Paper 3)
                                   Candidate has added descriptive information to an
      D        Description                                                                       Alt+4
                                   initial idea that has been named or identified.
                                   Candidate has explained why something occurs, or
               Analysis /          why it is important to the point s/he is making, or
     A+        Explanation         described the consequences of a policy/action/use of          Alt+5
                                   IT.
               Balanced            Use in the examiner’s comments at the end of extended
               argument            response questions. Balanced arguments involving
               involving           detailed analysis can occur within paragraphs as well
     B+        detailed analysis   as at the end of the response. Often, a transition word       Alt+6
                                   to link/compare ideas, such as “however” or “on the
                                   other hand” is used. Can also be structured analysis of
                                   ideas, eg good vs bad, for X and against X.
               Evaluation –        Use only if evaluation is supported, not just stated.
               beyond the          Note that evaluation can occur in the body of an
               ideas presented     extended response as an evaluative comment about an
    EVAL       to reach a          idea as well as at the end in the conclusion.                 Alt+7
               conclusion or       Fully evaluated requires a well-supported conclusion.
               overall             Evaluation and detailed analysis can overlap when
               comment.            evaluation is within a paragraph.
                                   Use only if opinion is supported, not just stated. Note
      O        Opinion             that opinion can occur in the body of an extended             Alt+9
                                   response as well as at the end.
                                                  –4–                   M17/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


               Dynamic,            Indicates a valid point that the student will need to
               Horizontal          support in an extended response.
               Dynamic,
                                   Used for incorrect statements/phrase
               Horizontal Wavy
                                   Indicates that the candidate has veered off course,
               Dynamic,            i.e. either by not answering the question that is asked
               Vertical Wavy       or has moved in a direction unrelated to the question.
                                   Can also use OC annotation
                                   Used to mark and comment on a block of writing that
                                   makes a valid point.
               Text box with       Note that the text box and the vertical line are
               extended            connected.
               vertical line.


               Insert comments     Used for comments at the end of questions where the
                                   mark needs to be JUSTIFIED.
   Text box                        Often with AO2 command terms – EXPLAIN. ALWAYS
                                   with AO3 command terms – EVALUATE, JUSTIFY, TO
                                   WHAT EXTENT, and DISCUSS.

You must make sure you have looked at all pages. Please put the            annotation on any blank page,
to indicate that you have seen it.

Critical Thinking – explanation, analysis and evaluation

These trigger words often signal critical thinking. The bold words are the key terms in the various
criteria.
Explanation - Because, as a result of, due to, therefore, consequently, for example
Analysis - Furthermore, additionally, however, but, conversely, likewise, in addition, on the other hand,
whereas, in contrast, as a consequence, similarly
Evaluation - My opinion, overall, although, despite, on balance, weighing up
                                                    –5–                  M17/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Using assessment criteria for external assessment

For external assessment, a number of assessment criteria have been identified. Each assessment
criterion has level descriptors describing specific levels of achievement, together with an appropriate
range of marks. The level descriptors concentrate on positive achievement, although for the lower levels
failure to achieve may be included in the description.

Examiners must judge the externally assessed work at SL and at HL against the four criteria (A–D) using
the level descriptors.

• The same assessment criteria are provided for SL and HL.

• The aim is to find, for each criterion, the descriptor that conveys most accurately the level attained by
   the candidate, using the best-fit model. A best-fit approach means that compensation should be
   made when a piece of work matches different aspects of a criterion at different levels. The mark
   awarded should be one that most fairly reflects the balance of achievement against the criterion. It is
   not necessary for every single aspect of a level descriptor to be met for that mark to be awarded.

• When assessing a candidate’s work, examiners should read the level descriptors for each criterion
   until they reach a descriptor that most appropriately describes the level of the work being assessed. If
   a piece of work seems to fall between two descriptors, both descriptors should be read again and the
   one that more appropriately describes the candidate’s work should be chosen.

• Where there are two or more marks available within a level, examiners should award the upper marks
   if the candidate’s work demonstrates the qualities described to a great extent. Examiners should
   award the lower marks if the candidate’s work demonstrates the qualities described to a lesser extent.

• Only whole numbers should be recorded; partial marks, that is fractions and decimals, are not
   acceptable.

• Examiners should not think in terms of a pass or fail boundary, but should concentrate on identifying
   the appropriate descriptor for each assessment criterion.

• The highest level descriptors do not imply faultless performance but should be achievable by
   a candidate. Examiners should not hesitate to use the extremes if they are appropriate descriptions
   of the work being assessed.

• A candidate who attains a high level of achievement in relation to one criterion will not necessarily
   attain high levels of achievement in relation to the other criteria. Similarly, a candidate who attains a
   low level of achievement for one criterion will not necessarily attain low achievement levels for the
   other criteria. Examiners should not assume that the overall assessment of the candidates will
   produce any particular distribution of marks.

• The assessment criteria must be made available to candidates prior to sitting the examination.
                                                    –6–                  M17/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


 Themes: Business and employment, home and leisure, politics and government

Introduction
The technology does not involve the use of the internet to operate and use the drone. Internet may be
used later to upload videos to cloud or sync. Responses that identify WiFi as internet should be
assessed with care, as WiFi can carry the internet but not only the internet. WiFi is a channel of
communication only. Bluetooth is a very short distance channel and not appropriate for this article.

Criterion A — The issue and stakeholder(s)                                                           [4]

1.   (a)   Describe one social/ethical concern related to the IT system in the article.

           [1]: for identification of the concern (which may not be explicitly named or
           incorrectly named or vaguely named).

           [2]: there needs to be an explicit description of the impact / result / consequences
           / effect / outcome.

           If more than one concern is identified, e.g. privacy and security, look at 2b and
           award marks for the concern that will give the candidates the highest mark across
           this question and 2b.

           The description needs to reference the IT system in the article.

           If two different concerns are raised, since the question specifies one concern
           hence only mark the first; except if commonly linked.

           Social/ethical concerns may include:
           • loss of privacy for drone user and/or members of the public due to intercepting
             the video streamed from the drone and misusing it (eg publishing captured
             video/using it to plan or commit crimes) or dropping drugs/guns/etc into
             prisons)
           • security concerns, such as the drone being taken over or disabled by third
             parties
           • safety concerns where drones are used inappropriately or recklessly (eg near
             airports, over forest fires, above crowded areas such as sporting fixtures)
           • privacy concerns over the use of drones for surveillance by individuals or
             government departments
           • loss of privacy if members of the public are filmed, without their knowledge or
             permission, and the video is published (eg on social media)
           • reliability where the limited range of WiFi may mean that drone may fly out of
             WiFi range and then out of control presenting a risk to public and loss of the
             drone
           • reliability and accuracy of GPS particularly in built up areas due to canyon
             effect of buildings/structures shrouding the GPS signal
           • digital citizenship where the use of small civilian drones as a weapon and
             surveillance tool in terrorist events (Syria and Iraq)
           • policies such as where local governments can set restrictions on the operation
             of the drone and easy access means that some people may be unaware that
             they are operating the drone illegally (in Dubai, it is illegal to fly drones without
             permission from the authorities concerned). Civilian/leisure user of drones
             can be fined/jailed (they may be unaware of the policies of government
             depending on size/type/purpose/features/range of drones)
           • inappropriate surveillance by government/police, misuse by people to monitor
             neighbours,
                                       –7–                  M17/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


• criminals can use it to better understand a locality to plan a crime, and to see if
  anyone is at home, where guards are, etc
• people and machines where drones may be prone to misuse because of
  range of possibilities/features this device has to offer, type of misuse needs to
  be specifically identified but not necessarily fully described.
                                              –8–                  M17/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   Describe the relationship of one primary stakeholder to the IT system in the
      article.

      Describe means to include who, what and where but not how and why for
      full marks.

      [1]: Who – identification of the stakeholder.

      [2]: Where – the use of the IT system (technical part) AND What are they doing
      with the IT system.

      Primary stakeholders may include:
      • drone owner who operates the drone and receives the video shot by the
         drone’s camera; not just flying the drone
      • members of the public who are observed/filmed by the drone’s camera or
         directly affected by the drone, eg closure of airport
      • government departments such as the fire service whose work may be
         impeded by incorrect use of the drone by operators
      • government departments such as the police who use drones for crime fighting
         or intelligence gathering
      • government departments who are responsible for regulating the use of drones
         and setting rules for their use
      • third parties who may intercept the video or take control of the drone
      • commercial enterprises such as filmmakers, retailers or construction
         companies who use the drones themselves or data/video gathered by drones
         for business activities
      • companies responsible for developing the drone hardware/software and who
         have a responsibility to ensure its security and reliability
      • a third party put at risk by the reliability of the WIFI signal/GPS signal, etc, and
         the drone crashes and does damage
      • anyone illegally using the drone – eg terrorism, criminal activity (transport of
         guns, drugs, etc), illegal surveillance.

Marks                                         Level descriptor

  0          The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

             Either an appropriate social/ethical concern or the relationship of one primary
  1
             stakeholder to the IT system in the article is identified.

             Either an appropriate social/ethical concern or the relationship of one primary
  2
             stakeholder to the IT system in the article is described or both are identified.

             Either an appropriate social/ethical concern or the relationship of one primary
  3
             stakeholder to the IT system in the article is described; the other is identified.

             Both an appropriate social/ethical concern and the relationship of one primary
  4
             stakeholder to the IT system in the article are described.
                                                   –9–                  M17/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B — The IT concepts and processes                                                                [6]

Before marking, please review how the GPS satellites are used by the GPS software in the mobile
device and the drone (triangulation). Basically, the GPS satellites only send a signal that is received and
processed by the device – there is no communication back to the GPS satellite. Ignore incorrect GPS
steps but award marks for steps such as those indicated in the following link:
www8.garmin.com/aboutGPS/

2.   (a)   Describe, step-by-step, how the IT system works.
           IT system: use of smartphones, WiFi, GPS positioning and video streaming to
           operate drones.

           Many of the responses will not fit neatly into a mark descriptor, so best fit will need to be
           applied.

           The major steps are the use of the four components of the IT system:
           smartphone, WiFi, GPS positioning and video streaming.

           [1]: the student may show some understanding of the process but NOT in a
           step-by-step approach – using the information in the article and possibly some
           steps missing.

           [2]: the student is able to provide a logical step-by-step account using the
           information in the article but lacks some details (at least three major components
           are required.

           [3]: the student is able to provide a step-by-step account which contains
           significant details, and which includes some information beyond the article (at
           least two technical developments) and includes at least three major components.

           [4]: at least four technical developments and all major components in detail.

           Answers provided in the article include:
           • an app is installed on the drone operator’s GPS-enabled phone already
           • GPS-enabled smartphone connects to the drone using WiFi
           • drone pinpoints its position using GPS
           • drone streams video back to the smartphone
           • user uses streamed video and GPS data to see where the drone is
           • user can send GPS coordinates to the drone, causing the drone to fly to that
             point
           • drone has a GPS receiver enabled automatically
           • drone can operate autonomously with preset GPS coordinates.

           NB: Setting up the phone and the drone are covered in the article, so no
           development marks for installing app or activating GPS and WiFi.
                                       – 10 –                M17/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Answers with additional information to that in the article may include:
• WiFi connection is made by specifying the drone’s unique SSID in the
  smartphone app
• both the smartphone and the drone use GPS satellites to trilaterate (accept
  triangulate) their position
• drone continuously sends GPS coordinates of its current position back to the
  smartphone
• smartphone displays the position of both the user and the drone on a map
  streamed from the internet or downloaded to the device
• user can control the drone using onscreen controls provided by the
  smartphone app
• use and outline of features displayed on the smartphone such as: overlaid
  maps, information about yaw, pitch, altitude, artificial horizon, battery life, GPS
  signal strength indicator, WiFi signal strength indicator, emergency landing
  button, etc
• user can control the drone using a handset or controller connected to the
  phone (or a specialized handset/joystick by itself)
• drone can be controlled by sending GPS coordinates from the smartphone to
  the drone, the drone calculates a flightpath from its current location to the
  location specified by the coordinates and flies to that point
• the drone can have a “return to home” setting added, where it returns to a
  point if the WiFi connection is lost (this can happen if the drone is used
  beyond the normal range or in a different city
• real time video gathered by the drone’s camera is transmitted to the
  smartphone in compressed format via the WiFi connection
• the smartphone is paired with the drone by selecting the drone from the list of
  available devices
• user can choose the speed and height of the drone using controls on
  smartphone
• user can instruct the drone to hover at a certain point and capture video
  footage
• encryption of video stream and control instructions
• real time viewing/streaming of camera video – this is different from real time
  control
• video is recorded and stored in camera/smartphone and may be in cloud
• drone may require authentication, such as a 4-8 digit number, to be operated
• password and username NOT awarded marks if just stated; needs to be
  explained how it is used to link to the drone
• password and username for the phone is NOT a development; and
  downloading the drone app is NOT a development.
                                            – 11 –                M17/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   Explain the relationship between the IT system and the social/ethical concern
      described in Criterion A.

      Explaining the link between the concern and specific parts, or whole, of the IT
      system means the student must include how and why the concern has arisen
      from the use of the IT system. The naming of the concern identified in Criterion A
      may be implicit.

      Q2(b) clearly asks for a link to Q1(a), but the link only needs to be generic –
      eg for a specific security concern described in Q1(a), then in Q2(b) the student
      can explain a security weakness without reference to the specific concern in
      Q1(a). If the concern addressed in Q2(a) is completely different from that in
      Q1(a) a link cannot be made and hence [0]. Q2(b) may refer to material from
      Q1(b) where the who and what and where of the IT system usage are described.

      [1]: If the student identifies the relationship between the concern and the IT
      system. This may be a repeat, or rewording, of the response to Q1(a) or lack of
      detail for the how and why.

      [2]: how and why the concern can happen must be described in technical IT
      AND/OR ITGS terms – eg privacy concern: responses need to specify HOW
      (technical) the data can be accessed (eg interception of the WiFi signal) (similar
      to some of the steps for Q2(a)) AND WHY it has been allowed to be accessed
      (eg lack of encryption of the WiFi signal)

      Answers may include:
      • How – Loss of privacy due to intercepting the video streamed from the drone.
        Why – The WiFi connection may be insecure or the data may be intercepted
        during transmission.
      • How – Surveillance of people using the drone. Why – People may not be
        aware that they are being observed/recorded by the drone. It is difficult for
        someone on the ground to know whether the camera is filming them or not as
        there is no visual or audible warning from the drone that filming is taking place.
      • How – Surveillance of property using the drone/using the stored video to aid
        criminal activities such as HD video and zoom function giving a detailed
        picture. Why – Exact location details obtained or shared via the internet for
        criminal purposes.
      • How – Privacy concerns arising from publishing recorded video on social
        media. Why – Social media do not screen the uploads.
      • How – Security concerns, such as the drone being taken over or disabled by
        third parties/streamed video being intercepted and used for purposes other
        than those intended by the drone owner. Why – Lack of WiFi security.
      • How – Safety concerns where drones are used inappropriately (eg near
        airports, over forest fires, overcrowded areas such as sporting fixtures). Why
        – Lack of regulations.
      • How – Loss of privacy. Why – People are not aware that they are being
        recorded by the drone – HD video footage/zoom function – along with
        location/time details – can easily identify an individual being at a certain place
        at a certain time.
      • How – Loss of connectivity/signal due to limited WiFi range or interference.
        Why – Operators may not be aware of the range of the WiFi they are using or
        the potential risk of interference causing a loss of control. Transmitter in the
        drone and phone have limited output, other operators maybe on similar
        frequencies, often requiring line of sight transmission. Also batteries may run
        out.
                                             – 12 –               M17/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


       • How – Inappropriate use of drone in terrorist actions. Why – The small size,
         mobility, low cost and ease of use, making drones a simple, improvised
         weapon or surveillance tool.
       • How – GPS signal loss occurs in built up areas or due to rainfade. Why –
         Low power of the GPS signal can be absorbed by structures and other
         features, impacting on the accuracy and reliability of the positioning systems.
       • How – Recklessly flying over forbidden areas, eg privacy concern. Why
         consciously or unknowingly not following regulations.

       Candidates are expected to make reference to the relevant stakeholders,
       information technologies, data and processes. Candidates will be expected to
       refer to “how the IT system works” using appropriate IT terminology.




Marks                                         Level descriptor

  0           The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

              There is little or no understanding of the step-by-step process of how the
              IT system works and does not go beyond the information in the article.
 1–2
              The major components of the IT system are identified using minimal technical
              IT terminology.

              There is a description of the step-by-step process of how the IT system works
              that goes beyond the information in the article.
              Most of the major components of the IT system are identified using some
 3–4          technical IT terminology.
              The relationship between the IT system referred to in the article and the
              concern presented in criterion A is identified, with the some use of
              ITGS terminology.


              There is a detailed description of the step-by-step process that shows a clear
              understanding of how the IT system works that goes beyond the information in
              the article.
              The major components of the IT system are identified using appropriate
 5–6
              technical IT terminology.
              The relationship between the IT system referred to in the article and the
              concern presented in criterion A is explained using appropriate
              ITGS terminology.
                                                  – 13 –               M17/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion C — The impact of the social/ethical issue(s) on stakeholders                         [8]

3.   Evaluate the impact of the social/ethical issues on the relevant stakeholders.

     Marking is to be done holistically focusing on determining the correct markband and
     then the level in the markband using the guidelines attached to each markband.

     Impact = result/consequence/effect/outcome on stakeholder.

     The FINAL evaluation/conclusion should focus on the overall impact on all the
     stakeholders mentioned discussing the balance between the positive and negative
     impacts.

     At least two stakeholders are required for entrance into the top markband.

       Marks                                   Level descriptor
                    The impact of the social/ethical issues on stakeholders is described but
         1–2        not evaluated. Material is either copied directly from the article or
                    implicit references are made to it.
     Lower end: One or two impacts identified – this is a low threshold.
     Upper end: At least three impacts described of either type – positive or negative.

     A list of impacts with no clear structure and descriptions only – max [2].

       Marks                                   Level descriptor

                    The impact of the social/ethical issues on stakeholders is partially
                    analysed, with some evaluative comment. Explicit references to the
         3–5
                    information in the article are partially developed in the response. There
                    is some use of appropriate ITGS terminology.
     Lower end: Analysis by structure – division into groups, eg positive/negatives and/or
     various stakeholders/issues.
     Middle: At least one negative and one positive balanced impact for at least each of
     two stakeholders/issues.
     Upper end: Must include some linking analytical connections (between
     positive/negatives, various stakeholders, various issues) and/or added evaluative
     comments about the implications for stakeholders.

     Only one stakeholder analysed or unbalanced analysis (ie only negative or positive
     impacts): maximum of [4].
                                           – 14 –               M17/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




  Marks                                  Level descriptor

              The impact of the social/ethical issues on stakeholders is fully analysed
              and evaluated. Explicit, well developed references to information in the
   6–8
              article are made appropriately throughout the response. There is use
              of appropriate ITGS terminology.
Entry to this markband requires at least three impacts (balance of negative and
positive) for each of two or more stakeholders in order to provide a balanced set of
impacts for the conclusion.

Lower end: Fully analysed and evaluated. Significant analytical connections and
evaluation comments means consistent evidence of additional thinking, beyond
descriptions and structure, throughout the various stakeholders/issues impact
descriptions.
Middle to upper end]: A conclusion backed by direct reference to the impacts
described is needed and NOT just a repetition or summary or unsupported opinion – it
needs to be argued based on the evidence.
                                              – 15 –                M17/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Answers may include:

Loss of privacy due to intercepting/misusing the video streamed from the drone
• drone users may be filming sensitive/private actions or property – eg private
  activities or views that would not be visible from ground level. Third parties who
  gain unauthorized access to the video footage may use it inappropriately. If a drone
  also can record audio this has privacy implications for people whose conversations
  are recorded accidentally or without their knowledge
• drone users operating the drone for professional purposes (eg journalism/
  film making) may suffer risks or loss of revenue due to their work being stolen and
  published/used by unauthorized people or may be put at risk if video is intercepted
  by the authorities
• third parties may not be aware that they are being filmed by the drone – may result
  in actions/activities that were intended to be private being recorded and published
  (eg celebrities/public figures may have drone video leaked to the press or posted
  online)
• captured video may be used to blackmail third parties with images being shared on
  social media
• property and premises may be filmed from vantage points that are not
  visible/accessible from ground level. Video may be used to plan/assist in crimes
  such as burglary (eg by revealing who is in the property, what entrance points there
  may be etc).

Security concerns such as the drone being taken over or disabled by third
parties
• drone itself may be stolen/the phone containing the video footage could be stolen –
  implications of access to the video
• drone may be used to endanger people on the ground due to loss of control/
  deliberate intent by the third party to crash the drone or endanger people.

Safety concerns where drones are used inappropriately (eg near airports, over
forest fires, overcrowded areas such as sporting fixtures)
• drone owners may not be aware of the regulations, or choose not to follow them as
   they feel they have little chance of being caught.

Inappropriate use of the drone may
• impede the work of emergency services (eg fire services unable to fly over forest
   fires due to presence of drone); may result in costs to the emergency services
   through diverting flights or costs to the public due to lack of ability of the services to
   respond effectively to an emergency situation
• cause a dangerous situation near airports; aircraft may be at risk of collision with
   drone and possible life-threatening damage (eg drone getting sucked into an aircraft
   engine); may result in flights being delayed/diverted
• the drone may be operating within restricted airspace – inexperienced or unqualified
   drone operator may not be aware of restrictions
• disrupt sporting fixtures or outdoor events; progress of the event may be held up by
   the presence of a drone; possibility of drones crashing into crowds and causing
   injury; possibility of drone causing an accident by obstructing or distracting people
   participating in the event
• may be used as an improvised weapon or surveillance device by terrorist groups
• may be used as a mechanism for illegal activities (delivering drugs/weapons etc to
   restricted areas).
                                             – 16 –               M17/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Reliability
• endangering people could also relate to the reliability of the hardware/software
• reliability of user input, eg wrong GPS coordinates sent to drone/wrong height or
  speed entered
• endangering people and risking loss of the drone by limited range of the WiFi signal
• reliability of the GPS signal impacting on the accuracy of the drones operation.

Business and Employment
• loss of jobs as drones take over the delivery of goods.

Drones may
• permit inspection of areas that would be inaccessible/hazardous for humans to enter
• allow film makers to include aerial shots without the expense of hiring an
  aircraft/pilot
• be used by commercial enterprises such as travel agents/property developers to
  capture footage for advertising purposes
• allow monitoring of construction sites etc to check on progress and work safety
• individuals may use drones to record family activities/holidays for later enjoyment
• individuals may use drones as source of entertainment and fun
• be used in sporting competitions like drone racing (there is a professional drone
  racing league)
• used for rapid survey and surveillance of disaster zones (Kaikoura earthquake)
• retailers can use drones to deliver goods to customers
• timely delivery of goods due to overcoming road congestions.

Sample Conclusion:
Overall the impact of the use of drones will be positive because the uses of drones and
their impact will increase as I explained above. However, some uses of drones can
have negative impacts linked to them as I explained above. But these negative impacts
were often due to the deliberate actions of the users of the drones, and these users are
in a minority. Also, as the drone technology improves the negative impacts will lessen;
and as regulations and laws are put in place by governments the negative impacts will
also lessen. However, as I will show in the next question, where I will discuss one
solution in detail, these solutions are not fool proof.


Marks                                         Level descriptor
  0          The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
             The impact of the social/ethical issues on stakeholders is described but not
 1–2         evaluated. Material is either copied directly from the article or implicit references
             are made to it.

             The impact of the social/ethical issues on stakeholders is partially analysed, with
             some evaluative comment. Explicit references to the information in the article are
 3–5
             partially developed in the response. There is some use of appropriate ITGS
             terminology.

             The impact of the social/ethical issues on stakeholders is fully analysed and
             evaluated. Explicit, well developed references to information in the article are
 6–8
             made appropriately throughout the response. There is use of appropriate ITGS
             terminology.
                                                  – 17 –               M17/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion D — A solution to a problem arising from the article                                    [8]

4.   Evaluate one possible solution that addresses at least one problem identified in
     Criterion C.

     Problem must be specified in the space provided, but if this is not done here, it must be
     one of the impacts/problems identified in Criterion C. The ONE solution may refer to
     ANY of the problems. No penalty if the problem is not stated. The space is to help the
     candidate focus on the task.

     Mark the FIRST solution only.
     Some solutions may have multiple parts, eg security arrangements, and each part must
     not be a different type of solution (otherwise it is a second solution and not marked –
     use your judgement here).

        Marks                                   Level descriptor

                    One feasible solution to at least one problem is proposed and
         1–2        described.
                    No evaluative comment is offered. Material is either copied directly
                    from the article or implicit references are made to it.
     [1]: solution is identified.
     [2]: solution is described (what, who, where) and the link to article may be implicit,
     which could be a general description eg general policy description similar to that found
     in a textbook, general description of how encryption works like in a textbook.

        Marks                                   Level descriptor

                    One appropriate solution to at least one problem is proposed and
         3–5        partially evaluated. The response contains explicit references to
                    information in the article that are partially developed. There is some
                    use of appropriate ITGS terminology.
     [3]: the solution is applied to the specific problem directly; and not generally – how and
     why it solves the problem (first positive evaluation). The solution must be feasible
     and can be applied to the problem, even if not good “quality”.
     [4–5]: one EXTRA evaluation, positive or negative, receives [4] marks. At least ONE
     extra POSITIVE, other than the applied evaluation of the solution, and ONE
     NEGATIVE evaluation, hence balance, is required for [5] marks.

     Evaluation must be more than an identification.

     Unbalanced (only negative or positive) is a maximum of [4].
                                             – 18 –               M17/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




   Marks                                    Level descriptor

               One appropriate solution to at least one problem is proposed and fully
               evaluated, addressing both its strengths and potential weaknesses.
    6–8        Areas for future development may also be identified. Explicit, fully
               developed references to the information in the article are made
               appropriately throughout the response. There is use of appropriate
               ITGS terminology.
[6]: fully evaluated strengths and weaknesses requires a balance of at least TWO
positive and TWO negative evaluations (including the first positive evaluation).
[7–8]: concluding paragraph directly referencing the evaluations to reach a balanced
conclusion as to the effectiveness of the solution.

Students may propose future developments in response to the evaluations, such as
solution/s to the negative evaluations, as part of the conclusion – best fit applies if
included instead of discussion of evaluations.

Warning: some students do not realise that WiFi is a radio signal and propose
solutions that replace it. But Bluetooth and infrared are not suitable replacements; but
they can be marked if later rejected as part of the evaluations. Securing the WiFi with
encryption or different protocols are viable solutions. Refer to:
https://www.forbes.com/sites/gregorymcneal/2016/10/19/key-questions-about-securing-
drones-from-hackers/#497cfeba33f3

Answers may include:

Solutions to the problem of loss of privacy for drone user due to intercepting the
video streamed from the drone
• secure the WiFi/encrypted connection. Companies who manufacture drones could
   be required to include secure WiFi connections between the drone and the
   controller, preventing data interception. Companies may be unwilling to do this
   unless obliged to as it would incur extra development costs. If new drones were
   required to have secure WiFi this would not solve the problem for existing drones
   unless a recall of drones for upgrading the system was made
• provide mandatory training/certification for drone owners on correct use of the
   drones and awareness of the regulations for privacy
• increased security – encryption requires increased processing and therefore
   potential cost and cost of software/hardware development

Do not accept VPN as a version of encryption.

Award [1] for ID of encryption as part of the VPN but the second mark for the details is
not to be awarded. The technology available in the drone and smartphone cannot
support VPN.

Solutions to the problem of loss of privacy for third parties through publishing
captured video/using it to commit crimes
• require drones to be fitted with a flashing light/LED to warn users when the camera
  is pointing in their direction
• strengthen and update privacy laws to include specific sections related to drones
• require all drone users to register their drones. This would only work if there was a
  way of identifying the drone itself while in use – eg a visible serial number on the
  drone (similar to the number on other aircraft) or a unique identification code
  transmitted by the drone on a known frequency
                                              – 19 –               M17/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


• automatic tracking of drones – include extra software for real time and after use
  transmission of movements (students need to specify how the tracking will happen
  and the data transmitted; a mention of tracking is only 1 mark for an identification as
  it lacks details).

   Solutions to the problem of security concerns such as the drone being
   taken over or disabled by third parties
   • secure the WiFi connection (see commentary above)
   • fit drones with ability to change WiFi frequency if the main channel was jammed.

   Solutions to the unemployment from drone use.
   • retrain as operators, maintenance, other appropriate solutions.

   Solutions to the problem of safety concerns where drones are used
   inappropriately (eg near airports, over forest fires, overcrowded areas such as
   sporting fixtures)
   • make all drone owners register their drones so that they can be more easily
      identified
   • draft more explicit regulations and penalties for not following them
   • provide mandatory training/certification for drone owners on correct use of the
      drones and awareness of the regulations
   • use WiFi jammers near airports or at the scene of emergencies to prevent
      drones from operating in the vicinity
   • use “geo-fencing”: Marking certain areas as “forbidden” via their GPS
      coordinates as and make drones download that data by law – drones will not
      cross into the marked areas even if the user instructs them to
   • regulations could include a policy on height
   • regulations may be different for government, commercial or personal use of
      drones.

   Solutions safety concerns due to loss of WiFi/GPS signal
   • setting return to home points (factor if return home is in a different town, drone
      attempts to fly home)
   • using a handset that the phone plugs into and boost the signal strength
      (potential health and safety risk with increased transmission strength)
   • include a signal strength measure in the transmission to the device and set
      alarms at threshold points
   • program a descend and hover function when signal lost (most high-end drones
      like the DJI phantoms already have this) (drone could descend out of sight and
      be lost from the operator’s view)
   • use of enhanced GPS using terrestrial waypoints and markers to improve
      accuracy of GPS and reduce reliance on GPS Satellites.

   If the evaluation does not provide any additional information to that in the article, the
   candidate will be awarded a maximum of [2].
                                       – 20 –               M17/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




Marks                                   Level descriptor

 0      The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

        One feasible solution to at least one problem is proposed and described.
1–2     No evaluative comment is offered. Material is either copied directly from the
        article or implicit references are made to it.

        One appropriate solution to at least one problem is proposed and partially
3–5     evaluated. The response contains explicit references to information in the article
        that are partially developed. There is some use of appropriate ITGS terminology.

        One appropriate solution to at least one problem is proposed and fully evaluated,
        addressing both its strengths and potential weaknesses. Areas for future
6–8     development may also be identified. Explicit, fully developed references to the
        information in the article are made appropriately throughout the response. There
        is use of appropriate ITGS terminology.
