M17/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                               May 2017


                           Psychology


           Higher level and standard level


                               Paper 1




10 pages
                          –2–             M17/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use
of examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.
                                                  –3–               M17/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


The following are the annotations available to use when marking responses.

                          Annotation                  Explanation

                                        Unclear

                                        Incorrect Point


                                        Good Response/Good Point

                               IR       Irrelevant
                              AQ        Answers the Question
                             CKS        Clear Knowledge Shown
                             NAQ        Not Answered Question

                                        Apply to blank pages

                                        On-page comment text box (for
                                        adding specific comments)

                                        Highlight (can be expanded)

                             TNCE       Theory is Not Clearly Explained
                             CON        Contradiction
                             DEV        Development
                               D        Description
                             DET        Relevant Detail
                              EG        Example
                             EVAL       Evaluation
                             EXC        Excellent Point
                              GP        Good Point

                                        Wavy Underline Tool

                              NE        Not Enough
                              VL        Very Limited
                            WKAR        Weak Argument

You must make sure you have looked at all pages. Please put the           annotation on any blank page,
to indicate that you have seen it.
                                                   –4–                 M17/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


                                               Section A
Biological level of analysis

1.   Describe one effect of neurotransmission on human behaviour.                                      [8]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands below when awarding marks.

     The command term “describe” requires candidates to give a detailed account that clearly
     illustrates one effect of neurotransmission on human behaviour.

     Examples of responses include, but are not limited to:
      the role of serotonin in depression
      the role of acetylcholine in memory
      the role of dopamine in addiction
      the role of noradrenaline (norepinephrine) in attention.

     Studies may be presented, but the focus of the response should be on the effects of
     neurotransmission on behaviour and not on the description of a study.

     Animal research may be used to describe an effect of neurotransmission, but the
     response must then be linked to human behaviour. If there is no clear link to human
     behaviour, a maximum of [5] may be awarded.

     If a candidate describes more than one effect of neurotransmission, credit should be given
     only to the first effect described. If the candidate describes one effect that involves several
     neurotransmitters (for example, Fisher on the role of neurotransmission in human
     attraction) this would be acceptable as the focus of the question is on neurotransmission.



     Section A markbands

     Marks       Level descriptor

     0           The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

     1 to 3      There is an attempt to answer the question, but knowledge and understanding
                 is limited, often inaccurate, or of marginal relevance to the question.

     4 to 6      The question is partially answered. Knowledge and understanding is accurate
                 but limited. Either the command term is not effectively addressed or the
                 response is not sufficiently explicit in answering the question.

     7 to 8      The question is answered in a focused and effective manner and meets the
                 demands of the command term. The response is supported by appropriate
                 and accurate knowledge and understanding of research.
                                                  –5–                 M17/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Cognitive level of analysis

2.   Describe one study investigating the reliability of one cognitive process.                            [8]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands on the next page when awarding marks.

     The command term “describe” requires candidates to give a detailed account of one study
     investigating the reliability of one cognitive process. The description should include the aim,
     procedure, results and conclusion of the study.

     Cognitive processes may include, but are not limited to:
      Memory – reconstructive memory, false memories, eye-witness testimony, flashbulb memory,
       memory distortions
      Perception – top-down/bottom-up processing, visual illusions, values, context, cultural factors.

     Studies may include, but are not limited to:
      Bartlett’s (1932) “War of the Ghosts” study relating to schema theory
      Loftus and Palmer’s (1974) study on reconstructive memory
      Riniolo et al.’s (2009) archival study of eyewitness memory related to the sinking of the Titanic
      Deffenbacher et al. (2004) on emotion and reliability of memory
      Deregowski’s (1972) study on visual perception and culture.


     If a candidate only describes the reliability of one cognitive process without making reference to a
     relevant research study, the response should be awarded up to a maximum of [3].

     If a candidate describes more than one study, credit should be given only to the first description.


     Section A markbands

     Marks       Level descriptor

     0           The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

     1 to 3      There is an attempt to answer the question, but knowledge and understanding
                 is limited, often inaccurate, or of marginal relevance to the question.

     4 to 6      The question is partially answered. Knowledge and understanding is accurate
                 but limited. Either the command term is not effectively addressed or the
                 response is not sufficiently explicit in answering the question.

     7 to 8      The question is answered in a focused and effective manner and meets the
                 demands of the command term. The response is supported by appropriate
                 and accurate knowledge and understanding of research.
                                                   –6–                 M17/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Sociocultural level of analysis

3.   Describe the “etic” concept, making reference to one example.                                   [8]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands below when awarding marks.

     “Etic” refers to an approach to studying the role of culture on behaviour. This approach
     describes or explains behaviours across cultures to find out what could be universal in
     human behaviour. Studies may be focused on psychological issues related to universal
     human behaviour or finding similarities/differences across cultures.

     A description of the “etic” concept may include, but is not limited to:
      a deductive approach based on established theory
      often uses an ethnocentric approach
      use of standardized materials that have established reliability
      the goal is generalization to the human population
      use of "experts" trained in psychology.


     Examples of “etic” research may include, but are not limited to:
      Cole and Scribner (1974) – research in cultural differences in memory strategies
      Kashima and Triandis (1986) on cultural differences in attributional styles
      Berry (1967) – variation of Asch’s conformity study
      Kleinman (1982) on cultural differences in expression of depression.

     Candidates may describe the etic approach making reference to an example that is not a research
     study (eg studying mental health). As long as they describe the example clearly and with detail
     they may receive full marks.

     If a candidate describes the “etic” concept without making reference to one example from the
     sociocultural level of analysis, the response should be awarded up to a maximum of [4].

     If a candidate only describes an appropriate example without describing the etic concept, the
     response should be awarded up to a maximum of [3].


     Section A markbands

     Marks       Level descriptor

     0           The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

     1 to 3      There is an attempt to answer the question, but knowledge and understanding
                 is limited, often inaccurate, or of marginal relevance to the question.

     4 to 6      The question is partially answered. Knowledge and understanding is accurate
                 but limited. Either the command term is not effectively addressed or the
                 response is not sufficiently explicit in answering the question.

     7 to 8      The question is answered in a focused and effective manner and meets the
                 demands of the command term. The response is supported by appropriate
                 and accurate knowledge and understanding of research.
                                                    –7–                 M17/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Section B assessment criteria

A — Knowledge and comprehension

Marks      Level descriptor

0          The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

1 to 3     The answer demonstrates limited knowledge and understanding that is of
           marginal relevance to the question. Little or no psychological research is used in
           the response.

4 to 6     The answer demonstrates limited knowledge and understanding relevant to the
           question or uses relevant psychological research to limited effect in the response.

7 to 9     The answer demonstrates detailed, accurate knowledge and understanding
           relevant to the question, and uses relevant psychological research effectively in
           support of the response.


B — Evidence of critical thinking: application, analysis, synthesis, evaluation

Marks      Level descriptor

0          The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

1 to 3     The answer goes beyond description but evidence of critical thinking is not linked
           to the requirements of the question.

4 to 6     The answer offers appropriate but limited evidence of critical thinking or offers
           evidence of critical thinking that is only implicitly linked to the requirements of the
           question.

7 to 9     The answer integrates relevant and explicit evidence of critical thinking in
           response to the question.


C — Organization

Marks      Level descriptor

0          The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

1 to 2     The answer is organized or focused on the question. However, this is not
           sustained throughout the response.

3 to 4     The answer is well organized, well developed and focused on the question.
                                                  –8–                 M17/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


                                              Section B
4.   Discuss two effects of the environment on one or more physiological processes.                  [22]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered review of two effects of the
     environment on one or more physiological processes.

     Candidates should explicitly identify an appropriate environmental factor and the relevant
     physiological process.

     Examples of how the environment may affect physiological processes include, but are not
     limited to:
      jet lag on Circadian rhythms
      daylight hours and levels of melatonin
      poverty on neuroplasticity
      environmental stressors and General Adaptation Syndrome
      effects of institutionalization on growth and physical development.

     Examples of studies include, but are not limited to:
      Maguire et al.’s (2000) on neuroplasticity in the hippocampus of taxi drivers
      Marmot et al.’s (1997) Whitehall study on workplace stress and general health
      Meaney’s (1988) study on how environmental stressors lead to hippocampal cell loss in rats
      Rosenzweig and Bennett’s (1972) study on stimulating environments and dendritic branching
      Bremner et al. (2003) on environmental stressors and the reduction of hippocampal volume.

     Discussion of the effects may include, but is not limited to:
      methodological and/or ethical issues
      supporting and contrary findings
      application of the findings
      contributing factors other than the environment affecting physiological processes.

     If a candidate discusses more than two effects, credit should be given only to the first
     two discussions.

     If a candidate discusses only one effect, the response should be awarded up to a
     maximum of [5] for criterion A, knowledge and comprehension, up to a maximum of [4] for
     criterion B, critical thinking, and up to a maximum of [2] for criterion C, organization. The
     response does not have to be evenly balanced to gain high marks.
                                                 –9–                 M17/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


5.   Discuss the use of technology in investigating one cognitive process.                           [22]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered review of the ways in
     which technology is used in investigating one cognitive process.

     Cognitive processes may include, but are not limited to: memory; perception; attention;
     language; decision-making.

     Examples include, but are not limited to:
      The use of PET scans to monitor brain activity during cognitive tasks (Mosconi, 2005).
      The use of MRI scans to observe specific deficits in the brain and how this impacts
       cognitive processing (Corkin, 1997) or to observe changes in structures related to
       cognition over time (Maguire’s studies: 2000; 2002; 2011).
      The role of fMRI scans to investigate the interaction of parts of the brain in flashbulb
       memories (Phelps, 2011; Sharot, 2007).

     Discussion may include, but is not limited to:
      how brain imaging technologies have changed the study of cognitive psychology
      differences in why and how different technologies are used
      evaluation of the techniques (for example, cost/benefit analysis, reductionism)
      ethical and methodological considerations in the use of the technology.

     It is important that candidates discuss the use of the technology, and not simply evaluate studies.
     Although an actual understanding of how the technology works may be beneficial, it is not
     required for top marks to be awarded.

     Candidates may discuss one type of technology in order to demonstrate depth of
     knowledge, or may discuss a number of different technologies in order to demonstrate
     breadth of knowledge. Both approaches are equally acceptable.

     If a candidate discusses the use of technology in investigating more than one cognitive
     process, credit should be given only to the discussion of the first cognitive process.
                                                 – 10 –              M17/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


6.   Evaluate social identity theory.                                                                   [22]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “evaluate” requires candidates to make an appraisal by weighing up the
     strengths and limitations of social identity theory. Although a discussion of both strengths and
     limitations is required, it does not have to be evenly balanced to gain high marks.

     Studies related to social identity theory may include but are not limited to:
      Tajfel’s studies on social groups and identities
      Sherif et al.’s Robbers Cave study (1961)
      Cialdini et al.’s Basking in Reflected Glory study (1976)
      Abrams’s study of the role of social identity on levels of conformity (1990)
      Maass’s study of the role of social identity on violence (2003).

     Evaluation may include, but is not limited to:
      the effectiveness of the theory in explaining inter-group behaviour
      the productivity of the theory in generating psychological research
      methodological, cultural and gender considerations
      contrary findings or explanations
      applications of the theory.

     If a candidate addresses only strengths or only limitations, the response should be
     awarded up to a maximum of [5] for criterion B, critical thinking, and up to a maximum of
     [2] for criterion C, organization. Up to full marks may be awarded for criterion A,
     knowledge and comprehension.

     If a candidate only evaluates research and does not directly evaluate the theory, the
     response should be awarded up to a maximum of [5] for criterion B, critical thinking, and
     up to a maximum of [2] for criterion C, organization. Up to full marks may be awarded for
     criterion A, knowledge and comprehension.
