M17/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                       Markscheme


                               May 2017


          Social and cultural anthropology


                           Higher level


                               Paper 1




7 pages
                          –2–             M17/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use
of examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Global Centre.
                                                    –3–           M17/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The following are the annotations available to use when marking responses.

          Annotation                          Explanation              Associated shortcut

                          Caret - Omission                                    Alt+3


                          CKS - Clear knowledge shown


                          DES - Descriptive


                          diff - Difference


                          EE - Effective evaluation                           Alt+9


                          GA - Good analysis


                          GD - Good definition

              GEN         GEN – Generalisation

                          GEXA - Good example


                          GEXP - Good explanation                             Alt+5

              GP          GP - Good point                                     Alt+4


                          Highlight - Highlight tool                          Alt+0


                          IR - Irrelevant


                          IU - Inappropriate use


                          ND - No definition

              NEX         NEX - No explanation given                          Alt+7
                                               –4–                M17/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        NExa - No examples                                  Alt+6


                        On Page Comment - On page comment tool              Alt+1


                        SEEN_Small - Seen

                        sim - Similarity

                        Good Response/Good Point                            Alt+2


                        U - Understanding                                   Alt+8


                        WARG - Well argued


You must make sure you have looked at all pages. Please put the      annotation on any blank page,
to indicate that you have seen it.
                                                      –5–                M17/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.       Describe how women in rural India use microcredit in everyday life.                                [6]

         This primarily descriptive question requires candidates to give an account of the different uses of
         microcredit by women in rural India. Candidates may refer to any of the following:
         • repay more expensive debts
         • avoid sexual harassment
         • avoid kin conflict
         • set up businesses, although many fail
         • invest in jewellery
         • avoid socially degrading debts
         • negotiate a better position within their social relations
         • protect reputation.

         More sophisticated responses will identify that the uses of microcredit by these women do not
         necessarily coincide with the intentions of microcredit as a project.




 Marks                                              Level descriptor

     0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

             There is an attempt to organize the response and identify relevant points or examples, but the
     1–2     response relies too heavily on quotations from the text and/or limited generalizations are
             offered.
             The response is organized, identifies and explains relevant points or examples, and offers
     3–4
             generalizations.
             The response is organized, identifies and explains detailed relevant points or examples, and
     5–6
             links them to generalizations, demonstrating good anthropological understanding.
                                                      –6–                M17/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.       Using theoretical perspectives, explain why microcredit is not achieving its
         intended purposes.                                                                                 [6]

         There are several points in the text which can be drawn on to answer this question, but stronger
         answers will incorporate concepts and knowledge from social and cultural anthropology that are
         relevant to the analysis and interpretation of the passage.

         This response requires that candidates make explicit the limits and the creative strategic uses of
         agency given social structural constraints. The abstract goals of microcredit are transformed when
         embedded within the context of rural India. Candidates may refer to caste, gender, kinship, client
         and patron, political structures and patriarchy to illustrate their response with examples taken from
         the text.

         Concepts such as gender, hierarchy, resistance, structural violence, capital, reciprocity and
         development can be drawn upon to discuss this question. Candidates can draw from relevant
         theories, including feminism or world systems/dependency theory, to answer this question. More
         sophisticated responses may identify that the viewpoint of the anthropologist is critical of economic
         projects that do not take cultural context into account. The anthropologist illustrates how women’s
         decisions and practices are rational given their social, cultural and economic context. However,
         these decisions and practices may not appear rational from the perspective of those who have set
         up microcredit schemes. Alternative relevant discussions on the viewpoint of the anthropologist
         are also acceptable.

         The question can be approached from different theoretical perspectives, for example agency,
         structure, diachrony, particularistic or any other relevant perspectives.




 Marks                                              Level descriptor

     0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

             The response is mainly descriptive and relies on quotations, but may demonstrate limited
     1–2
             understanding of relevant anthropological issues and concepts.
             The response demonstrates some understanding of relevant anthropological issues and
     3–4     concepts or theory, or the response recognizes the viewpoint of the anthropologist, but not all
             of these.
             The response demonstrates a critical understanding of relevant anthropological issues,
     5–6
             concepts and theory, and recognizes the viewpoint of the anthropologist.
                                                     –7–                 M17/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.       Compare the agency of women in rural India with the agency of one other group
         you have studied.                                                                                    [8]

         The target societies for this comparative question are varied and many. The question requires
         candidates to demonstrate an understanding of agency as inherent to the decision making and
         practices of individuals or groups in any given society. Agency can take many forms and may be
         limited by the particular social structures of the society in which people live.

         Responses need not revolve around gender or kinship but the agency of other individuals or
         groups can be considered in order to develop the comparison. The measure of this response lies
         in the way in which candidates compare and harness ethnographic knowledge, rather than it being
         a test of knowledge of a similar case study.

         In order to obtain full marks responses must be organized in a clear manner, highlighting
         similarities, differences and generalizations. Candidates must situate the comparative case in
         terms of group, place, author and historical context to gain more than 4 marks.

         Candidates may choose to use theoretical perspectives (ideally introduced in their question 2
         response) to help frame their comparison.




 Marks                                              Level descriptor

     0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

            Comparative ethnography is presented in limited detail and its relevance is only partly
     1–2    established. It is not identified in terms of place, author or historical context. The response
            may not be structured as a comparison.
            Comparative ethnography is presented in limited detail but its relevance is established. The
     3–4    comparative ethnography is identified in terms of place, author and historical context, or the
            response is clearly structured as a comparison.
            Comparative ethnography is presented and its relevance is successfully established. The
            comparative ethnography is identified in terms of place, author and historical context, and the
     5–6
            response is clearly structured as a comparison. Either similarities or differences are
            discussed in detail, but not both.
            Comparative ethnography is presented and its relevance is successfully established. The
            comparative ethnography is identified in terms of place, author and historical context, and the
     7–8    response is clearly structured as a comparison. Similarities and differences are discussed in
            detail. The response demonstrates good anthropological understanding.
