N13/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                       November 2013



      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN A
            GLOBAL SOCIETY


                         Higher Level



                               Paper 3




11 pages
                              –2–             N13/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.
                                                  –3–                N13/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Examiners should be aware that in some cases, candidates may take a different approach, which if
appropriate should be rewarded. If in doubt, check with your Team Leader.

If candidates answer more than the prescribed number of questions:

 In the case of an “identify” question read all answers and mark positively up to the maximum marks.
  Disregard incorrect answers.

 In the case of a “describe” question, which asks for a certain number of facts eg “describe two kinds”,
  mark the first two correct answers. This could include two descriptions, one description and
  one identification, or two identifications.

 In the case of an “explain” question, which asks for a specified number of explanations eg “explain
  two reasons”, mark the first two correct answers. This could include two full explanations,
  one explanation, one partial explanation etc.
                                                   –4–                N13/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.   Describe two situations in which the use of a Global Positioning System (GPS)
     would fail to provide the information the taxi driver needs to find a customer’s
     pick-up point.                                                                   [4 marks]

     Answers may include:
      when signal is poor (ie GPS receiver is near high buildings) or system not
       functioning (ie not connecting to satellites) the driver is unable to find the location as
       they do not have the required knowledge of the city
      less than three satellites are visible from the location of the taxi or client, making a
       GPS position inaccurate or unobtainable
      where streets in different districts have the same name, the driver may inadvertently
       select the wrong street causing a delay in the passenger being picked up
      the GPS system may not pick the quickest or cheapest route to the passenger’s
       location as the algorithms used to determine such routes may focus on designated
       and/or well known locations and/or the shortest route may take longer due to poor
       road conditions
      the GPS software may not be sufficiently up-to-date and does not recognize changes
       to road usage, such as newly designated one-way streets, street closures, road works
       etc
      the software may have bugs / errors in its logic (ie reliability issue) which give wrong
       positions or routes
      the hardware may have reliability issues (faulty components, bad manufacture, wear
       and tear etc) which may lead to incorrect positions and routes
      weather condition may also affect GPS, for example an extremely cloudy day,
       thunderstorm or even heavy rain can all affect the signal
      at certain times for political or malicious reasons GPS can be jammed or
       faked/spoofed
      customer gives the wrong address to the control centre and therefore the taxi
       software sends the taxi in the wrong direction
      customer’s device gives an incorrect GPS location therefore the taxi goes the wrong
       way
      customer device can’t get a signal for any of the reasons mentioned above.

     Award [1 mark] for each situation identified and an additional [1 mark] for a
     description of the situation where the use of a Global Positioning System would not
     provide the information that the taxi driver needs to find a customer’s pick-up point.
     Award a maximum of [2 marks] for each situation.
     Award a maximum of [4 marks] for the question.
                                                  –5–                N13/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   The control centre receives a request to pick up a customer. Explain how the
     integrated IT system (lines 55–61) can determine which taxi should be selected. [6 marks]

     Answer should focus on how the system decides on which taxi is best, but can also
     include a little about how the system get the information and how it then process it.

     Answers may include:
      customer gives location to the control centre at Red Dragon Taxi Company
      staff member at the office inputs location of customer into the integrated IT (IIT)
       system
      a search may be done on the database to retrieve customer’s address and details
      IIT system calculates determines which taxi is most appropriate for the journey based
       on relevant factors (ie amount of time, length of the journey) to reach customer
      IIT system software uses predefined settings to remove taxis that are occupied or do
       not meet the other criteria that may be incorporated into the integrated IT system
       (such as female driver only, ability to speak English, no shared taxi)
      the IIT system takes into consideration the shift ending time of the taxi driver to
       check whether a long journey would be possible
      the IIT System might consider previous bookings for that taxi driver to make sure the
       taxi is still in the area to fulfill previous planned journeys
      the IIT System might consider the amount of jobs a driver has already had that day
       when deciding between two possible taxis, so that workload/commission is balanced
       out evenly
      the IIT System might take into consideration the type of vehicle (size / wheelchair
       access etc) according to the needs of the customer
      a predetermined algorithm ranks the taxis that are available in order of
       appropriateness
      a message is sent to this taxi to inform the driver of the location of the customer
      a taxi will accept the job and therefore confirm that it has received and will act on the
       instructions, otherwise another taxi may be chosen instead
      a message may be sent to the customer to inform him/her of how long the taxi may
       take to arrive, the taxi registration number etc.

     [1–2 marks]
     A limited response that indicates very little understanding of the topic or the reason is
     not clear.

     [3–4 marks]
     A reasonable description of how the integrated IT system determines the most
     appropriate driver. The answer may be unbalanced and lack appropriate reasoning at
     the lower end of the band.

     [5–6 marks]
     A clear, detailed and balanced explanation of how the integrated IT system determines
     the most appropriate driver with clear evidence of technical understanding.
                                                 –6–                N13/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   Red Dragon Taxi Company’s new integrated communication and dispatch system
     (line 107) has the capability of recording information about customers and their
     journeys.

     With reference to your research, to what extent does the collection of customer
     information conflict with the customers’ privacy?                               [8 marks]

     Answers may include:
      what data is Red Dragon Taxi Company recording about the customers?
      are the customers aware of the data that is being collected by Red Dragon Taxi
       Company and how it may be used? Are they required to agree to the collection and
       possible dissemination of the data? What are the advantages to Red Dragon Taxi
       Company of holding personal data?
      how feasible is it to record customers’ data unless they register with Red Dragon
       Taxi Company? Must prospective customers register to take advantage of the service
       provided by Red Dragon Taxi Company? How appropriate is registration for many
       of the customers of Red Dragon Taxi Company?
      who has access to this data collected by Red Dragon Taxi Company? To what extent
       does the Red Dragon Taxi Company make prospective customers aware of how their
       personal information may be used?
      how long will the data be kept for, and how will it be destroyed after this time period
       has expired?
      what policies is Red Dragon Taxi Company considering implementing to ensure the
       privacy of the data held on its IT systems?
      if Red Dragon Taxi Company’s data is held on a third party server, what measures
       are in place to ensure the privacy of customer data?
      what safeguards exist to prevent the future selling of customer data held by Red
       Dragon Taxi Company? What measures can be put in place to ensure the privacy of
       customers?
      will there by physical security at the data centre / server? IE locks, key cards,
       biometrics to prevent physical access by unauthorized people?
      will there be digital security measures to prevent unauthorized access and corruption
       (firewall, password access, anti-virus and anti-malware)
      to what extent does Red Dragon Taxi Company have a different understanding of the
       terms privacy, ethical data management and data security to that of its customers?
      sensitivity of the data – is it basic contact information, does it contain medical or
       other data such as religion, or what about credit card payments – are the credit cards
       numbers stored with the customer details
      the data recorded may be from during the actual journey, as well as about the journey
       (ie audio/video footage recorded by a CCTV/audio device in the taxi). This could
       therefore raise privacy concerns because conversations could be recorded.
                                         –7–                N13/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


SL and HL paper 1 part (c) and HL paper 3 question 3 markband
     Marks                                      Level descriptor
                          A response with no knowledge or understanding of the relevant
    No marks               ITGS issues and concepts.
                          A response that includes no appropriate ITGS terminology.
                          A response with minimal knowledge and understanding of the
                           relevant ITGS issues and concepts.
                          A response that       includes   minimal    use   of   appropriate
      Basic                ITGS terminology.
   1–2 marks              A response that has no evidence of judgments and/or conclusions.
                          No reference is made to the scenario in the stimulus material in
                           the response.
                          The response may be no more than a list.
                          A descriptive response with limited knowledge and/or
                           understanding of the relevant ITGS issues and/or concepts.
                          A response that       includes    limited   use   of   appropriate
                           ITGS terminology.
    Adequate
                          A response that has evidence of conclusions and/or judgments
   3–4 marks
                           that are no more than unsubstantiated statements. The analysis
                           underpinning them may also be partial or unbalanced.
                          Implicit references are made to the scenario in the stimulus
                           material in the response.
                          A response with knowledge and understanding of the relevant
                           ITGS issues and/or concepts.
                          A response that uses ITGS terminology appropriately in places.
   Competent
                          A response that includes conclusions and/or judgments that have
   5–6 marks
                           limited support and are underpinned by a balanced analysis.
                          Explicit references to the scenario in the stimulus material are
                           made at places in the response.
                          A response with a detailed knowledge and understanding of the
                           relevant ITGS issues and/or concepts.
                          A response that uses ITGS terminology appropriately throughout.
    Proficient
                          A response that includes conclusions and/or judgments that are
   7–8 marks
                           well supported and underpinned by a balanced analysis.
                          Explicit references are made appropriately to the scenario in the
                           stimulus material throughout the response.
                                                 –8–                N13/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   Red Dragon Taxi Company has found that there is a wide range of IT systems
     available that could meet their needs and be implemented by July 2014.
     With reference to your research, discuss the criteria that could be used to evaluate
     these systems.                                                                       [12 marks]

     Examiners need to be aware that students may mention specific features that the system
     should have which should be accepted only if this is inside one of the criteria
     mentioned, such as “features of the system”. It is not valid if the focus of the response
     deals with features of the system only.

     Answers may include:
     Economic
      initial costs of purchasing the system and/or finance packages available. What value
       will the integrated communication and dispatch system add to Red Dragon Taxi
       Company?
      possible additional costs such as system upgrades. What is included? What is not?
       To what extent is the system structured so that some system modules can be
       purchased as needed to delay costs?
      possible licensing costs to run and maintain the integrated communication and
       dispatch systems
      development costs for new features
      training costs for existing staff
      data costs for updating data (eg map data on GPs / GIS systems).

     Functionality
      the software should fulfil all of the requirements of the Red Dragon Taxi Company
       which will have been laid out in the requirements specification
      the functionality of the software may go beyond the requirements of the Red Dragon
       Taxi Company and also have features which are useful
      the software should not have many extra features which are not useful to the Red
       Dragon Taxi Company as this may confuse users or affect the performance of the
       software
      the speed and performance of the software as well as the capacity for storage of
       information is adequate for present and future needs.



                                                                                             continued …
                                                  –9–                N13/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Question 4 continued

     Usability / ease of implementation / changeover for Red Dragon Taxi Company and
     taxi drivers
      how well does the software operate with existing IT systems?
      how much data can be transferred/migrated to the integrated communication and
        dispatch system?
      how much training is required by the staff in the Red Dragon Taxi Company offices
        to work with the integrated communication and dispatch system?
      what refinements are necessary for drivers working for Red Dragon Taxi Company
        to be able to utilise the integrated communication and dispatch system?
      how important for Red Dragon Taxi Company is it that the software is intuitive? Is it
        preferable to have a cheaper solution that can be more rapidly implemented and train
        the staff to use it?
      how urgent is the need to adopt the new integrated communication and dispatch
        system?
      how quickly can the project be completed (does it fit in the timeline that the Red
        Dragon Taxi Company have thought of)?

     Standards and Protocols / Technology
      is the software future-proof?
      does it implement the latest standards and versions
      is it compatible with other related products and data sources
      is it compatible with any legacy systems the company already has?

     The company providing the software
      does the company have a good reputation or positive track record?
      is the company financially stable and guaranteed to exist for the life of the product
      are there references / proof from existing customers/users of the software

     Support provided by the software developers of the integrated communication and
     dispatch system
      what are the Service Level Agreements available with the integrated communication
        and dispatch systems? (ie response time, levels of service)
      is the support for the system confined to that provided by the software developer, or
        are there user forums that Red Dragon Taxi Company can use to resolve issues with
        the software? How reliable are these forums?

     Cost benefit analysis
      to what extent do the weightings of the different criteria selected vary? How much
       will this influence a final decision?
      how important are the different phases associated with the implementation of a new
       integrated communication and dispatch system? For example, is it more important
       that the new integrated communication and dispatch system is implemented without
       a rigorous stakeholder analysis? How much emphasis should be placed on the
       planning stage?



                                                                                               continued …
                                                – 10 –             N13/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Question 4 continued

     Organisational benefits / customer satisfaction
      to what extent will the integrated communication and dispatch system improve the
       management and efficiency of the service provided by Red Dragon Taxi Company?
       Is it worth the investment?

     N.B. Many of these points may be expressed across a range of different criteria.
                                         – 11 –              N13/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


HL paper 3 question 4 markband
      Marks                                        Level descriptor
                         A response with no knowledge or understanding of the relevant
     No marks             ITGS issues and concepts.
                         A response that includes no appropriate ITGS terminology.
                         A response with minimal knowledge and understanding of the
                          relevant ITGS issues and concepts.
                         A response that         includes   minimal   use   of   appropriate
                          ITGS terminology.
       Basic
                         A response that has no evidence of judgments, conclusions or future
     1–3 marks            strategies.
                         No reference is made to the information in the case study or
                          independent research in the response.
                         The response may be no more than a list.
                         A descriptive response with limited knowledge and/or
                          understanding of the relevant ITGS issues and/or concepts.
                         A response that         includes   limited   use   of   appropriate
                          ITGS terminology.
      Adequate
                         A response that has evidence of conclusions, judgments or future
     4–6 marks
                          strategies that are no more than unsubstantiated statements.
                          The analysis underpinning them may also be partial or unbalanced.
                         Implicit references are made to the information in the case study or
                          independent research in the response.
                         A response with knowledge and understanding of the relevant ITGS
                          issues and/or concepts.
                         A response that uses ITGS terminology appropriately in places.
     Competent
                         A response that includes future strategies, conclusions and/or
     7–9 marks            judgments that have limited support and are underpinned by a
                          balanced analysis.
                         Explicit references to the information in the case study or
                          independent research are made at places in the response.
                         A response with a detailed knowledge and understanding of the
                          relevant ITGS issues and/or concepts.
                         A response that uses ITGS terminology appropriately throughout.
     Proficient
                         A response that includes conclusions, judgments or future strategies
    10–12 marks
                          that are well supported and underpinned by a balanced analysis.
                         Explicit references are made appropriately to the information in the
                          case study and independent research throughout the response.
