N13/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                      November 2013



              SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
                ANTHROPOLOGY



                        Higher Level



                               Paper 1




5 pages
                              –2–            N13/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.
                                                 –3–               N13/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.   Describe the different views of Welsh and English people on the extermination
     of badgers.                                                                   [6 marks]

     This question calls for a primarily descriptive response. Candidates should be able to recognize that
     views on the extermination of badgers is a complex topic and not dependent on any single factor
     such as ethnic or linguistic identity.

     The Welsh authorities have called for the extermination of badgers in Wales in order to stop the
     spread of Bovine Tuberculosis (bTB). bTB infected cattle must be slaughtered, causing distress to
     the farming community. Badgers, wild animals that share territory with domestic cattle, are
     understood to transmit bTB, although the evidence is not conclusive. Furthermore, many people in
     the UK feel affectionate towards badgers, in part because of their positive portrayal in children’s
     literature. A badger is also used as a symbol for a Wildlife Trust, and badgers attract tourists.

     The farmers most vulnerable to bTB are predominantly locally-born Welsh, although the area is
     also home to many English who have settled there, some of whom also farm. There are tensions
     between the Welsh and English people.

     At first glance it might appear that Welsh people are pro-extermination and English people are anti-.
     It was, after all, the Welsh authorities who called for the extermination and the largely
     Welsh farmers are most likely to benefit. For the English who have moved into the area,
     badgers are a powerful symbol of their rural dream, and exterminating them is insensitive
     and unenlightened.

     However, there are Welsh townspeople who do not support the extermination but still understand
     the arguments for it, and Welsh farmers who are against the extermination but do not want to cause
     further tension in the community by voicing their opinions in public. Some English people who are
     trying to integrate also avoid discussing the issue in public.

     The extermination of badgers is an issue that appears to divide communities, with people either for
     or against. This is commonly, although incorrectly, superimposed onto another clear divide
     in communities, that of being Welsh or English.


            Marks                           Level descriptor
                 0 The work does not reach a standard described by the
                   descriptors below.
               1–2 There is an attempt to organize the response and identify
                   relevant points or examples, but the response relies too
                   heavily on quotations from the text and/or limited
                   generalizations are offered.
               3–4 The response is organized, identifies and explains some
                   relevant points or examples, and offers generalizations.
               5–6 The response is organized, identifies and explains detailed
                   relevant points or examples, and links them to generalizations,
                   demonstrating good anthropological understanding.
                                                 –4–               N13/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   Using theoretical perspectives, analyse the role of language in the construction of
     identity in West Wales.                                                             [6 marks]

     This question calls for a more analytical approach. Good candidates should be able to
     identify that language is one amongst a number of factors contributing to identity
     construction in West Wales, others including ethnicity (English or Welsh) and residence
     (urban or rural).

     Caplan states that the Welsh language is the most important manifestation of local
     culture in West Wales. Knowledge and use of the Welsh language gives a strong
     indication of Welsh identity, particularly in a community affected by a large influx of
     English people who are not native Welsh speakers. Use of Welsh is a convenient –
     although not necessarily accurate – test of a person’s likely origins, and is a way of
     singling out and alienating English settlers not willing to learn the language.

     The recent resurgence of Welsh language, supported by the partly autonomous
     Welsh authority, emphasizes a self-conscious effort to link language with a distinct
     Welsh identity. Welsh television programmes and radio stations are supported,
     road signs are in Welsh and all children must learn Welsh in school. One further effect
     of this would be creating a sense of Welsh identity amongst the children of
     English settlers.

     While there are English settlers who do not speak Welsh, some have made the effort to
     learn the language and this valuing of Welsh is understood by these English as a way of
     helping them to integrate with the local community. In a sense their identity becomes
     more Welsh and less English through the adoption of the Welsh language.

     Candidates should identify themes of social reproduction, agency, culture and meaning
     in their responses, as well as ideas relating to syllabus themes 2.1 (Individuals, groups
     and society); 2.2 (Societies and cultures in contact) and 2.6 (Systems of knowledge).

     Candidates could use agency-centred, structure-centred, cohesion-centred,
     conflict-centred, and/or even idealist theoretical approaches, as well as references to
     theorists who study identity, in order to frame their analysis.

          Marks                            Level descriptor
                0 The work does not reach a standard described by the
                  descriptors below.
              1–2 The response is mainly descriptive and relies on quotations,
                  but may demonstrate limited understanding of relevant
                  anthropological issues and concepts.
              3–4 The response demonstrates some understanding of relevant
                  anthropological issues and concepts or theory, or the response
                  recognizes the viewpoint of the anthropologist, but not all
                  of these.
              5–6 The response demonstrates a critical understanding of relevant
                  anthropological issues, concepts and theory, and recognizes
                  the viewpoint of the anthropologist.
                                                –5–             N13/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   Compare and contrast the way in which the badger is the focus of conflict in
     West Wales, with the role played by an object or symbol, in one society that you
     have studied.                                                                    [8 marks]

     Candidates may choose any social group in order to develop a comparison.
     The question requires candidates to demonstrate an understanding of how an object or
     symbol is used by different groups of people within a society. A direct comparison
     might compare variant understandings of such an object or symbol within a conflict
     situation, alternative responses might focus on the way an object or symbol is used to
     foster a sense of unity.

           Marks                          Level descriptor
                 0 The work does not reach a standard described by the
                   descriptors below.
               1–2 Comparative ethnography is presented in limited detail and its
                   relevance is only partly established. It is not identified in
                   terms of place, author or historical context. The response may
                   not be structured as a comparison.
               3–4 Comparative ethnography is presented in limited detail but its
                   relevance is established. The comparative ethnography is
                   identified in terms of place, author and historical context,
                   or the response is clearly structured as a comparison.
               5–6 Comparative ethnography is presented and its relevance is
                   successfully established. The comparative ethnography is
                   identified in terms of place, author and historical context,
                   and the response is clearly structured as a comparison.
                   Either similarities or differences are discussed in detail,
                   but not both.
               7–8 Comparative ethnography is presented and its relevance is
                   successfully established. The comparative ethnography is
                   identified in terms of place, author and historical context,
                   and the response is clearly structured as a comparison.
                   Similarities and differences are discussed in detail. The
                   response demonstrates good anthropological understanding.
