N13/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                       November 2013



                        PHILOSOPHY



                         Higher Level



                               Paper 3




6 pages
                              –2–             N13/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.
                                                    –3–                N13/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Note to examiners
This markscheme outlines what members of the paper setting team had in mind when they devised the
questions. The topics listed in the bullet points indicate possible areas candidates might cover in their
answers. They are not compulsory points and not necessarily the best possible points. They are only a
framework to help examiners in their assessment. Examiners should be responsive to any other valid
points or any other valid approaches.

Paper 3 guidance
Examiners are reminded that in the examination paper it states that candidates are expected to
demonstrate the following skills. Since these skills are encouraged within the assessment criteria,
examiners should take them into account in their marking:
• develop a response in an organized way using clear, precise language, which is appropriate to
   philosophy
• identify pertinent issues regarding the philosophical activity raised in the text
• take an independent position about the nature of philosophical activity in relation to the ideas
   developed in the text
• draw upon, and show a holistic appreciation of, the skills, material and ideas developed throughout
   the course.

Candidates are also told that their responses are expected to include:
• a concise description of philosophical activity as presented in the text
• an exploration of the pertinent issues regarding philosophical activity raised in the text, relating this to
  their experience of doing philosophy throughout the whole course
• appropriate references to the text that illustrate their understanding of philosophical activity
• their personal evaluation of the issues regarding philosophical activity raised in the text.

Using the assessment criteria
Answers on Paper 3 are assessed according to the assessment criteria set out on pages 4–5.
                                                     –4–                 N13/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 3 assessment criteria

A    Expression

     • Has the student formulated the response in an organized way?
     • How clear and precise is the language used by the student?
     • To what extent is the language appropriate to philosophy?

       Achievement     Descriptor
          Level
            0          The student has not reached level 1.
            1          The student expresses some basic ideas but it is not always clear what the response is
                       trying to convey. The use of language is not appropriate to philosophy.
             2         The student presents some ideas in an organized way. There is some clarity of
                       expression but the response cannot always be followed. The use of language is not
                       always appropriate to philosophy.
             3         The student presents ideas in an organized way and the response can be easily followed.
                       The use of language is appropriate to philosophy.
             4         The student presents ideas in an organized and coherent way and the response is clearly
                       articulated. The use of language is effective and appropriate to philosophy.
             5         The student presents ideas in an organized, coherent and incisive way, insights are
                       clearly articulated and the response is focused and sustained. The use of language is
                       precise and appropriate to philosophy.


B    Exploration

     • How well does the student identify pertinent issues regarding philosophical activity raised in the text?
     • How effectively does the student explore the text and present appropriate examples and/or illustrations?
     • How well does the student draw on the experience of doing philosophy throughout the whole course in
       exploring issues raised in the text?

       Achievement     Descriptor
          Level
            0          The student has not reached level 1.
            1          The student demonstrates little or no evidence of identifying pertinent issues regarding
                       philosophical activity raised in the text.
             2         The student demonstrates some evidence of identifying pertinent issues regarding
                       philosophical activity raised in the text.
             3         The student demonstrates satisfactory evidence of identifying pertinent issues regarding
                       philosophical activity raised in the text. Examples or illustrations are used in support of
                       exploring the issues.
             4         The student demonstrates good evidence of identifying pertinent issues regarding
                       philosophical activity raised in the text. Appropriate examples or illustrations are used in
                       support of exploring the issues. The student draws on some experience of doing
                       philosophy throughout the course in exploring the issues raised in the text.
             5         The student demonstrates precise evidence of identifying pertinent issues raised
                       regarding philosophical activity in the text. Examples or illustrations are well chosen
                       and are compelling in support of exploring the issues. The student draws insightfully on
                       the experience of doing philosophy throughout the whole course in exploring the issues
                       raised in the text.
                                                     –5–                 N13/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


C   Relevance of the response and understanding of philosophical activity

    • How detailed and appropriate are the student’s references to the text?
    • How relevant is the response to the text?
    • How well does the response demonstrate an understanding of philosophical activity?

     Achievement      Descriptor
        Level
          0           The student has not reached level 1.
         1–2          The student makes no references to the text. There is only a basic understanding of the
                      way the text raises issues about philosophy as an activity.
          3–4         The student makes few relevant references to the text. There is a limited understanding
                      of the way the text raises issues about philosophy as an activity and the beginnings of an
                      awareness of how philosophical activity is carried out.
          5–6         The student makes some relevant references to the text. There is a satisfactory
                      understanding of the way the text raises issues about philosophy as an activity and a
                      limited awareness of how philosophical activity is carried out.
          7–8         The student makes effective references to the text. There is a good understanding of the
                      way the text raises issues about philosophy as an activity and an awareness of how
                      philosophical activity is carried out.
          9–10        The student makes compelling and convincing references to the text. There is an
                      in-depth understanding of the way the text raises issues about philosophy as an activity
                      and a clear awareness of how philosophical activity is carried out.


D   Evaluation and personal response

    • How well does the student evaluate the philosophical activity raised in the text?
    • To what extent does the student express a relevant personal response?

     Achievement      Descriptor
        Level
          0           The student has not reached level 1.
         1–2          The student expresses little or no personal response. There is little or no evaluation of
                      the philosophical activity raised in the text.
          3–4         The student expresses little personal response to the issues regarding philosophical
                      activity raised in the text. There is a basic evaluation of the philosophical activity raised
                      in the text.
          5–6         The student expresses some personal response to the issues regarding philosophical
                      activity raised in the text. There is a satisfactory evaluation of the philosophical activity
                      raised in the text.
          7–8         The student expresses a thoughtful personal response to the issues regarding
                      philosophical activity raised in the text. There is a good evaluation of the philosophical
                      activity raised in the text.
          9–10        The student expresses a thoughtful and insightful personal response to the issues
                      regarding philosophical activity raised in the text. There is a convincing evaluation of
                      the philosophical activity raised in the text.
                                                   –6–                N13/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Unseen text – exploring philosophical activity

This paper consists of an unseen text to which candidates are required to write a response. The purpose
of the exercise is to allow candidates to reflect upon and explore the nature, function, methodology and
meaning of philosophical activity as presented in the text, relating this to the candidate’s experience of
doing philosophy throughout the course (drawing on all elements including the Core Theme, Optional
Themes, the Prescribed Text and Internal Assessment). Responses will reflect this in different ways,
using specific examples from the candidate’s own experience of the course. Responses will use the
text extract to identify pertinent issues which enable an exploration of philosophical activity, and
references to the text extract should reflect an understanding of the way the text raises issues about
philosophy as an activity.

In this particular text extract there are many pertinent issues raised about philosophical activity including
the issue of the centrality of “careful critical examination” in evaluating “the information and beliefs we
have about the universe at large, and the world of human affairs”. This raises the issue of the kind of
picture that emerges of “all that we know and think”. There is mention of: the way philosophical activity
can help a person understand his/her place in the world of affairs, affecting aspirations and understanding;
the history of philosophy and how we consider information to be “reliable or important”;
scientific discoveries and an invitation is made for the philosopher to use critical examination to discover
if “views and beliefs are based upon adequate evidence” and justification; general outlooks about the
world most of us hold, which perhaps lack consistency and coherence, and the way the “philosopher feels
that these must be inspected, scrutinized and organized …”. Philosophy is better explained by “doing it”
with a conviction that examination, analysis and evidence is important. There are ways that the
philosopher thinks about certain matters finding out what ideas/concepts mean, what we base knowledge
on and what standards are used in arriving at (“sound”) judgments. The passage claims that
“the philosopher does not want just any answers” but “wants to find the right answers … that … are
warranted after most thoughtful consideration”. An issue of certainty about the “true” answers is raised
which may be explored in relation to how a rational person adopts them. In this exploration, the
possibility of only realizing “the inadequacy of all answers … thus far presented” is raised.

Candidates might consider links like the following to their experience of doing the HL course in response
to this text extract:
• The Core Theme might have introduced students to a consideration of our place in “the world of
    human affairs” (lines 5 and 10)
• The way “(a) philosopher thinks about certain matters in certain ways … what we base our knowledge
    on …” (lines 35–37) might be linked to their study of Optional Theme 1, Grounds of epistemology
• The awareness of the historical development of philosophy (line 15) might be linked to their study of
    a prescribed text
• “… philosophy can be better explained by doing it rather than trying to describe it” (line 33) might be
    linked to their experience of doing the Internal Assessment activity
• Critical questions about whether a systematic picture of “all that we know and think” can be
    worked out
• The clarity and importance of the idea of rationality to which appeal is made in the text.
