N13/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX




     88135707

PSYCHOLOGY
HIGHER LEVEL
PAPER 3

Thursday 7 November 2013 (morning)

1 hour


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

 Do not turn over this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Read the passage carefully and then answer all the questions.
 The maximum mark for this examination paper is [30 marks].




8813-5707                                                                                           2 pages
                                                            © International Baccalaureate Organization 2013
                                                            –2–                       N13/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX

The stimulus material below is based on a research article that describes a qualitative study to investigate
family doctors’ beliefs and attitudes towards obesity management within their clinical work.

            Treatment of obesity is problematic. Research shows that although people may initially lose weight
            as a result of treatment, they often return to their original weight after a few years. Management
            of obesity often takes place in primary care (that is, the family doctor) but it seems that family
            doctors are somewhat negative about their own role in obesity treatment. It seems that doctors
      5     have little enthusiasm for managing patients’ weight, prescribing anti-obesity drugs, or referring
            obese patients for surgery. They also feel that obesity management could interfere with a good
            relationship with patients.

            The aim of this qualitative study was to explore how family doctors felt about weight management
            strategies and how the doctors’ relationships with their obese patients could be affected.

     10     Twenty-one family doctors in London of various cultural backgrounds agreed to be interviewed
            for the study. There were 10 males and 11 females ranging in age from 30 to 59 years.

            The researchers used semi-structured interviews. Family doctors were asked questions about their
            obese patients (for example, “How did you feel about managing this patient?”) and also broader
            questions about managing obesity in general (for example, “What do you think is the best way to
     15     help patients who are obese?”). The interviews were audiotaped and later transcribed. The data
            was analysed using inductive content analysis.

            Findings indicated that the doctors primarily saw obesity as a problem that was caused by, and
            should be managed by, the patients themselves. According to the doctors, many patients were
            reluctant to accept personal responsibility for their problems and thought that doctors could
     20     perform miracles.

            This conflict of responsibility frustrated the doctors because when patients do not take ownership
            of their problem, they do not try to change their lifestyle. Even when doctors accepted responsibility,
            they believed there were no effective treatments to prescribe. Doctors were well aware of the
            stigma of being obese, but also recognized that obesity was often just one of many problems in
     25     a patient’s life. The primary concern of doctors was to maintain good relationships with their
            patients and, therefore, they were prepared to offer treatments for obesity even though they did not
            believe these treatments would be effective.
                                   [Source: © International Baccalaureate Organization 2014]


Answer all of the following three questions, referring to the stimulus material in your answers. Marks will
be awarded for demonstration of knowledge and understanding of qualitative research methodology.

1.    Explain considerations involved before conducting the semi-structured interviews in
      this study.                                                                                      [10 marks]

2.    Describe how the researchers in this study could use inductive content analysis
      (thematic analysis) on the interview transcripts.                                                [10 marks]

3.    To what extent can findings from this study be generalized?                                      [10 marks]


8813-5707
