N13/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                      November 2013



                       PSYCHOLOGY



           Higher Level and Standard Level



                               Paper 1




10 pages
                              –2–            N13/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.
                                                  –3–                N13/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                              SECTION A

Biological level of analysis

1.   Describe ethical considerations related to one study at the biological level of
     analysis.                                                                       [8 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands on the next page when awarding marks.

     The command term “describe” requires candidates to give a detailed account of ethical
     considerations related to one study at the biological level of analysis.

     Candidates should refer to an appropriate study carried out at the biological level of
     analysis. When addressing ethical considerations, it is not necessary to refer to a study
     that violates these standards; the study could have met ethical standards.

     Ethical considerations include, but are not limited to:
      obtaining informed consent
      avoiding harm or suffering of participants
      no changes to the participants that are not reversible in nature
      anonymity maintained
      the need for debriefing.

     Examples must be focused on biological aspects of the research – for example, Corkin’s
     use of brain imaging would be acceptable, whereas Milner’s cognitive testing of HM
     would not.

     Candidates must make an explicit link between ethical considerations and the study to
     access the top markband.

     If a candidate describes ethical considerations related to more than one study, credit
     should be given only to the first study.

     If a candidate only addresses one ethical consideration, then marks in the top markband
     should not be awarded.

     If a candidate describes a study but ethical considerations are not addressed, apply the
     markbands up to a maximum of [3 marks].

     If a candidate addresses ethical considerations but does not refer to an appropriate study,
     apply the markbands up to a maximum of [3 marks].

     Candidates may describe a smaller number of ethical considerations in order to
     demonstrate depth of knowledge, or may describe a larger number of ethical
     considerations in order to demonstrate breadth of knowledge. Both approaches are
     equally acceptable.
                                          –4–               N13/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Section A markbands

Marks       Level descriptor

0           The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

1 to 3      There is an attempt to answer the question, but knowledge and
            understanding is limited, often inaccurate, or of marginal relevance to the
            question.

4 to 6      The question is partially answered. Knowledge and understanding is
            accurate but limited. Either the command term is not effectively addressed
            or the response is not sufficiently explicit in answering the question.

7 to 8      The question is answered in a focused and effective manner and meets
            the demands of the command term. The response is supported by
            appropriate and accurate knowledge and understanding of research.
                                                  –5–                N13/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Cognitive level of analysis

2.   Explain the reliability of one cognitive process with reference to one relevant
     study.                                                                          [8 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands below when awarding marks.

     The command term “explain” requires candidates to give a detailed account, including
     reasons for why one cognitive process is or is not reliable. Cognitive processes may
     include: memory, perception, attention, language, thinking or decision-making.

     Responses may include, but are not limited to:
      that human memory is reconstructive and remembering is not simply retrieving a
       fully encoded event (Loftus and Palmer, 1974; Bartlett, 1932)
      that human memory may be reliable, for example, eyewitness testimony because of
       reliable biological processes (Brown and Kulik, 1977; Yuille and Cutshall, 1986)
      the role of heuristics in decision-making leads to errors in judgement (Tversky and
       Kahneman, 1974).

     Whichever cognitive process is selected, the focus of the response should be on its reliability.

     If the reliability of more than one cognitive process is explained, credit should be given
     only to the first cognitive process.

     If a candidate refers to more than one study, credit should be given only to the first
     study.

     If a candidate only describes an appropriate study without making reference to the
     reliability of one cognitive process, apply the markbands up to a maximum of
     [3 marks].

     If a candidate explains the reliability of one cognitive process without making reference
     to a study, apply the markbands up to a maximum of [4 marks].


     Section A markbands

     Marks          Level descriptor

     0              The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

     1 to 3         There is an attempt to answer the question, but knowledge and
                    understanding is limited, often inaccurate, or of marginal relevance to the
                    question.

     4 to 6         The question is partially answered. Knowledge and understanding is
                    accurate but limited. Either the command term is not effectively
                    addressed or the response is not sufficiently explicit in answering the
                    question.

     7 to 8         The question is answered in a focused and effective manner and meets
                    the demands of the command term. The response is supported by
                    appropriate and accurate knowledge and understanding of research.
                                                  –6–               N13/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Sociocultural level of analysis

3.   Explain one compliance technique.                                                            [8 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands below when awarding marks.

     The command term “explain” requires candidates to give a detailed account, including
     reasons or causes, of one compliance technique.

     Acceptable compliance techniques include, but are not limited to:
      reciprocity
      foot-in-the-door
      door-in-the-face
      low balling
      bait and switch.

     If a candidate explains more than one compliance technique, credit should be given only
     to the first explanation.

     Although an example should be given to illustrate the technique, it is not required that
     the example be an empirical study.

     Candidates may address principles and/or factors such as evolutionary arguments, social
     comparison, cognitive dissonance, cultural norms, goal gradients (commitment) and/or
     preservation of self-image as part of an explanation of the compliance technique.
     However, if a candidate explains factors without reference to a specific compliance
     technique, a maximum of [3 marks] should be awarded.

     If a candidate only describes an appropriate study without identifying or explaining a
     compliance technique, apply the markbands up to a maximum of [3 marks].


     Section A markbands

     Marks          Level descriptor

     0              The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

     1 to 3         There is an attempt to answer the question, but knowledge and
                    understanding is limited, often inaccurate, or of marginal relevance to the
                    question.

     4 to 6         The question is partially answered. Knowledge and understanding is
                    accurate but limited. Either the command term is not effectively
                    addressed or the response is not sufficiently explicit in answering the
                    question.

     7 to 8         The question is answered in a focused and effective manner and meets
                    the demands of the command term. The response is supported by
                    appropriate and accurate knowledge and understanding of research.
                                                  –7–               N13/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Section B assessment criteria

A — Knowledge and comprehension

Marks            Level descriptor

0                The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

1 to 3           The answer demonstrates limited knowledge and understanding that is of
                 marginal relevance to the question. Little or no psychological research is
                 used in the response.

4 to 6           The answer demonstrates limited knowledge and understanding relevant to
                 the question or uses relevant psychological research to limited effect in the
                 response.

7 to 9           The answer demonstrates detailed, accurate knowledge and understanding
                 relevant to the question, and uses relevant psychological research effectively
                 in support of the response.


B — Evidence of critical thinking: application, analysis, synthesis, evaluation

Marks            Level descriptor

0                The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

1 to 3           The answer goes beyond description but evidence of critical thinking is not
                 linked to the requirements of the question.

4 to 6           The answer offers appropriate but limited evidence of critical thinking or
                 offers evidence of critical thinking that is only implicitly linked to the
                 requirements of the question.

7 to 9           The answer integrates relevant and explicit evidence of critical thinking in
                 response to the question.


C — Organization

Marks            Level descriptor

0                The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

1 to 2           The answer is organized or focused on the question. However, this is not
                 sustained throughout the response.

3 to 4           The answer is well organized, well developed and focused on the question.
                                                –8–              N13/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                            SECTION B

4.   Evaluate the use of two brain imaging technologies in investigating the relationship
     between biological factors and behaviour.                                            [22 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “evaluate” requires candidates to address the strengths and
     limitations of brain imaging technologies. Candidates need to clearly identify two
     brain imaging technologies, give examples of how they have been used in research, and
     then evaluate their use. Although a discussion of both strengths and limitations is
     required, it does not have to be evenly balanced to gain high marks.

     Examples of brain imaging technologies could include, but are not limited to:
      EEG (for example, Davidson et al., 2004, on meditation)
      TCI (transcranial imaging) in studies of PTSD
      PET (for example, Raine et al., 1997, on violent behaviour; use of PET in the study
       of Alzheimer’s disease)
      MRI (for example, Corkin, 1997, study of HM)
      fMRI (for example, Harris and Fiske, 2006, on prejudice; Wang et al., 2007, on
       stress).

     It is important that candidates evaluate the use of the technologies, and not simply
     evaluate studies.

     If a candidate evaluates more than two brain imaging technologies, credit should be
     given only to the first two evaluations.

     If a candidate evaluates only one brain imaging technology, the response should be
     awarded up to a maximum of [5 marks] for criterion A, knowledge and comprehension,
     up to a maximum of [4 marks] for criterion B, critical thinking, and up to a maximum
     of [2 marks] for criterion C, organization.

     If a candidate discusses only strengths or only limitations, the response should be
     awarded up to a maximum of [5 marks] for criterion B, critical thinking, and up to a
     maximum of [2 marks] for criterion C, organization. Up to full marks may be awarded
     for criterion A, knowledge and comprehension.
                                                  –9–               N13/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


5.   Discuss how social and/or cultural factors affect one cognitive process.                    [22 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered and balanced
     review that includes a range of arguments, factors or hypotheses, supported by
     appropriate evidence, of how social and/or cultural factors affect one cognitive process.

     Candidates should give a considered review of the way in which social and/or cultural
     factors have a bearing on one way in which people process information, for example,
     memory, thinking, perception, attention, decision-making or language. As the concepts
     of social and cultural factors are arguably very much related, such distinction is
     not necessary.

     Candidates may discuss theories and/or methodological issues as well as giving the
     findings of studies.

     Examples of appropriate factors include, but are not limited to:

      Cultural norms and past experience (Bartlett, 1932)
      Social identity’s effect on formation of flashbulb memories (Luminet and Curci,
       2009)
      Schooling’s effects on encoding strategies (Cole and Scribner, 1974)
      The effect of poverty on cognitive processing (Mani, 2013; Pollitt, 1995)
      The role of environmental factors (Deregowski, 1972; Segall et al.’s carpentered
       world hypothesis, 1966).

     If a candidate discusses more than one cognitive process, credit should be given only to
     the first discussion.

     Candidates may discuss a smaller number of factors in order to demonstrate depth of
     knowledge, or may discuss a larger number of factors in order to demonstrate breadth of
     knowledge. Both approaches are equally acceptable.
                                                  – 10 –             N13/3/PSYCH/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


6.   Discuss how and why one particular research method is used to investigate behaviour
     at the sociocultural level of analysis.                                             [22 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered and balanced
     review, supported by appropriate evidence, of how and why one particular research
     method is used at the sociocultural level of analysis. Although a discussion of both how
     and why is required, it does not have to be evenly balanced to gain high marks.

     Research methods include experiments, case studies, observations and interviews.
     Candidates may address the different ways in which a research method is done – for
     example, a covert or naturalistic observation – but the focus should be on the nature of
     the research method itself.

     Examples of research studies could include, but are not limited to:
      Festinger’s (1956) covert observation studying cult behaviour
      Bandura’s (1961, 1963, 1965) laboratory experiments investigating social learning
       theory
      Hofstede’s (1973) study which used interviews to study cultural differences in the
       workplace
      Sherif’s (1954) “Robbers Cave” field experiment investigating the realistic conflict
       theory.

     Discussion about how the method is used might refer to key features of the method as
     well as how the method was used in specific research. For example, experimental
     studies may identify the sampling and allocation procedures, the independent and
     dependent variables, and the way in which extraneous variables were controlled.

     Discussion about why the method is used might refer to the appropriateness of the
     method for the aim, issues of validity and reliability, sample choice and size, ease and
     cost of the procedure, and the generalizability of findings. Candidates may address the
     strengths of the method as well as how it reflects the principles of the sociocultural level
     of analysis, that is, candidates could make clear how the selected research methods
     underpin one or more principles of the level of analysis.

     If a candidate discusses more than one research method, credit should be given only to
     the first discussion.

     If a candidate discusses only the “how” or only the “why”, the response should be
     awarded up to a maximum of [6 marks] for criterion A, knowledge and comprehension,
     up to a maximum of [6 marks] for criterion B, critical thinking, and up to a maximum
     of [2 marks] for criterion C, organization
