M23/2/ABENGHP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




               Marking notes
          Remarques pour la notation
           Notas para la corrección

               May / Mai / Mayo de 2023

             English / Anglais / Inglés B


                        Higher level
                      Niveau supérieur
                       Nivel Superior


             Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




9 pages
                                            –2–              M23/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                –3–              M23/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M

Criterion A: Language

How successfully does the candidate command written language?
• To what extent is the vocabulary appropriate and varied?
• To what extent are the grammatical structures varied?
• To what extent does the accuracy of the language contribute to effective communication?

  Marks                                         Level descriptor
     0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
             Command of the language is limited.
             Vocabulary is sometimes appropriate to the task.
    1–3      Some basic grammatical structures are used, with some attempts to use more
             complex structures.
             Language contains errors in both basic and more complex structures. Errors interfere
             with communication.
             Command of the language is partially effective.
             Vocabulary is generally appropriate to the task and varied.
    4–6      A variety of basic and some more complex grammatical structures is used.
             Language is mostly accurate for basic structures, but errors occur in more complex
             structures. Errors at times interfere with communication.
             Command of the language is effective and mostly accurate.
             Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied, including the use of idiomatic
             expressions.
    7–9
             A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used effectively.
             Language is mostly accurate. Occasional errors in basic and in complex grammatical
             structures do not interfere with communication.
             Command of the language is mostly accurate and very effective.
             Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and nuanced and varied in a manner that
             enhances the message, including the purposeful use of idiomatic expressions.
  10–12      A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used selectively in
             order to enhance communication.
             Language is mostly accurate. Minor errors in more complex grammatical structures
             do not interfere with communication.

Language
Not all errors have the same importance, and examiners should bear this in mind. Some errors
affect the communication of meaning significantly, and others do not. Also, some errors indicate a
fundamental lack of command of the language, while others may simply indicate a moment of
forgetfulness.

SLIPS – mistakes at all levels of difficulty, but erratic and occasional – eg the candidate normally
forms past tenses well, but occasionally forgets “-ed”.

FLAWS – errors occur more regularly, particularly in certain structures – eg past tenses are formed
correctly quite often, but are not really reliable, and there may be basic confusions (eg past simple
versus present perfect).

GAPS – some structures are rarely correct, or simply don’t appear – eg, the past tenses are
needed, but do not appear.
                                               –4–               M23/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M

Criterion B: Message
To what extent does the candidate fulfil the task?
  • How relevant are the ideas to the task?
  • To what extent are ideas developed?
  • To what extent do the clarity and organization of ideas contribute to the successful delivery of
    the message?

The “descriptor unpacked” explain the assessment criteria in greater detail. Where a candidate’s
response does not correspond exactly to a single mark band, the statements in bold should be
used as a guide for the ‘best fit’ approach.

 Marks           Level descriptor                             Descriptor unpacked
   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
         The task is partially fulfilled. The link between the response and task tends to be
                                             unclear; the reader has difficulty understanding the
         Few ideas are relevant to the       message.
         task.
                                             The response touches upon some aspects of the task but
         Ideas are stated, but with no       there is also much unrelated information.
  1–3    development.
                                             The response addresses the task in a simple manner, and
         Ideas are not clearly presented     supporting details and/or examples barely feature, if at all.
         and do not follow a logical         The ideas do not link well together; inadequate or
         structure, making the message       inappropriate use of cohesive devices confuse the
         difficult to determine.             message.
         The task is generally fulfilled.    The link between the response and the task is mostly
                                             detectable; the reader’s general understanding of the
         Some ideas are relevant to the      message is not impeded, despite some ambiguity.
         task.
                                             The response covers some aspects of the task, or
         Ideas are outlined, but are not     touches upon all aspects but superficially.
         fully developed.
  4–6                                        The response includes some supporting details and
         Ideas are generally clearly         examples.
         presented and the response is       The ideas are organized in a logical way; some cohesive
         generally structured in a logical   devices are used appropriately to aid the delivery of the
         manner, leading to a mostly         message, although there may be areas of confusion at
         successful delivery of the          times.
         message.
         The task is fulfilled.              The link between the response and the task is clear;
                                             the reader has a good understanding of the message
         Most ideas are relevant to the      conveyed.
         task.
                                             The response covers all aspects of the task, despite
         Ideas are developed well, with      losing focus at times.
  7–9    some detail and examples.
                                             The response uses supporting details and examples to
         Ideas are clearly presented and     clarify the message.
         the response is structured in a     The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive devices
         logical manner, supporting the      are used appropriately to deliver the message with little or
         delivery of the message.            no ambiguity.
         The task is fulfilled effectively. The link between the response and the task is precise
                                             and consistently evident; the reader has a clear
         Ideas are relevant to the task.     understanding of the message conveyed.
 10–12
         Ideas are fully developed,          The response covers all aspects of the task fully, and
         providing details and relevant      maintains focus throughout.
         examples.
                                                   –5–              M23/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M

             Ideas are clearly presented and     The response uses well-chosen supporting details and
             the response is structured in a     examples to illustrate and explain ideas persuasively.
             logical and coherent manner         The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive devices
             that supports the delivery of the   are used appropriately to deliver the message with clarity
             message.                            and ease.


Note: When marking candidate responses, keep in mind that neither the factual accuracy of the
information presented, nor the validity of the candidates’ personal opinions, are being assessed.
Therefore, scripts that are factually inaccurate should not be marked down, provided the ideas
presented have coherence and are sufficiently developed.



Criterion C: Conceptual understanding

To what extent does the candidate demonstrate conceptual understanding?
   •       To what extent is the choice of text type appropriate to the task?
   •       To what extent are register and tone appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
           task?
   •       To what extent does the response incorporate the conventions of the chosen text type?

  Marks                                           Level descriptor
       0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
              Conceptual understanding is limited.
              The choice of text type is generally inappropriate to the context, purpose or audience.
   1–2        The register and tone are inappropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response incorporates limited recognizable conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is mostly demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is generally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   3–4        The register and tone, while occasionally appropriate to the context, purpose and
              audience of the task, fluctuate throughout the response.
              The response incorporates some conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is fully demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   5–6        The register and tone are appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response fully incorporates the conventions of the chosen text type.



Note: Examiners must balance all three elements in criterion C (choice of text type,
appropriateness of tone and register, and use of text type conventions) to arrive at the final mark.
                                                  –6–               M23/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M

Question specific guidance (Criterion B and C)

Task 1
You are the leader of a community project that aims to make public facilities more accessible to
people with disabilities, but the project needs funds. You decide to ask a local business to support
the project financially. Write a text in which you describe your project, detail how their funds will
be used, and explain why the business should be a sponsor.
Blog                               Email                              Speech

Criterion B:
• The three aspects of the task are [i] “describe the project”, [ii] “detail how their funds will be used”,
  and [iii] “explain why the business should be a sponsor”.
• Equal weight does not need to be given to all three elements, but all should be given some
  developed attention. If one is ignored, dismissed in one sentence or not approached as detailed
  below, no more than the 4-6 band should be awarded, since the task has been ‘generally fulfilled’.
• The response may focus on either one or more than one disability. It could be either physical
  disabilities, or other forms of disability.
• The term “local business” can be interpreted as any local company or organization that buys and
  sells goods or services (e.g. a local shop, a bank, or even a big, multinational corporate).
• Provided the ideas are well developed, the response should not be marked down even if the funds
  do not seem to be used “sensibly” (e.g., overestimating or underestimating the budget for the
  overall program or particular items).
• Explaining why the business should be sponsored can be achieved by explaining the worthiness
  of the project itself or the benefits being a sponsor would bring to the company, for example.

Criterion C:
Choice of text type:
                            Text type      Rationale
Appropriate                 Email          The text type is suitable for the purpose of actively
                                           communicating information (funding request and details)
                                           to a small group of specified audience (a local business).
Generally appropriate       Speech         The text type is suitable for communicating information
                                           and/or ideas to a large group of specified audience on a
                                           specific occasion, with expectations of some sort of real-
                                           time responses. If the response makes the context of the
                                           speech clear (e.g., a meeting with the local business),
                                           then it may be considered “appropriate”.
Generally inappropriate     Blog           The text type is primarily read by unspecified readers,
                                           and it relies on the readers to seek out the information. If
                                           the response makes clear the context of the blog (e.g., a
                                           link of a private blog post sent to the local business), then
                                           it may be considered ‘generally appropriate’.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the stated task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”,
and the “generally inappropriate” text type can be considered “generally appropriate”.

Register and tone:
• Formal register
• Courteous, confident, and persuasive tone

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                   –7–              M23/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M

Task 2
A group of people in your local area have fallen victim to an online scam and lost a lot of money.
You want to inform the public of this incident. Write a text in which you describe what happened,
explain why the victims believed the trick, and suggest what people can do if they are in a similar
situation.
Blog                               Email                              News report

Criterion B:
• The three aspects of the task are [i] “describe what happened” (i.e., the scam), [ii] “explain why
  the victims believed the trick”, and [iii] “suggest what people can do if they are in a similar
  situation”.
• Equal weight does not need to be given to all three elements, but all should be given some
  developed attention. If one is ignored, dismissed in one sentence or not approached as detailed
  below, no more than the 4-6 band should be awarded, since the task has been ‘generally fulfilled’.
• A broad interpretation of the term “scam” should be allowed, e.g., phishing scam, online seller
  running away with money, selling of counterfeit products, etc., as long as there is an online
  element, and that it involves money.
• “Explain why the victims believed the trick” could be a generalized explanation or using particular
  victims as examples.
• “Suggest what people can do” may relate to the same online scam, or to online scams in general.
  Suggestions may include invitation for other victims to speak out, but the focus should be on
  preventing further incidents.

Criterion C:
Choice of text type:
                           Text type          Rationale
Appropriate                News report        The text type is suitable for informing the public about
                                              an incident of significance to the general public, in
                                              order to raise public awareness of it.
Generally appropriate      Blog               The text type is suitable for recording anecdotes,
                                              communicating ideas, and sharing opinions with a
                                              large group of unspecified audience who has some
                                              connection with the writer (e.g., personal relationship,
                                              common interest, etc.). If the response makes clear
                                              the blog is to be read by the general public, then it
                                              may be considered “appropriate”.
Generally inappropriate    Email              The text type is typically used to communicate with
                                              individuals or small groups of specified readers. It is
                                              not used to communicate with the general public. If
                                              the response makes clear that the text was sent in an
                                              email blast to the public e.g., local residents, then it
                                              may be considered ‘generally appropriate’.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the stated task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”,
and the “generally inappropriate” text type can be considered “generally appropriate”.

Register and tone:
• Semi-formal to formal register
• Descriptive, objective, journalistic tone

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                 –8–                M23/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M

Task 3
You are concerned that too many people are buying pets these days without understanding the
responsibilities involved. You want to share your thoughts about this issue with other animal
lovers. Write a text in which you reflect on why this is happening, explain the problems this can
lead to, and what one should consider before keeping a pet.
Blog                               News report                        Opinion column

Criterion B:
• The three aspects of the task are: [i] reflect on why people buy pets without understanding the
  responsibilities involved, [ii] explain the problems this can lead to, and [iii] what people should
  consider before keeping a pet.
• Equal weight does not need to be given to all three elements, but all should be given some
  developed attention. If one is ignored, dismissed in one sentence or not approached as detailed
  below, no more than the 4-6 band should be awarded, since the task has been ‘generally fulfilled’.
• Although the task states “buying pets… without understanding the responsibilities…”, if
  candidates interpret it as keeping a pet in general or even adopting a pet, it should be accepted.
• While the response could include some criticism of irresponsible pet owners, this should be
  developed to discuss the three aspects required.
• “what one should consider before keeping a pet” can be presented as advice/suggestion, as long
  as it is properly elaborated.
• A response may use a personal anecdote as a springboard for discussion.

Criterion C:
Choice of text type:
                           Text type        Rationale
Appropriate                Blog             The text type is suitable for recording personal
                                            anecdotes, communicating ideas, and sharing opinions
                                            with a large group of unspecified audience who has
                                            some connection with the writer (i.e., “other animal
                                            lovers”). It often includes insights and reflections by the
                                            writer.
Generally appropriate      Opinion          The text type is suitable for sharing ideas, opinions, and
                           column           insights, often based on an anecdote or observation.
                                            However, the audience is typically the general public. If
                                            the response makes clear that the text addresses other
                                            animal lovers, then it may be considered appropriate.
Generally inappropriate    News report      The text type is primarily used for the purpose of
                                            describing the details of an incident objectively, without
                                            any personal insights. If the context of the news report
                                            is made clear (e.g., one written in the yellow press
                                            where the voice of a youth is reported and is addressed
                                            to youths), then it may be considered ‘generally
                                            appropriate’.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the stated task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”,
and the “generally inappropriate” text type can be considered “generally appropriate”.

Register and tone:
• Semi-formal or informal register
• Reflective tone; concerned or even emotional when talking about the phenomenon
Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                –9–              M23/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M

Appendix: Text type conventions (Criterion C)

The most common and recognisable conventions of the text types are given below:

Blog
•    first person statement and/or narration
•    awareness of the reader, e.g., direct address, a lively and interesting style etc.
•    closing statement, e.g., invitation to comment, a conclusion drawn etc.


Opinion column
•    relevant title
•    introduction to catch attention
•    engaging style


News report
•   relevant title/headline
•   neutral/objective style, e.g., presents ideas with only minimal embellishment (if any)
•   clearly presented layout, e.g., sub-headings, short brief paragraphs/sections, etc.


Email
•     clear sense of address to a specific person
•     statement of Subject in the heading
•     appropriate opening and closing salutations


Speech
•   catch the audience’s attention at the beginning, and leave a clear impression at the end
•   address the audience and keep contact with them throughout, e.g., use of “we” and “you” etc.
•   elements of speech rhetoric e.g., rhetorical questions, repetition etc.
