© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
English B – Standard level – Paper 2 – Reading comprehension
Anglais B – Niveau moyen – Épreuve 2 – Compréhension écrite
Inglés B – Nivel Medio – Prueba 2 – Comprensión de lectura
3 May 2023 / 3 mai 2023 / 3 de mayo de 2023
Zone A afternoon    Zone B morning     Zone C afternoon
Zone A après-midi   Zone B matin       Zone C après-midi
Zona A tarde        Zona B mañana      Zona C tarde

1h

Text booklet – Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this booklet until instructed to do so.
y This booklet accompanies paper 2 reading comprehension.

Livret de textes – Instructions destinées aux candidats
y N’ouvrez pas ce livret avant d’y être autorisé(e).
y Ce livret accompagne la partie de l’épreuve 2 portant sur la compréhension écrite.

Cuadernillo de textos – Instrucciones para los alumnos
y No abra este cuadernillo hasta que se lo autoricen.
y Este cuadernillo acompaña a la parte de comprensión de lectura de la prueba 2.




                                                                                               2223 – 2240
      4 pages/páginas                                      © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
                                                    –2–                                            2223 – 2240


Text A

                                                Emma’s story
         Emma has come to the UK to work for Erasmus+
         Volunteering Projects. This organization, sometimes
         called EVS (European Voluntary Service), allows
         young people aged 17–30 to take part in unpaid and
    5    full-time volunteering activities for up to 12 months
         in another country. This is Emma’s story.

         “My name is Emma and I am a full-time volunteer in
          Norfolk (UK). I support young people with learning
          disabilities in their day to day lives, whether it’s going
  10      shopping, going to work or going to art classes. It is
          amazing to see them become more independent and
          more self-confident from week to week. And while they
          are making progress, I am also developing new abilities.

         In my last year of school, I already knew I wanted to go
  15     somewhere new and do something different. However, I
         knew that travelling wouldn’t give me all I wanted during
         my year abroad. I therefore decided to take part in EVS,
         because I get to live in another country and experience
         new places and I can take time to decide if social work
  20     is something I’d like to do as a job later in life.

         I have been a volunteer for 9 months now and I have learnt a lot in this role, not only from
         other volunteers and friends here but also from the people I help.

         I support a young woman who is volunteering in the local library. In the beginning she seemed
         shy. She had been to the library before but it was a new situation with lots of new people and
  25     new challenges for her. In the 8 months we have worked together she has improved so much.
         She has learnt the library’s system and is able to find books quickly. She is confident in talking
         to people and happy to have a range of tasks. She has also taught me that everyone has their
         own pace. I used to be an impatient person! I now know that everyone will do and finish their
         tasks at a pace that is best for them.”
                                                    –3–                                            2223 – 2240


Text B

                 Honoring Black History with Anitra Belle Henderson
         In 1860, a plantation owner smuggled in a shipload of 110 African people to Alabama on
         the Clotilda, the last known slave ship to arrive in the US, decades after the banning of the
         importation of enslaved people. When enslaved people were freed in 1865, survivors of the
         Clotilda couldn’t afford to return to Africa, so they founded Africatown instead, a bustling town
    5    rooted in their homelands and cultures.

         After years of searching for the long-lost Clotilda, a team of historians and archaeologists finally
         discovered it at the bottom of Alabama’s Mobile River in 2019.

         Now, the City of Mobile will open a heritage house this summer to tell the story of the Clotilda’s
         survivors and of Africatown.

  10     “We are excited to help the community of Africatown tell their story,” says Anitra Belle Henderson,
          the leader of the team planning all the Africatown projects. “Our goal is for visitors to understand
          more about those who were enslaved. They have a name and a story.”

         The heritage house is designed to be an immersive experience. Visitors will feel the waves of
         the ocean like the enslaved people felt on their voyage, read stories about the slave trade and
  15     the survivors of the Clotilda. They’ll also be able to visit Africatown, where many descendants of
         the Clotilda’s survivors still reside.

         “Each detail of the heritage house was designed with reverence to the ancestors, descendants
          and the community,” Belle Henderson says. “Those who are curious about African culture
          can visit an African community on American soil—a community that was built with hope
  20      and promise.”

         “The many stories show the diverse brilliance of black people,” she says. “Since the discovery
          of the Clotilda there has been a new excitement in the community. Educating people about
          Africatown’s past will definitely create a bright future for a community that so deserves the
          attention it is receiving.”




                                                                 Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                    –4–                                           2223 – 2240


Text C

                               Top Future Transport Innovations
         A recent report released by the US Department of Transportation (DOT) identified a critical need
         for improvement of the nation’s transportation system. While the DOT has begun accelerating
         the improvement of the country’s highways and bridges, new forms of transit are being
         developed and will most likely be implemented soon.

     5   These five innovations will revolutionize transportation in the near future.

          1. Hyperloop transportation systems
             Hyperloops are essentially transportation tubes where pods of passengers or freight pass
             through a pressurized track at high speeds. Hyperloops run at an average of 600 miles
             per hour. There are several companies currently working to advance the technology. One
    10       company hopes to launch its first passenger service in the next year or two.

          2. [ – 27 – ]
             Automated city buses and shuttles will be in operation in the near future. Autonomous
             vehicles use cameras, radars and GPS systems to recognize and communicate with traffic
             lights and have impressive safety records. These buses of the future will reduce the impact
    15       on the environment because they are electric. Such buses are already in operation in
             China and Germany, and are being tested in the US.

          3. [ – 28 – ]
             While automated buses are being developed worldwide, China is working on a bus system
             that will reduce traffic congestion. The bus “straddles” traffic by running on special tracks
    20       that allow regular vehicles to drive underneath. A system currently being designed in China
             is expected to reduce traffic congestion by thirty percent.

          4. [ – 29 – ]
             A fleet of flying hotels is being designed by a company in Canada. Driftscape is a mobile,
             self-sustaining hotel that uses drone technology. Driftscape allows guests to travel while
    25       sleeping, and to roam or to touch down in diverse locations. It consists of several modular
             units including food and beverage elements. Driftscape offers spectacular panoramas and
             has minimal impact on the environment, preserving the integrity and authenticity of the
             locations visited.

          5. [ – 30 – ]
    30       Air traffic control systems in operation today are ground-based, using technology that
             dates back to the 1960s. Control systems using satellites allow air traffic controllers to be
             more efficient. The US is currently working on such a system: NextGen, which is being
             implemented in stages through 2025. GPS technology will be used to increase accuracy
             and shorten routes. NextGen will save time and fuel, reduce late arrivals, increase flight
    35       capacity and permit controllers to monitor aircraft with improved safety margins.




Disclaimer:
Content used in IB assessments is taken from authentic, third-party sources. The views expressed within them belong to their
individual authors and/or publishers and do not necessarily reflect the views of the IB.

References:
Text A		      Volunteering Matters, 2016. EVS Full-Time Volunteering: Emma’s Story. Volunteering Matters, [online]. Available
              at: https://volunteeringmatters.org.uk/casestudy/evsemma/ [Accessed 27 July 2022]. Source adapted.
		            Summer, L., 2020. Smiling ethnic woman showing volunteer sign on red apron. [online image] Available at:
              https://www.pexels.com/photo/smiling-ethnic-woman-showing-volunteer-sign-on-red-apron-6348129/
              [Accessed 24 August 2022]. Source adapted.
Text B        Copyright 2023 Smithsonian Institution. Reprinted with permission from Smithsonian Enterprises. All rights
              reserved. Reproduction in any medium is strictly prohibited without permission from Smithsonian Institution.
Text C		      MarshMcLennan Agency, 2018. Top 10 Future Transportation Innovations. Marsh & McLennan Agency LLC,
              [online]. Available at: https://www.marshmma.com/blog/top-10-future-transportation-innovations [Accessed
              21 December 2021]. Source adapted.
