© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
English ab initio – Standard level – Paper 2 – Reading comprehension
Anglais ab initio – Niveau moyen – Épreuve 2 – Compréhension écrite
Inglés ab initio – Nivel Medio – Prueba 2 – Comprensión de lectura
3 May 2023 / 3 mai 2023 / 3 de mayo de 2023
Zone A afternoon    Zone B morning     Zone C afternoon
Zone A après-midi   Zone B matin       Zone C après-midi
Zona A tarde        Zona B mañana      Zona C tarde

1h

Text booklet – Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this booklet until instructed to do so.
y This booklet accompanies paper 2 reading comprehension.

Livret de textes – Instructions destinées aux candidats
y N’ouvrez pas ce livret avant d’y être autorisé(e).
y Ce livret accompagne la partie de l’épreuve 2 portant sur la compréhension écrite.

Cuadernillo de textos – Instrucciones para los alumnos
y No abra este cuadernillo hasta que se lo autoricen.
y Este cuadernillo acompaña a la parte de comprensión de lectura de la prueba 2.




                                                                                               2223 – 2812
      4 pages/páginas                                      © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
                                                    –2–                                                    2223 – 2812


Text A

           Super Biker: Daughter Carries Father Across India on Bike
   1     When Jyoti was 15 years old, her father had a traffic accident. Because he couldn’t walk, he
         was unable to work. As a result, he and his daughter could no longer pay their rent in New
         Delhi. Jyoti also realized that she and her father would not even have enough money for food if
         they stayed. The two needed to get home to their village, but trains can be expensive.

   2     So Jyoti bought a bicycle for $20 and began the 745 mile (1,200 kilometer) trip back to their
         home village. It took Jyoti 10 days to bike that distance with her injured father on the back of the
         bicycle. It was not easy because her father is big and carried a bag.

   3     Some days they had little food. They slept at gas stations. The pair were lucky enough to have
         strangers give them food and water. Except for one short ride on a truck, Jyoti pedaled the
         whole way.

   4     She continued in spite of being exhausted from the effort. “It was a difficult journey because of
         the heat, but we had no choice,” Jyoti says. “I had only one aim and that was to reach our home
         in Darbhanga.”

   5     After the news spread about Jyoti’s amazing cycling efforts, India’s most important biking group,
         the Cycling Federation of India, offered to pay for Jyoti to go back to New Delhi to try out for
         the national team. In January, the Indian government gave her the National Children’s Award
         (a medal and $1,300) for her courage. The government also made her the ambassador for its
         social welfare project.
                                                   © NewsForKids.net. 15-Year-Old Carries Father Across India on Bike.
                                          Available at: https://newsforkids.net [Accessed 26 July 2022]. Source adapted.
                     –3–                                         2223 – 2812


Text B




         Removed for copyright reasons




                                Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                    –4–                                            2223 – 2812


Text C

                                                Emma’s story
         Emma has come to the UK to work for Erasmus+
         Volunteering Projects. This organization, sometimes
         called EVS (European Voluntary Service), allows
         young people aged 17–30 to take part in unpaid and
    5    full-time volunteering activities for up to 12 months
         in another country. This is Emma’s story.

         “My name is Emma and I am a full-time volunteer in
          Norfolk (UK). I support young people with learning
          disabilities in their day to day lives, whether it’s going
    10    shopping, going to work or going to art classes. It is
          amazing to see them become more independent and
          more self-confident from week to week. And while they
          are making progress, I am also developing new abilities.

         In my last year of school, I already knew I wanted to go
    15   somewhere new and do something different. However, I
         knew that travelling wouldn’t give me all I wanted during
         my year abroad. I therefore decided to take part in EVS,
         because I get to live in another country and experience
         new places and I can take time to decide if social work
    20   is something I’d like to do as a job later in life.

         I have been a volunteer for 9 months now and I have learnt a lot in this role, not only from other
         volunteers and friends here but also from the people I help.

         I support a young woman who is volunteering in the local library. In the beginning she seemed
         shy. She had been to the library before but it was a new situation with lots of new people and
    25   new challenges for her. In the 8 months we have worked together she has improved so much.
         She has learnt the library’s system and is able to find books quickly. She is confident in talking
         to people and happy to have a range of tasks. She has also taught me that everyone has their
         own pace. I used to be an impatient person! I now know that everyone will do and finish their
         tasks at a pace that is best for them.”




Disclaimer:
Content used in IB assessments is taken from authentic, third-party sources. The views expressed within them belong to their
individual authors and/or publishers and do not necessarily reflect the views of the IB.

References:
Text A		      © NewsForKids.net. 15-Year-Old Carries Father Across India on Bike. Available at: https://newsforkids.net
              [Accessed 26 July 2022]. Source adapted.
Text C		      Volunteering Matters, 2016. EVS Full-Time Volunteering: Emma’s Story. Volunteering Matters, [online]. Available
              at: https://volunteeringmatters.org.uk/casestudy/evsemma/ [Accessed 27 July 2022]. Source adapted.
		            Summer, L., 2020. Smiling ethnic woman showing volunteer sign on red apron. [online image] Available at:
              https://www.pexels.com/photo/smiling-ethnic-woman-showing-volunteer-sign-on-red-apron-6348129/
              [Accessed 24 August 2022]. Source adapted.
