M23/2/ABENG/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                  May / Mai / Mayo de 2023


                  English / Anglais / Inglés B


                         Standard level
                         Niveau moyen
                          Nivel Medio


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




9 pages/páginas
                                            –2–              M23/2/ABENG/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                –3–              M23/2/ABENG/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M

Criterion A: Language

How successfully does the candidate command written language?
• To what extent is the vocabulary appropriate and varied?
• To what extent are the grammatical structures varied?
• To what extent does the accuracy of the language contribute to effective communication?

  Marks                                         Level descriptor
     0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
             Command of the language is limited.
             Vocabulary is sometimes appropriate to the task.
    1–3
             Basic grammatical structures are used.
             Language contains errors in basic structures. Errors interfere with communication.
             Command of the language is partially effective.
             Vocabulary is appropriate to the task.
             Some basic grammatical structures are used, with some attempts to use more
    4–6
             complex structures.
             Language is mostly accurate for basic structures, but errors occur in more complex
             structures. Errors at times interfere with communication.
             Command of the language is effective and mostly accurate.
             Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied.
    7–9      A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used.
             Language is mostly accurate. Occasional errors in basic and in complex grammatical
             structures do not interfere with communication.
             Command of the language is mostly accurate and very effective.
             Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied, including the use of idiomatic
             expressions.
  10–12
             A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used effectively.
             Language is mostly accurate. Minor errors in more complex grammatical structures
             do not interfere with communication.


Language
Not all errors have the same importance, and examiners should bear this in mind. Some errors
affect the communication of meaning significantly, and others do not. Also, some errors indicate a
fundamental lack of command of the language, while others may simply indicate a moment of
forgetfulness.

SLIPS – mistakes at all levels of difficulty, but erratic and occasional – eg the candidate normally
forms past tenses well, but occasionally forgets “-ed”.

FLAWS – errors occur more regularly, particularly in certain structures – eg past tenses are formed
correctly quite often, but are not really reliable, and there may be basic confusions (eg past simple
versus present perfect).

GAPS – some structures are rarely correct, or simply don’t appear – eg the past tenses are
needed, but do not appear.
                                                 –4–             M23/2/ABENG/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M

Criterion B: Message
To what extent does the candidate fulfil the task?
  • How relevant are the ideas to the task?
  • To what extent are ideas developed?
  • To what extent do the clarity and organization of ideas contribute to the successful delivery of
    the message?

The “descriptor unpacked” explain the assessment criteria in greater detail. Where a candidate’s
response does not correspond exactly to a single mark band, the statements in bold should be
used as a guide for the ‘best fit’ approach.

 Marks            Level descriptor                              Descriptor unpacked
   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
         The task is partially fulfilled.    The link between the response and task tends to
                                                 be unclear; the reader has difficulty understanding
         Few ideas are relevant to the task.     the message.
         Ideas are stated, but with no           The response touches upon some aspects of the task
         development.                            but there is also much unrelated information.
  1–3    Ideas are not clearly presented and     The response addresses the task in a simple manner,
         do not follow a logical structure,      and supporting details and/or examples barely feature,
         making the message difficult to         if at all.
         determine.                              The ideas do not link well together; inadequate or
                                                 inappropriate use of cohesive devices confuse the
                                                 message.
         The task is generally fulfilled.        The link between the response and the task is
                                                 mostly detectable; the reader’s general
         Some ideas are relevant to the          understanding of the message is not impeded,
         task.                                   despite some ambiguity.
         Ideas are outlined, but are not fully   The response covers some aspects of the task, or
         developed.                              touches upon all aspects but superficially.
  4–6
         Ideas are generally clearly             The response includes some supporting details and
         presented and the response is           examples.
         generally structured in a logical       The ideas are organized in a logical way; some
         manner, leading to a mostly             cohesive devices are used appropriately to aid the
         successful delivery of the              delivery of the message, although there may be areas
         message.                                of confusion at times.

         The task is fulfilled.                  The link between the response and the task is
                                                 clear; the reader has a good understanding of the
         Most ideas are relevant to the task.    message conveyed.
         Ideas are developed well, with          The response covers all aspects of the task, despite
         some detail and examples.               losing focus at times.
  7–9
         Ideas are clearly presented and the     The response uses supporting details and examples to
         response is structured in a logical     clarify the message.
         manner, supporting the delivery of      The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive
         the message.                            devices are used appropriately to deliver the message
                                                 with little or no ambiguity.
         The task is fulfilled effectively.      The link between the response and the task is
                                                 precise and consistently evident; the reader has a
         Ideas are relevant to the task.         clear understanding of the message conveyed.
 10–12
         Ideas are fully developed, providing The response covers all aspects of the task fully, and
         details and relevant examples.       maintains focus throughout.
                                                    –5–             M23/2/ABENG/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M

             Ideas are clearly presented and the    The response uses well-chosen supporting details and
             response is structured in a logical    examples to illustrate and explain ideas persuasively.
             and coherent manner that               The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive
             supports the delivery of the           devices are used appropriately to deliver the message
             message.                               with clarity and ease.


Note: When marking candidate responses, keep in mind that neither the factual accuracy of the
information presented, nor the validity of the candidates’ personal opinions, are being assessed.
Therefore, scripts that are factually inaccurate should not be marked down, provided the ideas
presented have coherence and are sufficiently developed.



Criterion C: Conceptual understanding

To what extent does the candidate demonstrate conceptual understanding?
   •       To what extent is the choice of text type appropriate to the task?
   •       To what extent are register and tone appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of
           the task?
   •       To what extent does the response incorporate the conventions of the chosen text type?

  Marks                                            Level descriptor
       0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
              Conceptual understanding is limited.
              The choice of text type is generally inappropriate to the context, purpose or audience.
   1–2        The register and tone are inappropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response incorporates limited recognizable conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is mostly demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is generally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   3–4        The register and tone, while occasionally appropriate to the context, purpose and
              audience of the task, fluctuate throughout the response.
              The response incorporates some conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is fully demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   5–6        The register and tone are appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response fully incorporates the conventions of the chosen text type.



Note: Examiners must balance all three elements in criterion C (choice of text type, appropriateness
of tone and register, and use of text type conventions) to arrive at the final mark.
                                                 –6–                M23/2/ABENG/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M

Question specific guidance (Criterion B and C)

Task 1
A local store has installed many security cameras overlooking the neighbourhood, including some
that are pointed at your home. You feel very uncomfortable about this. Write a text for the owner
of the store to express your concerns and explain what you would like the store owner to do.

Blog                      Email                        Proposal

Criterion B:
• The two required aspects of the task are [i] “to express your concerns” and [ii] “explain what you
  would like the store owner to do”.
• Equal weight does not have to be given to those two elements, but both should be given some
  developed attention. If any aspect is ignored or given only cursory attention (e.g. very brief and
  general or in a single sentence), no more than the 4-6 band should be awarded since the task
  has only been “generally fulfilled” at best.
• It is expected that the “concerns” be plural i.e. there should be 2 or more distinguishable reasons
  causing the writer to be uncomfortable. However, should the script introduce one single concern
  only, this should be fully developed and well supported with examples and details.
• The concerns may relate to the number of cameras overlooking the neighbourhood (a more public
  perspective), or the ones pointed at the writer's own home (a more personal perspective), or both.
• The response should explain what the writer would like the owner to do, rather than simply
  providing a list of requests.

Criterion C:
Choice of text type:
                           Text type         Rationale
Appropriate                Email             The text type is suitable for the purpose of actively
                                             communicating information in a personal manner
                                             (concerns and suggestions) to a specific audience
                                             (the owner of the store).
Generally appropriate      Proposal          The text type is suitable for the purpose of making
                                             suggestions, but it is usually used in a formal
                                             context. This choice may be considered appropriate
                                             for this task if it explicitly addresses the shop owner
                                             and reveals clear understanding of context and
                                             purpose.
Generally inappropriate    Blog              The text type is usually used for the purpose of
                                             sharing the writer’s thoughts and opinions with a
                                             larger group of unspecified audience. It is not
                                             typically used to communicate with an individual.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the stated task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”,
and the “generally inappropriate” text type can be considered “generally appropriate”.

Register and tone:
• Semi-formal to formal register
• Serious, persuasive, and polite tone

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                 –7–                M23/2/ABENG/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M

Task 2
A former student, who is known for their humanitarian work overseas, has returned to your school
to give a talk. Therefore, you have been asked to introduce the event and the former student to
the school community. Write a text in which you highlight some of the former student's
accomplishments, and what their talk will be about.
Blog                         Report                       Speech

Criterion B:
• The two required aspects of the task are [i] “highlight some of the former student's
   accomplishments” and [ii] “what their talk will be about”.
• Equal weight does not have to be given to those two elements, but both should be given some
   developed attention. If any aspect is ignored or given only cursory attention (e.g. very brief and
   general or in a single sentence), no more than the 4-6 band should be awarded since the task
   has only been “generally fulfilled” at best.
• While the response could mention the former student’s general accomplishments or biography,
   the focus should be on their humanitarian work and what the talk will be about.
• The response should describe or explain what the talk will be about. It should not be the talk of
   the former student itself.
• “Introduce the event” does not need to be developed as an aspect to cover. It can be interpreted
   broadly e.g., as a school assembly, other school function, or just the fact that a former student
   has returned to the school. However, there should be at least a cursory reference to the context.
• It is expected that the “accomplishments” be plural i.e. there should be 2 or more distinguishable
   accomplishments. However, should the script introduce one single accomplishment only, this
   should be fully developed and well supported with examples and details.
• All ideas need to be clearly linked to “humanitarian work” rather than environmental or general
   activities.

Criterion C:
Choice of text type:
                           Text type    Rationale
Appropriate                Speech       The text type is suitable for the purpose of sharing
                                        information with the audience – the school community, in a
                                        real-time context as required implicitly by the task (“has
                                        returned”).
Generally appropriate      Blog         The text type is suitable for introducing the event and
                                        speaker as an event advertisement. It does not elicit a
                                        real-time response that a speech does, and it relies on the
                                        audience to seek out the information. If the response
                                        provides a clear trigger context for the text and event (e.g.
                                        in a school blog) and thus reveals understanding of
                                        audience with all conventions met, it may be considered
                                        appropriate.
Generally inappropriate    Report       The text type is typically used for the purpose of
                                        documenting an event and/or processes that have already
                                        happened.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the stated task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”,
and the “generally inappropriate” text type can be considered “generally appropriate”.
Register and tone:
  • Semi-formal to formal register, possibly with touches of informality
  • Engaging, excited and persuasive tone
Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                 –8–                M23/2/ABENG/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M

Task 3
You feel that one of your school rules is outdated and may have negative impacts on students.
You want this rule changed. Write a text in which you explain to the school principal why this rule
is a problem and suggest how it could be changed.

Blog                        Proposal                        Speech

Criterion B:
• The two required aspects of the task are [i] “explain why this rule is a problem” and [ii] “suggest
  how it could be changed”.
• Equal weight does not have to be given to those two elements, but both should be given some
  developed attention. If any aspect is ignored or given only cursory attention (e.g. very brief and
  general or in a single sentence), no more than the 4-6 band should be awarded since the task
  has only been “generally fulfilled” at best.
• Some responses explain more than one rule. That should be permissible as long as each rule is
  developed to indicate the problem and suggestions how to improve it.
• While a response can mention how the rule affects the writer personally, it should focus on the
  impacts on the student body in general.
• The term “changed” can be interpreted as a replacement of the rule by another, modification of
  the rule to reflect a more current context (i.e., updating an outdated rule), or a removal of the rule.

Criterion C:
Choice of text type:
                           Text type        Rationale
Appropriate                Proposal         The text type is suitable for the purpose of submitting
                                            ideas or solutions for implementation in order to
                                            address an issue that affects a large group of people.
Generally appropriate      Speech           The text type is suitable for the purpose of sharing
                                            ideas and suggestions, but it is not usually used to
                                            communicate with an individual (the school principal).
                                            If the response makes clear that the writer is
                                            addressing the principal only in a formal context to
                                            provide a proposal verbally (i.e., it is indicated the
                                            meeting had been pre-arranged), then it may be
                                            considered “appropriate”
Generally inappropriate    Blog             The text type is typically used for the purpose of
                                            sharing the writer’s thoughts and opinions with a
                                            larger group of unspecified audience.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the stated task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”,
and the “generally inappropriate” text type can be considered “generally appropriate”.

Register and tone:
• Formal register
• Serious, explanatory, persuasive tone

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                               –9–               M23/2/ABENG/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




Appendix: Text type conventions (Criterion C)

The most common and recognisable conventions of the text types are given below:

Blog
   •   first person statement and/or narration
   •   awareness of the reader, e.g. direct address, a lively and interesting style etc.
   •   closing statement, e.g. invitation to comment, a conclusion drawn etc.


Email
  • clear sense of address to a specific person
  • statement of Subject in the heading
  • appropriate opening and closing salutations


Proposal
   • title summarising the overall subject
   • clearly set-out format, e.g. headings, short clear paragraphs, bullets, numbering, insetting
      etc.
   • style aimed to persuade a specified audience


Report
   • relevant title
   • neutral/objective style, e.g. presents ideas and facts without embellishment
   • clearly set-out format, e.g. sub-headings, short numbered paragraphs/sections, etc.


Speech
   • catch the audience’s attention at the beginning, and leave a clear impression at the end
   • address the audience and keep contact with them throughout, e.g. use of “we” and “you” etc.
   • elements of speech rhetoric e.g. rhetorical questions, repetition etc.
