M23/2/ABSWA/HP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                   May / Mai / Mayo de 2023



          Kiswahili / Kiswahili / Kisuajili B


                        Higher level
                      Niveau supérieur
                       Nivel Superior


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




9 pages/páginas
                                            –2–              M23/2/ABSWA/HP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                             –3–            M23/2/ABSWA/HP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion A: Language

How successfully does the candidate command written language?
• To what extent is the vocabulary appropriate and varied?
• To what extent are the grammatical structures varied?
• To what extent does the accuracy of the language contribute to effective communication?

  Marks                                      Level descriptor
     0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
            Command of the language is limited.
            Vocabulary is sometimes appropriate to the task.
   1–3      Some basic grammatical structures are used, with some attempts to use more
            complex structures.
            Language contains errors in both basic and more complex structures. Errors interfere
            with communication.
            Command of the language is partially effective.
            Vocabulary is generally appropriate to the task and varied.
   4–6      A variety of basic and some more complex grammatical structures is used.
            Language is mostly accurate for basic structures, but errors occur in more complex
            structures. Errors at times interfere with communication.
            Command of the language is effective and mostly accurate.
            Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied, including the use of idiomatic
            expressions.
   7–9
            A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used effectively.
            Language is mostly accurate. Occasional errors in basic and in complex grammatical
            structures do not interfere with communication.
            Command of the language is mostly accurate and very effective.
            Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and nuanced and varied in a manner that
            enhances the message, including the purposeful use of idiomatic expressions.
  10–12     A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used selectively in
            order to enhance communication.
            Language is mostly accurate. Minor errors in more complex grammatical structures
            do not interfere with communication.

Lugha
Si makosa yote yana umuhimu sawa na watahini wanafaa kukumbuka haya. Baadhi ya makosa
huathiri mawasiliano ya maana kwa kiasi kikubwa, na mengine hayaathiri. Pia, baadhi ya makosa
huonyesha ukosefu wa kimsingi wa lugha, wakati makosa mengine huweza kuashiria usahaulifu.

KUTELEZA – Makosa hutokea katika ngazi zote za ugumu, lakini hayatokei mara kwa mara – kwa
mfano, mtahiniwa kwa kawaida anatunga sentensi vyema wakati uliopita, lakini mara chache
anasahau kiambishi “-li-”.

DOSARI – Makosa hutokea mara kwa mara, hasa katika miundo fulani – kwa mfano, wakati
uliopita unaundwa kwa usahihi mara nyingi, lakini si wa kuaminika, na kunaweza kuwa na
mikanganyiko ya kimsingi (kwa mfano, wakati uliopita dhidi ya wakati timilifu).

MAPENGO – Baadhi ya miundo huwa sahihi kwa nadra au haijitokezi – kwa mfano, wakati uliopita
unahitajika, lakini haujitokezi.
                                                  –4–               M23/2/ABSWA/HP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B: Message
To what extent does the candidate fulfil the task?
     • How relevant are the ideas to the task?
     • To what extent are ideas developed?
     • To what extent do the clarity and organization of ideas contribute to the successful delivery of
       the message?

The “descriptor unpacked” explain the assessment criteria in greater detail. Where a candidate’s
response does not correspond exactly to a single mark band, the statements in bold should be
used as a guide for the ‘best fit’ approach.

 Marks              Level descriptor                             Descriptor unpacked
 0          The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
            The task is partially fulfilled. The link between the response and task tends to be
                                                unclear; the reader has difficulty understanding the
            Few ideas are relevant to the       message.
            task.
                                                The response touches upon some aspects of the task but
            Ideas are stated, but with no       there is also much unrelated information.
     1–3    development.
                                                The response addresses the task in a simple manner, and
            Ideas are not clearly presented     supporting details and/or examples barely feature, if at all.
            and do not follow a logical         The ideas do not link well together; inadequate or
            structure, making the message       inappropriate use of cohesive devices confuse the
            difficult to determine.             message.
            The task is generally fulfilled.    The link between the response and the task is mostly
                                                detectable; the reader’s general understanding of the
            Some ideas are relevant to the      message is not impeded, despite some ambiguity.
            task.
                                                The response covers some aspects of the task, or
            Ideas are outlined, but are not     touches upon all aspects but superficially.
            fully developed.
     4–6                                        The response includes some supporting details and
            Ideas are generally clearly         examples.
            presented and the response is       The ideas are organized in a logical way; some cohesive
            generally structured in a logical   devices are used appropriately to aid the delivery of the
            manner, leading to a mostly         message, although there may be areas of confusion at
            successful delivery of the          times.
            message.
            The task is fulfilled.              The link between the response and the task is clear;
                                                the reader has a good understanding of the message
            Most ideas are relevant to the      conveyed.
            task.
                                                The response covers all aspects of the task, despite
            Ideas are developed well, with      losing focus at times.
     7–9    some detail and examples.
                                                The response uses supporting details and examples to
            Ideas are clearly presented and     clarify the message.
            the response is structured in a     The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive devices
            logical manner, supporting the      are used appropriately to deliver the message with little or
            delivery of the message.            no ambiguity.
            The task is fulfilled effectively. The link between the response and the task is precise
                                                and consistently evident; the reader has a clear
            Ideas are relevant to the task.     understanding of the message conveyed.
 10–12
            Ideas are fully developed,          The response covers all aspects of the task fully, and
            providing details and relevant      maintains focus throughout.
            examples.
                                                   –5–              M23/2/ABSWA/HP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


             Ideas are clearly presented and     The response uses well-chosen supporting details and
             the response is structured in a     examples to illustrate and explain ideas persuasively.
             logical and coherent manner         The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive devices
             that supports the delivery of the   are used appropriately to deliver the message with clarity
             message.                            and ease.


Note: When marking candidate responses, keep in mind that neither the factual accuracy of the
information presented, nor the validity of the candidates’ personal opinions, are being assessed.
Therefore, scripts that are factually inaccurate should not be marked down, provided the ideas
presented have coherence and are sufficiently developed.



Criterion C: Conceptual understanding

To what extent does the candidate demonstrate conceptual understanding?
   •       To what extent is the choice of text type appropriate to the task?
   •       To what extent are register and tone appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
           task?
   •       To what extent does the response incorporate the conventions of the chosen text type?

  Marks                                           Level descriptor
       0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
              Conceptual understanding is limited.
              The choice of text type is generally inappropriate to the context, purpose or audience.
   1–2        The register and tone are inappropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response incorporates limited recognizable conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is mostly demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is generally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   3–4        The register and tone, while occasionally appropriate to the context, purpose and
              audience of the task, fluctuate throughout the response.
              The response incorporates some conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is fully demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   5–6        The register and tone are appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response fully incorporates the conventions of the chosen text type.



Note: Examiners must balance all three elements in criterion C (choice of text type,
appropriateness of tone and register, and use of text type conventions) to arrive at the final mark.
                                                 –6–                M23/2/ABSWA/HP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


Question specific guidance (Criterion B and C)

Swali 1

 Utawala wa shule yako unapendekeza kuwa ni lazima kila mwanafunzi shuleni mwako awe na
 kipatakalishi kuanzia muhula ujao. Mwalimu mkuu amekuteua kukusanya maoni kutoka kwa
 wanafunzi kuhusu suala hilo. Andika matini ambapo unajadili madhara na manufaa ya
 kuwalazimisha wanafunzi kuwa na vipakatalishi na kisha utoe sababu za pendekezo utakalotoa.


 Barua kwa mhariri                 Barua pepe                       Ripoti rasmi

Criterion B:

• Utangulizi wa jibu unafaa kuoyesha kuwa shule inapendekeza kila mwanafunzi awe na
  kipakatalishi.
• “Maoni kutoka kwa wanafunzi” yanajumuisha mawazo ya wanafunzi kuhusu pendekezo la shule
  kutaka kila mwanafunzi kuwa na kipakatalishi. Maoni hayo yanaweza kuwa chanya au hasi.
• “Madhara na manufaa” yanafaa kutoa maelezo kuhusu faida na athari hasi za hatua hii
  kuchukuliwa na shule, ilhali “sababu za pendekezo” zinaangazia kwa nini mwandishi wa ripoti
  atoe ushauri fulani au pendekezo la kuunga mkono au kupinga hatua hii.

Criterion C:

Choice of text type:

                            Text type        Rationale
Appropriate                                  Aina hii ya matini hulenga kutoa maelezo au
                            Ripoti rasmi     uchanganuzi wa hali au wazo fulani kulingana na
                                             uchunguzi au utafiti. Aghalabu huandikwa na mtu
                                             binafsi kwa mtu au watu fulani, na kwa lengo mahsusi.
Generally appropriate                        Aina hii ya matini inafaa kwa lengo la kutoa taarifa,
                            Barua pepe       lakini kimsingi inatumiwa kuwasiliana na watu binafsi
                                             au vikundi vidogo vya watu.
Generally inappropriate                      Aina hii ya matini inaakisi maoni ya mwandishi juu ya
                            Barua kwa        mada au wazo fulani. Barua kwa mhariri ni matini
                            mhariri          inayotumwa kwa gazeti/jarida na yeyote katika umma,
                                             halafu inachapishwa ili isomwe na umma.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the
“generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• Sajili rasmi
• Toni yenye umakini na inayoshawishi

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                 –7–                M23/2/ABSWA/HP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


Swali 2

 Hivi karibuni, ulisoma makala iliyosema kuwa sherehe za siku ya kuzaliwa ni za hasara na
 hazifai kufanyika. Ungetaka kutoa maoni yako kwa wasomaji wengine. Andika matini ambapo
 unaelezea hoja kuu za makala hiyo, uelezee ni kwa kiasi gani ulikubaliana au kutokubaliana
 nazo, na utoe hitimisho lako kuhusu mada hiyo.


 Barua kwa mhariri                  Blogu                           Shajara

Criterion B:

• Jibu linafaa kuonyesha “hoja kuu” kama sababu zilizotolewa katika makala ambazo zinaelezea
  kwa nini sherehe za siku ya kuzaliwa zinaleta hasara.
• “Maoni” yanaweza kuwa ufafanuzi wa mawazo ya kuungana au kupingana na baadhi ya hoja
  au hoja zote kama zilivyoelezwa katika makala dhidi ya sherehe za siku ya kuzaliwa.
• “Hitimisho” ni msimamo kuhusu makala ambao unaweza kukubaliana au kutokubaliana na
  mada au maoni ya mwandishi wa makala. Sababu za kukubaliana na au kutokubaliana na
  mada ambazo haziko kwenye makala zinaweza kujumuishwa katika hitimisho.

Criterion C:

Choice of text type:

                            Text type        Rationale
Appropriate                 Barua kwa        Aina hii ya matini inaakisi maoni ya mwandishi juu ya
                            mhariri          mada au wazo fulani. Barua kwa mhariri ni matini
                                             inayotumwa kwa gazeti/jarida na yeyote katika umma,
                                             halafu inachapishwa ili isomwe na umma.
Generally appropriate       Blogu            Aina hii ya matini kimsingi husomwa na wasomaji
                                             wasiobainishwa, na hutegemea msomaji kujitafutia
                                             taarifa.
Generally inappropriate     Shajara          Aina hii ya matini ni ya kibinafsi na yenye habari
                                             kuhusu aliyoyapitia mtu, maoni na tafakuri.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the
“generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• Sajili iliyo nusu rasmi na rasmi
• Toni yenye umakini unaofaa


Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                –8–                 M23/2/ABSWA/HP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


Swali 3

 Leo, umehudhuria kongamano kuhusu utandawazi. Ilikuwa ni siku yenye furaha sana na
 inayochochea fikira, na ungependa kuitafakari. Andika matini ambapo unaelezea malengo ya
 kongamano hilo, ujadili ni matukio yapi yaliyokuwa ya kufana zaidi, na jinsi yalivyochangia
 mawazo yako kuhusu utandawazi.


 Blogu                              Barua kwa mhariri               Shajara

Criterion B:

• Jibu linafaa kuonyesha kwa uwazi kuwa kongamano linahusu “utandawazi” wala sio jambo
  lingine.
• “Malengo ya kongamano” yajumuishe ufafanuzi wa mada au masuala mbalimbali kuhusu
  utandawazi yaliyoangaziwa katika kongamano.
• “Matukio” ya “kufana zaidi” yanafaa kuwa masuala au mambo yaliyovutia zaidi. Maelezo ya jinsi
  matukio hayo yalivyomchochea au kumtaarifu zaidi mhudhuriaji kuhusu utandawazi lazima
  yajumuishwe katika jibu.

Criterion C:

Choice of text type:

                            Text type        Rationale
Appropriate                 Shajara          Aina hii ya matini ni ya kibinafsi na yenye habari
                                             kuhusu aliyoyapitia mtu, maoni na tafakuri.
Generally appropriate       Blogu            Aina hii ya matini kimsingi husomwa na wasomaji
                                             wasiobainishwa, na hutegemea msomaji kujitafutia
                                             taarifa.
Generally inappropriate     Barua kwa        Aina hii ya matini inaakisi maoni ya mwandishi juu ya
                            mhariri          mada au wazo fulani. Barua kwa mhariri ni matini
                                             inayotumwa kwa gazeti/jarida na yeyote katika umma,
                                             halafu inachapishwa ili isomwe na umma.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the
“generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• Sajili isiyo rasmi au iliyo nusu rasmi
• Toni inayoshirikisha

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                            –9–             M23/2/ABSWA/HP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


Appendix: Text type conventions (Criterion C)

The most common and recognisable conventions of the text types are given below:

Barua kwa mhariri
  • Salamu zinazofaa za mwanzo na mwisho
  • Itakuwa na utangulizi mfupi na hitimisho
  • Itamtambulisha mwandishi; mfano jina, eneo.


Barua pepe
  • Itakuwa na mstari wa mada husika
  • Itadumisha mazungumzo yaliyo wazi kwa mtu mmoja mahsusi
  • Itakuwa na salamu za kufungua na kufunga
     Kumbuka: ‘Kwa:’ /’Kutoka’: na tarehe zinaweza kuwekwa lakini hazihitajiki.


Blogu
   • Itakuwa na mada inayoshirikisha
   • Itatumia usimulizi wa nafsi ya kwanza
   • Itadhihirisha ufahamu wa wasomaji, kama vile kutumia lugha inayowalenga moja kwa moja,
      mtindo unaovutia na kusisimua, kuwakaribisha kutoa maoni, na kadhalika
   • Itakuwa na kauli ya kutamatisha


Ripoti rasmi
   • Itakuwa na mada husika
   • Itatumia mtindo ambao hauegemei upande wowote; kwa mfano, kuwasilisha mawazo na
        ukweli wa mambo bila kupamba
   • Itakuwa na muundo uliopangiliwa vizuri; kwa mfano, utangulizi ulio wazi, mada ndogo,
        aya/sehemu fupi na kadhalika
   • Itakuwa na hitimisho au mapendekezo.



Shajara
  • Itakuwa na tarehe
  • Itatumia usimulizi wa nafsi ya kwanza
  • Itakuwa na kauli ya kutamatisha, kama vile “imetosha kwa leo”
  • Haitatumia vifungu vya maneno au sentensi zinazotoa maelezo yaliyo dhahiri, (kwa mfano,
      itatumia “Nilimwona Juma”, lakini sio, “Nilimwona Juma, rafiki yangu wa dhati”


     Kumbuka: Shajara inaweza kuanza kwa “Mpendwa May”, lakini hili halitarajiwi.
