M23/2/ABKOR/HP1/KOR/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                   May / Mai / Mayo de 2023


              Korean / Coréen / Coreano B


                        Higher level
                      Niveau supérieur
                       Nivel Superior


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




9 pages/páginas
                                            –2–              M23/2/ABKOR/HP1/KOR/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                             –3–             M23/2/ABKOR/HP1/KOR/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion A: Language

How successfully does the candidate command written language?
• To what extent is the vocabulary appropriate and varied?
• To what extent are the grammatical structures varied?
• To what extent does the accuracy of the language contribute to effective communication?

  Marks                                      Level descriptor
     0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
            Command of the language is limited.
            Vocabulary is sometimes appropriate to the task.
   1–3      Some basic grammatical structures are used, with some attempts to use more
            complex structures.
            Language contains errors in both basic and more complex structures. Errors interfere
            with communication.
            Command of the language is partially effective.
            Vocabulary is generally appropriate to the task and varied.
   4–6      A variety of basic and some more complex grammatical structures is used.
            Language is mostly accurate for basic structures, but errors occur in more complex
            structures. Errors at times interfere with communication.
            Command of the language is effective and mostly accurate.
            Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied, including the use of idiomatic
            expressions.
   7–9
            A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used effectively.
            Language is mostly accurate. Occasional errors in basic and in complex grammatical
            structures do not interfere with communication.
            Command of the language is mostly accurate and very effective.
            Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and nuanced and varied in a manner that
            enhances the message, including the purposeful use of idiomatic expressions.
  10–12     A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used selectively in
            order to enhance communication.
            Language is mostly accurate. Minor errors in more complex grammatical structures
            do not interfere with communication.

언어
모든 오류의 중요도가 같지 않으며 평가자들은 이 점을 기억하여야 합니다. 뜻을 전달하는데
있어서 중대한 영향을 미치는 오류가 있고, 그렇지 않은 오류도 있습니다. 또한, 어떤 오류는 순간
착각을 하여 한 실수일 수도 있지만 어떤 오류는 그 언어 사용에 대한 기본적인 이해가 되어 있지
않아서 저지르는 오류입니다.
실수 (Slips) – 모든 난이도에서 일어날 수 있는 실수이지만 가끔, 그리고 일정치 않게 일어나야
합니다. – 예를 들어, 학생이 보통은 과거 시제를 잘 사용하였지만 가끔 실수를 하는 경우입니다.
결점 (Flaws) – 보다 규칙적으로, 특히 특정 문법 구조에 일어나는 오류입니다. – 예를 들어, 과거
시제를 바르게 쓰는 경우가 많이 있어도 정확도가 안정적이지 못 하여 학생이 기본적으로 다른
시제와 혼동 하고 있는 경우입니다.

결함 (Gaps) – 어떤 언어 구조가 올바로 사용되는 경우가 거의 없거나 아예 없는 경우입니다. –
예를 들어, 과거 시제가 필요한 경우에도 과거 시제를 사용하지 못 하는 경우입니다.
                                               –4–               M23/2/ABKOR/HP1/KOR/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B: Message
To what extent does the candidate fulfil the task?
  • How relevant are the ideas to the task?
  • To what extent are ideas developed?
  • To what extent do the clarity and organization of ideas contribute to the successful delivery of
    the message?

The “descriptor unpacked” explain the assessment criteria in greater detail. Where a candidate’s
response does not correspond exactly to a single mark band, the statements in bold should be
used as a guide for the ‘best fit’ approach.

 Marks           Level descriptor                             Descriptor unpacked
   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
         The task is partially fulfilled. The link between the response and task tends to be
                                             unclear; the reader has difficulty understanding the
         Few ideas are relevant to the       message.
         task.
                                             The response touches upon some aspects of the task but
         Ideas are stated, but with no       there is also much unrelated information.
  1–3    development.
                                             The response addresses the task in a simple manner, and
         Ideas are not clearly presented     supporting details and/or examples barely feature, if at all.
         and do not follow a logical         The ideas do not link well together; inadequate or
         structure, making the message       inappropriate use of cohesive devices confuse the
         difficult to determine.             message.
         The task is generally fulfilled.    The link between the response and the task is mostly
                                             detectable; the reader’s general understanding of the
         Some ideas are relevant to the      message is not impeded, despite some ambiguity.
         task.
                                             The response covers some aspects of the task, or
         Ideas are outlined, but are not     touches upon all aspects but superficially.
         fully developed.
  4–6                                        The response includes some supporting details and
         Ideas are generally clearly         examples.
         presented and the response is       The ideas are organized in a logical way; some cohesive
         generally structured in a logical   devices are used appropriately to aid the delivery of the
         manner, leading to a mostly         message, although there may be areas of confusion at
         successful delivery of the          times.
         message.
         The task is fulfilled.              The link between the response and the task is clear;
                                             the reader has a good understanding of the message
         Most ideas are relevant to the      conveyed.
         task.
                                             The response covers all aspects of the task, despite
         Ideas are developed well, with      losing focus at times.
  7–9    some detail and examples.
                                             The response uses supporting details and examples to
         Ideas are clearly presented and     clarify the message.
         the response is structured in a     The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive devices
         logical manner, supporting the      are used appropriately to deliver the message with little or
         delivery of the message.            no ambiguity.
         The task is fulfilled effectively. The link between the response and the task is precise
                                             and consistently evident; the reader has a clear
         Ideas are relevant to the task.     understanding of the message conveyed.
 10–12
         Ideas are fully developed,          The response covers all aspects of the task fully, and
         providing details and relevant      maintains focus throughout.
         examples.
                                                   –5–              M23/2/ABKOR/HP1/KOR/TZ0/XX/M


             Ideas are clearly presented and     The response uses well-chosen supporting details and
             the response is structured in a     examples to illustrate and explain ideas persuasively.
             logical and coherent manner         The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive devices
             that supports the delivery of the   are used appropriately to deliver the message with clarity
             message.                            and ease.


Note: When marking candidate responses, keep in mind that neither the factual accuracy of the
information presented, nor the validity of the candidates’ personal opinions, are being assessed.
Therefore, scripts that are factually inaccurate should not be marked down, provided the ideas
presented have coherence and are sufficiently developed.



Criterion C: Conceptual understanding

To what extent does the candidate demonstrate conceptual understanding?
   •       To what extent is the choice of text type appropriate to the task?
   •       To what extent are register and tone appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
           task?
   •       To what extent does the response incorporate the conventions of the chosen text type?

  Marks                                           Level descriptor
       0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
              Conceptual understanding is limited.
              The choice of text type is generally inappropriate to the context, purpose or audience.
   1–2        The register and tone are inappropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response incorporates limited recognizable conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is mostly demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is generally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   3–4        The register and tone, while occasionally appropriate to the context, purpose and
              audience of the task, fluctuate throughout the response.
              The response incorporates some conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is fully demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   5–6        The register and tone are appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response fully incorporates the conventions of the chosen text type.



Note: Examiners must balance all three elements in criterion C (choice of text type,
appropriateness of tone and register, and use of text type conventions) to arrive at the final mark.
                                                 –6–                M23/2/ABKOR/HP1/KOR/TZ0/XX/M


Question specific guidance (Criterion B and C)

Task 1

 여러분은 학교에서 많은 종이와 일회용품이 낭비되고 있다고 생각합니다. 여러분은
 학교의 모든 학생들이 이 문제의 심각성을 알길 원합니다. 학생들에게 문제를 설명하고,
 왜 이것이 문제인지, 또 어떻게 이 문제를 해결할 수 있는지에 대한 글을 쓰세요.



Criterion B:

•   종이와 일회용품이 어떻게 낭비되는지 구체적인 예시 언급
•   이 문제를 해결하는 것이 환경보호에 어떻게 도움이 될 수 있는지 설명


Criterion C:

Choice of text type:

                            Text type        Rationale
Appropriate                 기사               학교에서 발생한 이슈에 대해 다른 학생들에게
                                             기사로 알리기 좋음
Generally appropriate       발표문              학교에서 발생한 이슈를 다른 학생들에게 발표의
                                             형식으로 알리기 적절함
Generally inappropriate     블로그              학교의 소식을 전체에게 알리는데 개인적인
                                             블로그 보다는 기사나 발표문이 더 적절함

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the
“generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
•   정확하고 간결한 문체
•   기사에 맞는 격식체

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                 –7–                M23/2/ABKOR/HP1/KOR/TZ0/XX/M


Task 2

 여러분은 요즘 젊은 사람들에게 좋은 영향을 끼치는 한 인물을 존경하고 있습니다. 그
 사람에 대한 여러분의 생각을 다른 학생들과 공유하고 싶습니다. 그 사람이 누구인지,
 어떤 일을 했는지, 어떤 점을 배울 수 있는지에 대한 글을 쓰세요.



Criterion B:

• 인물에 대해 구체적인 소개
• 젊은 사람들에게 어떤 영향을 끼쳤는지 구체적인 예시 언급

Criterion C:

Choice of text type:

                            Text type        Rationale
Appropriate                 발표문              학생들에게 발표의 형식으로 알리기 적절함
Generally appropriate       블로그              개인적인 생각을 불특정 다수의 학생들에게
                                             알리기 적절함
Generally inappropriate     이메일              학생들에게 전체적으로 알리는 것이 목적이기
                                             때문에, 보통 개인이 수신자인 이메일로 보내기
                                             부적절함

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the
“generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• 발표문에 맞는 격식있는 말투
• 또래에게 쓰는 비격식 말투는 부적절함

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                 –8–                M23/2/ABKOR/HP1/KOR/TZ0/XX/M


Task 3

 여러분은 최근 한 영화를 보고 한 배우의 연기에 크게 감명을 받았습니다. 그 배우가
 영화제에서 상을 받을 것으로 기대했지만, 배우는 상을 받지 못했습니다. 이 배우에
 대한 소개, 영화에서 인상깊었던 배우의 연기, 이 결과에 대한 실망감을 다른 사람과
 공유하는 글을 쓰세요.



Criterion B:

• 영화제에 대한 기대감과 결과에 대한 실망감을 표현
• 영화와 영화속 배우의 연기에 대한 구체적인 장면 설명

Criterion C:

Choice of text type:

                            Text type        Rationale
Appropriate                 블로그              개인적인 생각을 불특정 다수와 공유하기 적절함
Generally appropriate       발표문              개인의 생각을 수업시간이나 토론시간에 발표의
                                             형식으로 공유할 수 있음

Generally inappropriate     일기               자기의 생각을 다른 사람과 '공유'하는 것이
                                             목적이므로 일기는 부적절함

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the
“generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• 비슷한 또래의 독자 또는 친구들에게 쓰는 친근한 표현, 말투 사용

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                            –9–            M23/2/ABKOR/HP1/KOR/TZ0/XX/M


Appendix: Text type conventions (Criterion C)

The most common and recognisable conventions of the text types are given below:

기사
   •   제목/헤드라인 제시
   •   독자층에 대한 이해를 바탕으로 한 내용 기술
   •   적절한 서론, 본론, 결론 전개

발표문
   •   발표문 서두에 적절한 인사 표현이 있음
   •   발표의 주제에 대해 간단히 소개
   •   적절한 결론 및 마무리 인사


블로그
   •   제목 제시
   •   독자들에 대한 직접적이고 적절한 호칭, 지칭 사용
   •   날짜와 이름 기재


이메일
   • 제목 기재
   • 서두에 받는이 이름과 적절한 인사 표현
   • 이메일의 목적 간단히 소개
   • 마지막에 보내는이 이름 적절한 인사말 기재
   • 수신자 정보 기재


일기
   •   날짜 기재
   •   본인이 알고 있는 사실 기재하지 않음
   •   적절한 마무리
