M23/2/LATIN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                                May 2023


                                  Latin


                               Higher level


                                 Paper 1




6 pages
                                            –2–                   M23/2/LATIN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                   –3–                   M23/2/LATIN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The translation is assessed in its basic units of clause and sentence. To this end, the original text is
chunked in a fixed number of sections (or “sense units”), 15 at SL and 30 at HL. Every section is awarded
two separate marks according to the two descriptors outlined below.

Each section is awarded 0 to 3 marks for descriptor A (Meaning) and 0 to 3 marks for descriptor B
(Vocabulary & Grammar).

The range of marks for each section is therefore 0 to 6, while the maximum number of marks for the
whole text is 180 at HL (30 sections  6 marks).

Criterion A (Meaning) assesses how well the meaning of each sense unit has been communicated.

Criterion B (Vocabulary & Grammar) assesses how correctly vocabulary and grammar have been
rendered in relation to each sense unit. The term ‘grammar’ here includes syntax and accidence.

As a guideline, criterion A tends to look at the translation as a whole (eg stylistic, literal and idiomatic
meanings conveyed), while criterion B tends to assess the conformity of the single section with the
original text (eg grammatical accuracy of translation, apparent understanding of source language syntax
and vocabulary).

While it may not always be possible to give the full range of marks for a single sense unit, the range of
marks necessary for differentiation is present over the whole exam.

By way of example, the marking of different translations of the sense unit omnia tela totius accusationis
in Oppianicum coniciebantur, found in an Ovid passage (HL specimen papers), would be as follows:
• “The entire force of the whole accusation was hurled against Oppianicus”: A=3, B=3.
• “The strength of the accusation was fully directed against Oppianicus”: A=3, B=2 (grammar is
    rendered adequately despite inaccuracies).
• “The weapons of the accuser were hurled against Oppianicus”: A=2 (the meaning has been partially
    communicated; errors impair the translation), B=2 (grammar is rendered adequately
    despite inaccuracies).
• “Every bit of the accusation was aimed into Oppianicus”: A=2 (the meaning has been partially
    communicated), B=1 (limited grammar is rendered accurately).
• “The attack of the accusation was focused intently on Oppianicus”: A=1 (the translation conveys
    some meaning), B=1 (little grammar is rendered appropriately).

Square brackets [ ] indicate that the words in the sense unit have been inserted out of the order of the
text.
                                          –4–                   M23/2/LATIN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



                                      (A) Meaning

      How well has the student communicated the meaning of each sense unit?

Marks                                        Level descriptors

  0        The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.


           The meaning has not been communicated adequately.
  1
           The translation conveys some meaning; errors impair the translation significantly.


           The meaning has been partially communicated.
  2
           The translation is mostly logical; errors impair the translation.

           The meaning has been fully communicated.
  3
           The translation is logical; errors do not impair the translation.



                             (B) Vocabulary & Grammar

How correctly has the student rendered vocabulary and grammar in relation to each
                                   sense unit?

Marks                                        Level descriptors

  0         The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

            Vocabulary and grammar are not rendered adequately.
  1         Limited vocabulary is rendered appropriately for the context.
            Limited grammar is rendered accurately.

            Vocabulary and grammar are rendered adequately despite inaccuracies.
  2         Some vocabulary is rendered appropriately for the context.
            Some grammar is rendered accurately and effectively.

            Vocabulary and grammar are rendered correctly.
  3         Most vocabulary is rendered appropriately for the context.
            Most grammar is rendered accurately and effectively.
                                                   –5–           M23/2/LATIN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Text 1                                                                              A          B
1.   omnibus in rebus, iudices
2.      quae graviores maioresque sunt
3.      quid quisque voluerit, cogitarit, admiserit
4.      non ex crimine, sed ex moribus eius
5.      qui arguitur
6.      est ponderandum
7.      neque enim potest quisquam nostrum
8.      subito fingi
9.      neque cuiusquam repente vita mutari
10.     aut natura converti
11.     circumspicite paulisper mentibus vestris … hosce ipsos homines
12.     ut alia mittamus
13.     qui huic adfines sceleri fuerunt
14.     Catilina … coniuravit
15.     contra rem publicam
16.     cuius aures umquam haec respuerunt?
17.     conatum esse audacter hominem a pueritia
18.     non solum intemperantia et scelere
19.     sed etiam consuetudine et studio
20.     in omni flagitio, stupro, caede versatum?
21.     quis eum … perisse miratur
22.     contra patriam pugnantem
23.     quem semper omnes … putaverunt?
24.     ad civile latrocinium natum
25.     quis … recordatur
26.     Lentuli societates cum indicibus
27.     quis insaniam libidinum
28.     quis perversam atque impiam religionem
29.     qui illum … miretur?
30.     aut nefarie cogitasse aut stulte perasse

                                                                                    90         90
Total                                                                                    180
                                                –6–                M23/2/LATIN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Text 2                                                                                A          B
1.   pandite nunc, Musae
2.      praesentia numina vatum
3.      scitis enim
4.      nec vos fallit spatiosa vetustas
5.      unde … circumflua Thybridis alti insula … adiecerit
6.      Coroniden … Romuleae sacris … urbis
7.      dira lues quondam Latias vitiaverat auras
8.      pallidaque … squalebant corpora
9.      exsangui … morbo
10.     funeribus fessi
11.     postquam … cernunt
12.     mortalia … temptamenta nihil, nihil artes posse medentum
13.     auxilium caeleste petunt
14.     mediamque tenentes orbis humum
15.     Delphos adeunt, oracula Phoebi
16.     utque salutifera miseris succurrere rebus sorte velit
17.     tantaeque urbis mala finiat, orant
18.     et locus et laurus et … pharetrae intremuere simul
19.     quas habet ipse
20.     cortinaque reddidit … hanc … vocem
21.     imo … adyto
22.     pavefactaque pectora movit
23.     quod petis hinc
24.     propiore loco, Romane, petisses
25.     et pete nunc propiore loco
26.     nec Apolline vobis … opus est
27.     qui minuat luctus
28.     sed Apolline nato
29.     ite bonis avibus
30.     prolemque accersite nostram

                                                                                      90         90
Total                                                                                      180
