M23/2/ABNOR/HP1/NOR/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                   May / Mai / Mayo de 2023


       Norwegian / Norvégien / Noruego B


                        Higher level
                      Niveau supérieur
                       Nivel Superior


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




9 pages/páginas
                                            –2–              M23/2/ABNOR/HP1/NOR/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                              –3–             M23/2/ABNOR/HP1/NOR/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion A: Language

How successfully does the candidate command written language?
• To what extent is the vocabulary appropriate and varied?
• To what extent are the grammatical structures varied?
• To what extent does the accuracy of the language contribute to effective communication?

  Marks                                       Level descriptor
     0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
            Command of the language is limited.
            Vocabulary is sometimes appropriate to the task.
   1–3      Some basic grammatical structures are used, with some attempts to use more
            complex structures.
            Language contains errors in both basic and more complex structures. Errors interfere
            with communication.
            Command of the language is partially effective.
            Vocabulary is generally appropriate to the task and varied.
   4–6      A variety of basic and some more complex grammatical structures is used.
            Language is mostly accurate for basic structures, but errors occur in more complex
            structures. Errors at times interfere with communication.
            Command of the language is effective and mostly accurate.
            Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied, including the use of idiomatic
            expressions.
   7–9
            A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used effectively.
            Language is mostly accurate. Occasional errors in basic and in complex grammatical
            structures do not interfere with communication.
            Command of the language is mostly accurate and very effective.
            Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and nuanced and varied in a manner that
            enhances the message, including the purposeful use of idiomatic expressions.
  10–12     A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used selectively in
            order to enhance communication.
            Language is mostly accurate. Minor errors in more complex grammatical structures
            do not interfere with communication.

Språk
Ikke alle feil har samme tyngde, og sensorer bør ta dette med i betraktningen. Noen feil påvirker
kommunikasjon av mening betydelig og andre ikke. Dessuten tyder noen feil på en grunnleggende
mangel på beherskelse av språket, mens andre bare tyder på et øyeblikks forglemmelse.

SLURV – feil på alle vanskelighetsnivå, men uregelmessig og tilfeldig – f. eks. kandidaten har
vanligvis ingen problemer med å danne fortidsformer, men glemmer innimellom fortidsendelsen.

MANGEL – feil forekommer mer regelmessig, særlig i noen strukturer – f. eks. fortidsformer blir
dannet korrekt ganske ofte, men er ikke virkelig pålitelige, og det kan foreligge grunnleggende
forvirring (f. eks. preteritum versus presens perfektum).

HULL – noen strukturer er sjelden korrekte eller forekommer simpelthen ikke – f. eks.
fortidsformene er påkrevd, men forekommer ikke.
                                               –4–               M23/2/ABNOR/HP1/NOR/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B: Message
To what extent does the candidate fulfil the task?
  • How relevant are the ideas to the task?
  • To what extent are ideas developed?
  • To what extent do the clarity and organization of ideas contribute to the successful delivery of
    the message?

The “descriptor unpacked” explain the assessment criteria in greater detail. Where a candidate’s
response does not correspond exactly to a single mark band, the statements in bold should be
used as a guide for the ‘best fit’ approach.

 Marks           Level descriptor                             Descriptor unpacked
   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
         The task is partially fulfilled. The link between the response and task tends to be
                                             unclear; the reader has difficulty understanding the
         Few ideas are relevant to the       message.
         task.
                                             The response touches upon some aspects of the task but
         Ideas are stated, but with no       there is also much unrelated information.
  1–3    development.
                                             The response addresses the task in a simple manner, and
         Ideas are not clearly presented     supporting details and/or examples barely feature, if at all.
         and do not follow a logical         The ideas do not link well together; inadequate or
         structure, making the message       inappropriate use of cohesive devices confuse the
         difficult to determine.             message.
         The task is generally fulfilled.    The link between the response and the task is mostly
                                             detectable; the reader’s general understanding of the
         Some ideas are relevant to the      message is not impeded, despite some ambiguity.
         task.
                                             The response covers some aspects of the task, or
         Ideas are outlined, but are not     touches upon all aspects but superficially.
         fully developed.
  4–6                                        The response includes some supporting details and
         Ideas are generally clearly         examples.
         presented and the response is       The ideas are organized in a logical way; some cohesive
         generally structured in a logical   devices are used appropriately to aid the delivery of the
         manner, leading to a mostly         message, although there may be areas of confusion at
         successful delivery of the          times.
         message.
         The task is fulfilled.              The link between the response and the task is clear;
                                             the reader has a good understanding of the message
         Most ideas are relevant to the      conveyed.
         task.
                                             The response covers all aspects of the task, despite
         Ideas are developed well, with      losing focus at times.
  7–9    some detail and examples.
                                             The response uses supporting details and examples to
         Ideas are clearly presented and     clarify the message.
         the response is structured in a     The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive devices
         logical manner, supporting the      are used appropriately to deliver the message with little or
         delivery of the message.            no ambiguity.
         The task is fulfilled effectively. The link between the response and the task is precise
                                             and consistently evident; the reader has a clear
         Ideas are relevant to the task.     understanding of the message conveyed.
 10–12
         Ideas are fully developed,          The response covers all aspects of the task fully, and
         providing details and relevant      maintains focus throughout.
         examples.
                                                   –5–              M23/2/ABNOR/HP1/NOR/TZ0/XX/M


             Ideas are clearly presented and     The response uses well-chosen supporting details and
             the response is structured in a     examples to illustrate and explain ideas persuasively.
             logical and coherent manner         The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive devices
             that supports the delivery of the   are used appropriately to deliver the message with clarity
             message.                            and ease.


Note: When marking candidate responses, keep in mind that neither the factual accuracy of the
information presented, nor the validity of the candidates’ personal opinions, are being assessed.
Therefore, scripts that are factually inaccurate should not be marked down, provided the ideas
presented have coherence and are sufficiently developed.



Criterion C: Conceptual understanding

To what extent does the candidate demonstrate conceptual understanding?
   •       To what extent is the choice of text type appropriate to the task?
   •       To what extent are register and tone appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
           task?
   •       To what extent does the response incorporate the conventions of the chosen text type?

  Marks                                           Level descriptor
       0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
              Conceptual understanding is limited.
              The choice of text type is generally inappropriate to the context, purpose or audience.
   1–2        The register and tone are inappropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response incorporates limited recognizable conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is mostly demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is generally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   3–4        The register and tone, while occasionally appropriate to the context, purpose and
              audience of the task, fluctuate throughout the response.
              The response incorporates some conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is fully demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   5–6        The register and tone are appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response fully incorporates the conventions of the chosen text type.



Note: Examiners must balance all three elements in criterion C (choice of text type,
appropriateness of tone and register, and use of text type conventions) to arrive at the final mark.
                                               –6–             M23/2/ABNOR/HP1/NOR/TZ0/XX/M


Question specific guidance (Criterion B and C)

Oppgave 1

Skolen din har bestemt at alle elevene må ha 30 minutters fysisk trening i lunsjpausen hver dag.
Noen elever er uenig med dette. Som leder av elevrådet har du blitt spurt om å overtale alle
elevene at dette er en god idé. Skriv en tekst hvor du anerkjenner elevenes bekymringer, men
også forklarer hvorfor skolen har tatt denne avgjørelsen og hvordan dette vil ha positive
virkninger.

 Brosjyre                        Instruksjon                    Tale


Criterion B:

• Overtale medelevene at dette er en god idé.
• Erkjenne bekymringene til studentene, med eksempler.
• Forklar hvorfor skolen har bestemt dette, og hvordan dette vil være positivt.


Criterion C:

Valg av teksttype:
                           Text type       Rationale
Appropriate                Tale            En tale er en velegnet teksttype for denne oppgaven.
                                           Den kan leveres til hele kohorten. Den som levere
                                           talen holder kontakt med studentene gjennom hele
                                           talen.
Generally appropriate      Brosjyre        Brosjyre kan være en egnet teksttype til denne
                                           oppgaven fordi en slik teksttype kan leveres til mange
                                           mennesker. Det er imidlertid ikke sikker at mottakeren
                                           vil lese brosjyren og dermed er ikke denne teksttypen
                                           best egnet for oppgaven.
Generally inappropriate    Instruksjon     Instruksjon er ikke en velegnet teksttype til denne
                                           oppgaven. Instruksjon forklarer hvordan man gjøre
                                           noe, ikke hvorfor.

NB! Hvis en besvarelse gjør greie for kontekst, mottaker og hensikt med teksten og disse
samsvarer med oppgaven, kan «generally appropriate» teksttype bli godkjent som «appropriate»
eller «generally inappropriate» teksttype som «generally appropriate»

Register and tone:
• Uformelt register.
• Vennlig tone til medelevene


Se oversikt over teksttyper i Appendix.
                                                 –7–              M23/2/ABNOR/HP1/NOR/TZ0/XX/M


Oppgave 2

Din teatergruppe er invitert til å opptre ved et prestisjetungt teater i utlandet. Dere trenger
imidlertid penger til dette. Dere bestemmer dere for å søke sponsoravtale hos et lokalt firma.
Skriv en tekst hvor du forklarer hvor viktig denne turen er for din gruppe, hvilke fordeler firmaet vil
ha av denne avtalen, og hvordan pengene de eventuelt gir vil bli brukt.

 Brev                              Forslag                         Instruksjon


Criterion B:

• Forklar hvorfor turen er så viktig for dramagruppen.
• Forklar fordelene som det lokale firmaet vil få.
• Forklar hvordan sponsoravtalen skal brukes.


Criterion C:

Valg av teksttype:
                             Text type        Rationale
Appropriate                  Brev             Brev er en velegnet teksttype for denne oppgaven,
                                              fordi et brev er skrevet til ett menneske/avdeling i et
                                              firma. Teksttypen er en mer formell og tradisjonell
                                              måte å kommunisere på, som er velegnet til
                                              oppgaven.
Generally appropriate        Forslag          Forslag kan være en egnet teksttype. Et forslag kan
                                              også presenteres i et brev.

Generally inappropriate      Instruksjon      Instruksjon er ikke en velegnet teksttype til denne
                                              oppgaven. Instruksjon forklarer hvordan man gjøre
                                              noe, ikke hvorfor.

NB! Hvis en besvarelse gjør greie for kontekst, mottaker og hensikt med teksten og disse
samsvarer med oppgaven, kan «generally appropriate» teksttype bli godkjent som «appropriate»
eller «generally inappropriate» teksttype som «generally appropriate»

Register and tone:
• Ganske formelt register
• Profesjonell, overtalende tone


Se oversikt over teksttyper i Appendix.
                                              –8–             M23/2/ABNOR/HP1/NOR/TZ0/XX/M


Oppgave 3

Du og vennene dine har bestemt at dere skal organisere et ‘klesbytte’ arrangement. Skriv en tekst
for å reklamere for dette arrangementet til de som bor i nabolaget for å tiltrekke så mange
deltakere som mulig. Gi de praktiske detaljene som folk bør kjenne til, forklar hvorfor dere har
organisert arrangementet og hvorfor folk burde delta.

 Brosjyre                        Essay                         Innlegg på sosiale medier


Criterion B:

• Reklamere for arrangementet.
• Praktiske detaljer.
• Hvorfor man har laget arrangementet. Og hvorfor folk burde delta.


Criterion C:

Valg av teksttype:
                           Text type        Rationale
Appropriate                Innlegg på       Et innlegg på sosiale media er velegnet fordi et slik
                           sosiale medier   innlegg snakker direkte til mottakerne med egnet
                                            informasjon.
Generally appropriate      Brosjyre         Brosjyre kan være en egnet teksttype til denne
                                            oppgaven fordi en slik teksttype kan leveres til
                                            mange mennesker. Det er imidlertid ikke sikker at
                                            mottakeren vil lese brosjyren og dermed er ikke
                                            denne teksttypen best egnet for oppgaven.
Generally inappropriate    Essay            Essay er uegnet til denne oppgaven fordi det er
                                            vanligvis brukt i akademiske tekster.


NB! Hvis en besvarelse gjør greie for kontekst, mottaker og hensikt med teksten og disse
samsvarer med oppgaven, kan «generally appropriate» teksttype bli godkjent som «appropriate»
eller «generally inappropriate» teksttype som «generally appropriate»

Register and tone:
• Uformelt register
• Forklarende tone


Se oversikt over teksttyper i Appendix.
                                                –9–              M23/2/ABNOR/HP1/NOR/TZ0/XX/M


Appendix: Text type conventions (Criterion C)

The most common and recognisable conventions of the text types are given below:

Tale
• Skal henvende seg til publikum og holde kontakten med dem (f. eks. ved bruk av ”vi” og ”dere”)
• Skal prøve å fange publikums oppmerksomhet i begynnelsen og etterlate et klart inntrykk på
   slutten
• Skal ta i bruk retoriske virkemidler, dvs. retoriske spørsmål, gjentakelser osv.

Brev
• Skal vise eksplisitt mottaker og avsender (navn, eventuelt adresse, rolle/tittel eller dato)
• Skal gjennomgående henvende seg til en bestemt person eller gruppe
• Skal ha en innledende og avsluttende hilsen
• Skal ha med en dato

Forslag
• Skal ha en passende tittel i forhold til hovedtema
• Skal prøve å overtale leserne
• Skal ha en oversiktlig struktur med bruk av for eksempel undertitler, korte og klare avsnitt,
   opplistinger ved hjelp av bokstaver/ tall/ kulepunkt osv.
• Skal ha en innledning og konklusjon

NB: Det er akseptabelt å utforme forslaget som et brev eller en e-post så lenge elementene ovenfor
er på plass

Instruksjoner
• Skal henvende seg direkte til den tenkte mottakeren
• Skal ha en meningsfull overskrift/ tittel
• Skal ha en oversiktlig struktur med bruk av f. eks. korte avsnitt, undertitler, tall, kulepunkt osv.
• Skal ha en kort innledning og konklusjon

Innlegg på sosiale medier
• Skal skrives i første person
• Skal engasjere leserne gjennom for eksempel direkte henvendelse
• Skal ha typiske nettbaserte kommunikasjonsteknikker, for eksempel referere til andre innlegg
    og deltakere, bruke emneknagger, @referanser og ’likes’

Brosjyre
• Skal ha en overskrift som vekker oppmerksomhet
• Skal ha en kort innledning og en konklusjon
• Skal framheve innholdet ved hjelp av f. eks. undertitler, kulepunkt, tall osv.
• Skal inneholde kontaktinformasjon

NB: Grafisk design blir ikke vurdert

Essay
• Skal ha en tittel
• Skal argumentere på en måte som er lett å følge for leseren
• Skal ha en klar innledning og konklusjon
• Skal ha en klar oppbygging med bruk av avsnitt
