© International Baccalaureate Organization 2022

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2022

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2022

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Mathematics: applications and interpretation
Higher level
Paper 3

Thursday 12 May 2022 (morning)


1 hour


Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y A graphic display calculator is required for this paper.
y Answer all the questions in the answer booklet provided.
y Unless otherwise stated in the question, all numerical answers should be given exactly or
  correct to three significant figures.
y A clean copy of the mathematics: applications and interpretation formula booklet is
  required for this paper.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [55 marks].




                                                                                              2222 – 7213
     7 pages                                              © International Baccalaureate Organization 2022
                                                       –2–                                                2222 – 7213


Answer both questions in the answer booklet provided. Please start each question on a new page.
Full marks are not necessarily awarded for a correct answer with no working. Answers must be
supported by working and/or explanations. Solutions found from a graphic display calculator should be
supported by suitable working. For example, if graphs are used to find a solution, you should sketch
these as part of your answer. Where an answer is incorrect, some marks may be given for a correct
method, provided this is shown by written working. You are therefore advised to show all working.

1.    [Maximum mark: 27]

      This question uses statistical tests to investigate whether advertising leads to
      increased profits for a grocery store.

      Aimmika is the manager of a grocery store in Nong Khai. She is carrying out a statistical
      analysis on the number of bags of rice that are sold in the store each day. She collects the
      following sample data by recording how many bags of rice the store sells each day over a
      period of 90 days.

            Number of bags
                                  0       1   2        3      4    5         6   7       8    9      10
            of rice sold

            Number of days        1       8   12       11    19   14     13      8       2    0       2

      She believes that her data follows a Poisson distribution.

      (a)   (i)	Find the mean and variance for the sample data given in the table.                              [2]

            (ii)   Hence state why Aimmika believes her data follows a Poisson distribution.                     [1]

      (b)   State one assumption that Aimmika needs to make about the sales of bags of rice to
            support her belief that it follows a Poisson distribution.                                           [1]

      Aimmika knows from her historic sales records that the store sells an average of 4.2 bags of
      rice each day. The following table shows the expected frequency of bags of rice sold each
      day during the 90 day period, assuming a Poisson distribution with mean 4.2.


     Number of bags
                           ≤1         2            3          4          5           6        7           ≥8
     of rice sold

     Expected
                            a      11.903     16.665          b        14.698    10.289      6.173         c
     frequency

      (c)   Find the value of a , of b , and of c . Give your answers to 3 decimal places.                       [5]

(This question continues on the following page)
                                                     –3–                                                2222 – 7213


(Question 1 continued)

     Aimmika decides to carry out a  ​χ​2​  goodness of fit test at the 5 % significance level to see
     whether the data follows a Poisson distribution with mean 4.2.

     (d)   (i)	Write down the number of degrees of freedom for her test.                                      [1]

           (ii)   Perform the  ​χ​2​  goodness of fit test and state, with reason, a conclusion.               [7]

     Aimmika claims that advertising in a local newspaper for 300 Thai Baht (THB) per day
     will increase the number of bags of rice sold. However, Nichakarn, the owner of the store,
     claims that the advertising will not increase the store’s overall profit.

     Nichakarn agrees to advertise in the newspaper for the next 60 days. During that time,
     Aimmika records that the store sells 282 bags of rice with a profit of 495 THB on
     each bag sold.

     (e)   Aimmika wants to carry out an appropriate hypothesis test to determine whether the
           number of bags of rice sold during the 60 days increased when compared with the
           historic sales records.

           (i)    By finding a critical value, perform this test at a 5 % significance level.                  [6]

           (ii)   Hence state the probability of a Type I error for this test.                                 [1]

     (f)   By considering the claims of both Aimmika and Nichakarn, explain whether the
           advertising was beneficial to the store.                                                            [3]




                                                                                                        Turn over
  –4–        2222 – 7213




Blank page
                                                            –5–                                2222 – 7213


2.   [Maximum mark: 28]

     This question compares possible designs for a new computer network between
     multiple school buildings, and whether they meet specific requirements.

     A school’s administration team decides to install new fibre-optic internet cables underground.
     The school has eight buildings that need to be connected by these cables. A map of the
     school is shown below, with the internet access point of each building labelled A–H.


                                              A               B             C


                                                                       E
                                        Lake              D


                                          F                       G         H




     Jonas is planning where to install the underground cables. He begins by determining the
     distances, in metres, between the underground access points in each of the buildings.

     He finds ​ AD = 89.2 m​ ,  ​DF = 104.9 m ​ and ​  A​D̂ ​F = ​83​∘​​.

     (a)    Find AF.[3]

     The cost for installing the cable directly between A and F is $21 310.

     (b)    Find the cost per metre of installing this cable.                                         [2]

     Jonas estimates that it will cost $110 per metre to install the cables between all the
     other buildings.

     (c)    State why the cost for installing the cable between A and F would be higher than
            between the other buildings.                                                              [1]

(This question continues on the following page)




                                                                                               Turn over
                                                            –6–                                                 2222 – 7213


(Question 2 continued)

     Jonas creates the following graph, S , using the cost of installing the cables between two
     buildings as the weight of each edge.

                                                           B
                                                                                  13 156
                                        8811
                   A                                                    10                                  C
                                                                           15




                                                      8
                                                                              3                9



                                                   877
                                 981                                                          3
                                       2                                                   82

                                                                 8833                  E
                                               D




                                                                                                   13 574
                  21 310




                                   39




                                                                                           92
                                                                           24
                                                          86
                                  5
                               11




                                                                                              51
                                                                         97
                                                            86



                                           12 606                                   9603
                                                                    G                                  H
                   F

     The computer network could be designed such that each building is directly connected to at
     least one other building and hence all buildings are indirectly connected.

     (d)   (i)	By using Kruskal’s algorithm, find the minimum spanning tree for S , showing
                clearly the order in which edges are added.                                                            [3]

           (ii)        Hence find the minimum installation cost for the cables that would allow all the
                       buildings to be part of the computer network.                                                   [2]

     The computer network fails if any part of it becomes unreachable from any other part.
     To help protect the network from failing, every building could be connected to at least
     two other buildings. In this way if one connection breaks, the building is still part of the
     computer network. Jonas can achieve this by finding a Hamiltonian cycle within the graph.

     (e)   State why a path that forms a Hamiltonian cycle does not always form an Eulerian circuit. [1]

     (f)   Starting at D, use the nearest neighbour algorithm to find the upper bound for the
           installation cost of a computer network in the form of a Hamiltonian cycle.

           Note: Although the graph is not complete, in this instance it is not necessary to form a
           table of least distances.                                                                                   [5]

     (g)   By deleting D, use the deleted vertex algorithm to find the lower bound for the
           installation cost of the cycle.                                                                             [6]

(This question continues on the following page)
                                                      –7–                                          2222 – 7213


(Question 2 continued)

      After more research, Jonas decides to install the cables as shown in the diagram below.

                                                  B

                  A                                                                       C




                                                                        E
                                        D




                                                            G                         H
                 F

      Each individual cable is installed such that each end of the cable is connected to a building’s
      access point. The connection between each end of a cable and an access point has a 1.4 %
      probability of failing after a power surge.

      For the network to be successful, each building in the network must be able to communicate
      with every other building in the network. In other words, there must be a path that connects
      any two buildings in the network. Jonas would like the network to have less than a 2 %
      probability of failing to operate after a power surge.

      (h)     Show that Jonas’s network satisfies the requirement of there being less than a 2 %
              probability of the network failing after a power surge.                                      [5]




References:

© International Baccalaureate Organization 2022
