M13/1/AXENG/HP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


                    May / mai / mayo 2013

         ENGLISH / ANGLAIS / INGLÉS A:
          LITERATURE / LITTERATURE /
                 LITERATURA

                        Higher Level
                      Niveau Supérieur
                       Nivel Superior

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2




6 pages/páginas
                              –2–        M13/1/AXENG/HP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.
                                               –3–           M13/1/AXENG/HP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking and as a supplement to
the published external assessment criteria for written paper 2. They are not offered as an exhaustive
and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must rigidly adhere. Good ideas or
angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate. Similarly, answers
which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here may still be very good answers.

Examiners: please note that the term “comparison”, both in the descriptors and in the
marking notes, includes the discussion of relevant “contrasts” as well.

The features of the “very good to excellent” answers assume that those for “adequate to good”
are included.


Drama

1.   An adequate to good answer will show an understanding of the term “tempo” and will identify
     and discuss some of the means used to create shifts in tempo. There will be some comparison
     of these means and their effects.

     A very good to excellent answer may explore in greater detail the uses made of tempo shifts,
     showing more perceptive understanding of their impact on the chosen plays. There will be a
     clear evaluation of how effectively these shifts are achieved and used.


2.   An adequate to good answer will establish a viable definition of “theatrical” and show how
     such theatricality is created in the chosen works. Examples chosen will be consistently
     relevant and there will be comparison of these and their effects in relation to the question.

     A very good to excellent answer may offer closer scrutiny of the conventions which create
     theatricality. It will more effectively and persuasively develop the comparison and
     evaluation.


3.   An adequate to good answer will identify and compare moments of drama which are created
     by ordinary characters placed in situations of crisis. The answer will make a reasonable case
     for the “ordinariness” of the character and the critical nature of the situation in a considered
     discussion of relevant examples.

     A very good to excellent answer may clearly identify and thoughtfully compare judiciously
     chosen examples evaluating their dramatic effect in the chosen works.
                                              –4–          M13/1/AXENG/HP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M




Poetry

4.   An adequate to good answer will offer a viable definition of pleasure in relation to poetry,
     give consistently relevant examples of how one or more poetic devices are used to develop
     pleasure as the object of a poem and compare the approaches of the poets.

     A very good to excellent answer may offer a more convincing or comprehensive analysis of
     the chosen poetic devices, with an appropriate evaluation of the approaches of the poets. It
     may also explore the subtleties of the question and may even offer a comparison of pleasure
     with truth in relation to poetry.


5.   An adequate to good answer will offer a viable definition of what is “singular, strange or
     different” in the poems and identify some of the devices used to draw attention to the unique
     or the strange in the poems, and their effects. It will offer some developed comparison of the
     approaches of the selected poets.

     A very good to excellent answer may consider in more detail how poets seek to draw our
     attention to the “singular, strange and different” in a more conceptualised comparison and
     evaluation of these methods and devices.


6.   An adequate to good answer will offer a viable definition of voice in the poems, give
     consistently relevant examples of how one or more conventions develop voice in the poems
     and compare the approaches of the poets.

     A very good to excellent answer may offer a more convincing analysis of the chosen
     conventions with effective evaluation of the approaches of the poets.
                                               –5–          M13/1/AXENG/HP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


Prose: novel and short story

7.   An adequate to good answer will convincingly identify some examples of narrative
     disruptions in at least two works. The writers’ use of these conventions and their effects will
     be explored and compared in some detail.

     A very good to excellent answer may show a more sophisticated sense of the ways in which
     narrative disruptions are achieved, demonstrating a clear awareness and evaluation of how
     such authorial decisions add to the effectiveness of the individual works.


8.   An adequate to good answer will offer a valid interpretation of being “taken to the heart” in
     this context and will identify appropriate examples of the means by which their chosen writers
     seek to do this. It will compare the techniques used by the writers and discuss their
     effectiveness.

     A very good to excellent answer may feature aptly chosen examples used to illustrate a more
     detailed comparison and evaluation of their impact in the selected works.


9.   An adequate to good answer will offer a viable definition of the term “moral” or “lesson” as
     appropriate to the chosen works, and will identify what methods the author uses to present
     that “moral” or “lesson”.

     A very good to excellent answer may explore, with greater sophistication, the concept of
     adhering to or subverting the conventional use of a moral or lesson and the methods by which
     the author’s purpose is achieved. Illustration will be pertinent and thoughtfully analysed, and
     there will be evaluation of how this convention underpins the chosen work as a whole.
                                               –6–          M13/1/AXENG/HP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


Prose other than fiction

10.   An adequate to good answer will identify some examples of authentic detail and their effects,
      and offer some comparison of the approaches of the writers.

      A very good to excellent answer may offer a more convincing analysis of the use and
      significance of authentic detail in the works with an appropriate and effective evaluation of
      the writers’ approaches.


11.   An adequate to good answer will offer appropriate examples of memories that could be seen
      as “dark and negative” from their selected works. There will be a comparative discussion of
      the means by which they are presented and their function in the texts.

      A very good to excellent answer may offer more perceptive readings of memories that could
      be seen as “dark or negative” and discuss well-chosen examples, showing the effectiveness of
      their presentation and their importance in the texts in a more sustained, evaluative
      comparison.


12.   An adequate to good answer will identify some examples of group or communal effort, either
      in the works or in their construction (examples may include narrative perspectives, implied
      audiences, research, and character interaction). The answer will include adequate comparison
      of the effects of communal effort within the chosen works.

      A very good to excellent answer may offer more persuasive examples of group or communal
      effort in a convincingly developed analysis. The answer will explore the subtleties of the
      question and offer an effective evaluation of the contribution of communal effort within the
      chosen works.
