M13/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ1/XX




     22130063

ENGLISH A: LITERATURE – STANDARD LEVEL – PAPER 1
ANGLAIS A : LITTéRATURE – NIVEAU MOYEN – ÉPREUVE 1
INGLÉS A: LITERATURA – NIVEL MEDIO – PRUEBA 1

Thursday 2 May 2013 (morning)
Jeudi 2 mai 2013 (matin)
Jueves 2 de mayo de 2013 (mañana)

1 hour 30 minutes / 1 heure 30 minutes / 1 hora 30 minutos


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

 Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Write a guided literary analysis on one passage only. In your answer you must address both of
  the guiding questions provided.
 The maximum mark for this examination paper is [20 marks].

INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS

 N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
 Rédigez une analyse littéraire dirigée d’un seul des passages. Les deux questions d’orientation
  fournies doivent être traitées dans votre réponse.
 Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est [20 points].

INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS

 No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
 Escriba un análisis literario guiado sobre un solo pasaje. Debe abordar las dos preguntas de
  orientación en su respuesta.
 La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [20 puntos].




2213-0063                                                                                   4 pages/páginas
                                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2013
                                                  –2–                M13/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ1/XX

Write a guided literary analysis on one passage only. In your answer you must address both of the guiding
questions provided.

1.

                                          Acceptance Speech

                        The radio’s replaying last night’s winners
                        and the gratitude of the glamorous,
                        everyone thanking everybody for making everything
                        so possible, until I want to shush
                    5   the faucet, dry my hands, join in right here
                        at the cluttered podium of the sink, and thank

                        my mother for teaching me the true meaning of okra,
                        my children for putting back the growl in hunger,
                        my husband, primo uomo of dinner, for not
                   10   begrudging me this starring role—

                        without all of them, I know this soup
                        would not be here tonight.

                        And let me just add that I could not
                        have made it without the marrow bone, that blood—
                   15   brother to the broth, and the tomatoes
                        who opened up their hearts, and the self-effacing limas,
                        the blonde sorority of corn, the cayenne
                        and oregano who dashed in
                        in the nick of time.

                   20   Special thanks, as always, to the salt—
                        you know who you are—and to the knife,
                        who revealed the ripe beneath the rind,
                        the clean truth underneath the dirty peel.

                        —I hope I’ve not forgotten anyone—
                   25   oh, yes, to the celery and the parsnip,
                        those bit players only there to swell the scene,
                        let me just say: sometimes I know exactly how you feel.

                        But not tonight, not when it’s all
                        coming to something and the heat is on and
                   30   I’m basking in another round
                        of blue applause.

                             From The Zones of Paradise by Lynn Powell, copyright © 2003 Lynn Powell.
                                              Reprinted by permission of The University of Akron Press.
                                                                Unauthorized duplication not permitted.


2213-0063
                                                 –3–                M13/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ1/XX

      (a)   Consider the situation and attitude of the speaker especially in relation to the opening and
            closing stanzas.

      (b)   Discuss the sources and importance of humour in the poem.




2213-0063                                                 Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                       –4–                 M13/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ1/XX

2.

                    THE floor under the little rock overhang was level and sandy. He crawled in as usual with
            his dustpan and brush and sat up. At the back of the tiny cave was a brick wall darkened with soot
            like the back of a fireplace. The row of bricks below the rock roof was missing. That, he supposed,
            was where the smoke went, although there was no trace of a fire on the clean sand floor. He knelt
      5     in front of the wall, poked his brush up into the gap and began to sweep away busily. Soot poured
            down, piling up on the floor in front of him. He brushed harder. Then the spiders began, small at
            first, but black as pitch and very active. He watched them scrabbling up the mound of soot, black
            on black, and brushed no more. Larger and larger spiders slithered out of the rift. He backed
            away until the tip of the overhang was pressing against his shoulders and waited for what he knew
     10     was coming.
                    But as usual, its arrival was swifter and more brutal than he was prepared for. It squeezed
            through the narrow gap and landed heavily but silently on the floor of the cave. King spider, the
            size of a young dog. Its many-faceted eyes took in everything at once, including Conrad pressed
            against the dipping rock roof. It, too, began to clamber up the mound of soot. He knew it was
     15     biding its time, waiting to attack, yet he did not move. To get out from under the overhang he
            would have had to bend his head and shoulders towards it and twist his legs beneath him. In doing
            this, he might lose his balance and lurch towards it, or at least make a sudden movement which
            would draw attention to himself. So he remained crouched on his knees, staring and stock-still,
            the soles of his feet pointing towards freedom.
     20             He awoke shivering, staring with wide eyes at the black space between the wardrobe
            and the chest of drawers. Betsy lay with her back to him, her knees drawn up like a baby.
            She breathed slowly and deeply, as though she were breathing underwater, slow motion even
            in sleep. But reassuring. He put his hand on the long swell of her hip and stroked the blanket
            gratefully. Nothing moved in the darkness. There were no spiders. He settled back against the
     25     pillows and studied the blue ink of the window. He felt vaguely ashamed that, at his age, the
            springs of terror still ran so pure.
                    Quietly, so as not to disturb his wife, he got out of bed, pulled jeans and sweater over his
            pyjamas and went out on to the landing, closing the door softly. He paused in the darkness,
            listening. Only the faint hum of the refrigerator downstairs and the creak of the dog’s basket as the
     30     creature lifted its head to attend.
                    He switched on the landing light, climbed the aluminium ladder, unlocked the trapdoor and
            clambered into the attic, pulling the ladder up behind him. Softly, he lowered the trapdoor again
            and switched on the lights. His pictures stared at him from around the room, muddy ominous
            shapes. Like the dream spiders, he thought, but without the power of dreams. Blackness without
     35     terror. Mere gloom.

                                                               A Alvarez, Hunt (1978) Copyright ©Al Alvarez


      (a)      How does the writer convey the states of mind of the main character?

      (b)      Consider the significance of the dream sequence to the passage as a whole.




2213-0063
