N10/3/GEOGR/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                      November 2010



                       GEOGRAPHY




           Higher Level and Standard Level



                               Paper 2



26 pages
                              –2–            N10/3/GEOGR/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                               –3–                N10/3/GEOGR/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                           SECTION A

A1. Drainage basins and their management

    Either

    (a)   Essay

          Using examples, examine how erosion and deposition have created distinctive
          fluvial landforms.                                                          [20 marks]

          Candidates are likely to choose landforms such as waterfalls, rapids, ox-bow lakes and
          meanders for erosion, and deltas, flood plains, levees and braided channels for deposition.
          Note that some, such as meanders and ox-bows, are the result of both erosion and deposition.

          Candidates could use annotated diagrams to show how landforms have been created.
          They should also comment on the distinctive nature of the landform. This should include a
          detailed description of the features.

          A detailed examination of a limited number of landforms might be as successful an approach
          as looking at a larger number of landforms in less depth. Alternative approaches such as
          organizing the essay by processes are equally acceptable.

          Answers that only examine either erosion or deposition should not move beyond band D.
          Candidates that cover erosion and deposition, and refer to the “distinctive” nature of the
          landform and include examples, are likely to be credited at bands E/F.

          Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.
                                              –4–               N10/3/GEOGR/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Or

(b)   Structured question

      (i)    Identify the place (A, B or C) where each of the following impacts occur
             and justify your choice:

             (a)   reduction of flood risk,                                                  [2 marks]

                   Reduction of flood risk at C – since excess water is stored in the reservoir
                   behind B.

             (b)   hydro-electricity (HEP).                                                  [2 marks]

                   HEP at B – as there is a large head of water and a large volume of water to drive
                   the turbines.

      (ii)   Explain two of the six disadvantages of dam construction shown on
             the diagram.                                                     [3+3 marks]

             Increased downstream erosion is one such disadvantage. This occurs because the river
             deposits its load in the reservoir behind the dam. Downstream of the dam the river has
             very little load and so it has the potential to pick up more material. This increases rates
             of erosion downstream from the dam.

             Increased coastal erosion may occur as less material is carried by the river (a high
             proportion is deposited in the reservoir). Therefore there is less material entering the
             coastal system (less input of sediment). If coastal erosion continues, the coastline will
             retreat as there is less input to balance the material lost to coastal erosion.

             Credit any two of the six disadvantages explained.


      (iii) Referring to specific case studies, discuss how drainage basins can be
            managed to provide water for different types of users.                 [10 marks]

             There are many types of users, including urban domestic users, recreational users such
             as swimming pools and golf courses, industrial users, hydro-electric power stations,
             farmers and navigators.

             There are many management options. These include construction of large-scale dams;
             terraces; check dams and diguettes in poor countries; afforestation schemes;
             groundwater recharge; mixing of fresh water and salt water for non-potable uses of
             water; desalinization; different types of irrigation such as drip-irrigation; metering in
             urban areas; recycling of water; increased water collection and storage.

             The number of users and management options discussed will depend on the case
             studies chosen. A minimum of two case studies is required to move beyond band D.

             Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.
                                               –5–                N10/3/GEOGR/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


A2. Coasts and their management

    Either

    (a)   Essay

          Referring to one or more examples, examine the physical and human factors
          that determine the management strategies adopted in a coastal zone.       [20 marks]

          The answer should identify several management options; these will range from ambitious and
          costly schemes involving structural engineering to a passive approach of doing nothing. The
          type of scheme adopted is dependent upon the urgency and scale of the problem and its
          expected outcomes. Both physical and human factors should be identified, and a good answer
          accessing markbands E/F will examine several physical and several human factors.

          Physical factors include:
           The level of risk of erosion and flooding
           The resilience of the coastline, which is determined by its geomorphology, geology and
             exposure to climatic hazards
           Wave energy and direction
           The current rate of recession
           The natural processes and the extent to which they can be controlled
           Natural resources potential
           Environmental outcomes of protection schemes.

          Human factors include:
           Population density
           Coastal land value
           Coastal land use
           Amenity value of coastal features
           Recreational value
           National/regional priorities in spending
           Cost benefit analysis.

          Examples are a specific requirement, hence they would be expected in those answers
          achieving band D and above.

          Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.
                                               –6–              N10/3/GEOGR/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Or
(b)   Structured question
      (i)    Referring to the photograph, briefly describe two physical factors that
             have affected this cliff-face.                                        [2+2 marks]

             Award [2 marks] for any two of the following, with a brief description of the effect of
             each on the cliff-face [2 marks]:
             Geology, weathering, mass movement, undercutting and erosion.
             There may be other valid factors, but there must be photographic evidence.

      (ii)   Describe and explain the variation in the size of particles found on
             beaches.                                                           [2+4 marks]

             The description should cover a range of particle sizes from coarse to fine [1 mark] and
             may refer to variation within one beach or between several [1 mark].

             There are several possible explanations for variation in size:

             Wave energy – coarse particles may be stranded at the back of the beach during storm
             events when percolation allows only fine material to be transported by the weakened
             backwash. The result is a graded cross-profile to the beach. This may vary seasonally
             with finer materials, such as sand, being eroded when high energy waves dominate.

             Sediment sources – large particles, such as boulders and cobbles, are often found at the
             cliff foot where they have not yet been subject to the processes of transport and attrition.
             Sandy beaches are typical of low-lying coastlines backed by sand-dunes or weak cliffs
             of unconsolidated geology. Fine fluvial deposits such as silt are found close to river
             mouths.

             For [4 marks] there should be at least two explanations given. Other explanations may
             be valid and should be credited.

      (iii) Using examples, examine the impacts made by humans upon the
            natural processes and features of coastlines.               [10 marks]

             Coastlines are often zones of intensive human activity and impacts may be deliberate or
             unintentional. Modification of the coastline by hard defence systems may reduce wave
             energy and prevent cliff recession, but these structures may also interrupt longshore
             drift causing down-drift sediment starvation. Other human impacts which expose
             coastlines to erosion include dam construction and mangrove destruction. Human
             impacts may also be positive such as beach replenishment, sand dune conservation and
             land reclamation, all of which maintain natural processes and conserve features.

             To achieve markbands E/F, the answer should refer to at least two types of human
             impact, at least two specific coastal locations and the resulting modification of natural
             processes and features at each one.

             Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.
                                                 –7–              N10/3/GEOGR/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


A3. Arid environments and their management

    Either

    (a)   Examine the relationship between vulnerability to desertification and levels
          of development.                                                              [20 marks]

          Answers should show an understanding of “vulnerability to desertification” and of the term
          “desertification” as the degradation of land in arid and dry sub-humid areas, resulting from
          destructive human activities and influenced by climatic variations.
          There are varied definitions and any accurate one should be accepted. Answers that refer to
          desertification simply as the growth or spread of deserts should not be credited.
          An awareness of the types of area and parts of the world that are vulnerable should be shown.
          The majority of these should be recognized as semi-arid areas, some of which are in LEDCs
          and some in MEDCs.

          Answers might state that many of the causes of desertification are more prevalent in LEDCs,
          thus making them more vulnerable. Such causes should be stated and explained and may
          include population growth, farming in marginal areas, overgrazing, deforestation,
          monoculture, refugee movements, misuse of water, salinization, over-cultivation and other
          farming practices leading to soil erosion or land degradation. References to impacts are
          acceptable but not essential.
          Not all of these causes are necessary in order to reach the top markbands.

          Answers should also examine areas in MEDCs where some of these causes are also leading to
          desertification. The vulnerability of semi-arid areas to desertification through climate change
          is relevant but not essential to a good response.

          Vulnerability is also related to the ability to counter desertification, and answers should look
          at variations in the ability of LEDCs and MEDCs to employ prevention, conservation and
          restoration measures, and could include the ability to respond to changes in climate that
          exacerbate the desertification process.

          Although examples are not a specific requirement of the question, they would be expected in
          those answers achieving bands D and above.

          Answers that do not refer to vulnerability of both LEDCs and MEDCs should not move above
          band D.

          Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.
                                               –8–               N10/3/GEOGR/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Or
(b)   Structured question
      (i)    Name and briefly describe these two arid landforms.                               [4 marks]
             Photograph A – Accept salt flats / playa / playa lake for [1 mark].
             Photograph B – Accept seif dune or longitudinal dune for [1 mark].
             The additional [1+1 mark] in each case should be awarded for a valid descriptive statement.
             Accept also statements that refer to the formation of each feature.
      (ii)   Explain the natural processes responsible for the transport of weathered
             materials in deserts.                                                    [6 marks]
             Answers should refer to both wind and water as agents of transport.
             A more detailed description of one agent should still be able to access full marks.
             Answers that explain the role of only wind or water should not be awarded more than
             [4 marks] and this only when a full explanation is given.
             The role of wind as a transport agent depends on wind velocity, turbulence and grain size,
             and involves the processes of saltation and creep as well as suspension.
             Intense rainfall, resulting in flash floods, should be recognized in terms of its ability to
             move large amounts of material. These high energy conditions are short-lived in terms of
             both time and distance. Good responses may distinguish between high energy channel
             transport in canyons (arroyos/wadis) and successively lower energy zones such as alluvial
             fans, bajadas and playas in terms of the speed of transport and size of materials. Not all of
             the above points are required for the award of [6 marks].
      (iii) Examine the conflicts arising from either mineral extraction or tourism in
            specific arid or semi-arid regions.                                        [10 marks]
             Answers must refer to specific named and located examples in either arid or semi-arid
             areas, though answers that refer to both semi-arid and arid areas should be credited.
             If answers refer to both tourism and mineral extraction, then only one of these should be
             credited (the one to which you would award the highest mark).
             Conflicts from mineral extraction may involve the subsequent contamination of scarce
             water resources, effects on local water tables, overuse and pollution of exotic rivers,
             dam construction in areas of natural beauty and the changes in the natural landscape caused
             by mining itself, including power production and transport. Heavy vehicles breaking
             through the fragile surface of such areas may lead to accelerating wind erosion or rain
             gullying.
             The conflicts involved are largely dependent on the areas chosen.
             Tourist conflicts may include the construction of modern hotels that are out of character
             with the local environment, the increased demand for water from tourists for showers,
             pools, golf courses, and recreational demands that make water more expensive and divert it
             from traditional uses, such as irrigation systems or oasis farming, resource consumption and
             excessive water pollution.
             Social conflicts may also be considered in either case as long as they are relevant to the
             specific arid areas.
             Examples are a specific requirement of the question, hence they would be expected in those
             answers achieving band D and above.
             Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.
                                                  –9–              N10/3/GEOGR/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


A4. Lithospheric processes and hazards

     Either

     (a)   Essay

           Examine how the locations of volcanoes affect human responses to them.              [20 marks]

           There are a number of approaches to this question. It is likely that good answers will look at
           locations in relation to the type of plate margin and also in relation to the level of economic
           development. In areas where there are effusive eruptions, such as hot spots and divergent
           margins (fluid or basic lava), the responses will differ from those which are located at
           destructive plate boundaries. In rift valley zones or hot spots, eruptions are more frequent and
           tend to be relatively gentle, and responses tend to reflect greater knowledge of impacts and
           mitigation techniques may be relatively straightforward – diverting flows, such as evacuation
           from lava flows. The magnitude and explosive nature of volcanoes on destructive margins
           (acid or viscous lava) requires better management and more radical responses. Examples may
           be chosen to illustrate this. The nature of the response will also be determined by the level of
           economic development of the country in which the volcanoes are located. It is likely that
           stronger answers will refer to specific examples of volcanic eruptions in selected countries
           and relate response to development levels.

           Alternative approaches, such as looking at tourism, types of agriculture, mineral extraction,
           hydrothermal activity and other reasons, and examining these responses, may be
           equally valid.

           Although examples are not a specific requirement of the question, they would be expected in
           those answers achieving band D and above.

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.
                                            – 10 –            N10/3/GEOGR/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Or

(b)   Structured question

      (i)    Describe the pattern of the liquefaction hazard shown on the map.            [2 marks]

             The greatest risk from the hazard appears to be in coastal areas [1 mark] and decreases
             with distance inland towards the Hayward fault (or increases with distance from the
             fault towards the coastline) [1 mark]. One of these points plus some reference to the
             percentage of the area predicted to liquefy would also gain full marks.

      (ii)   Define and briefly explain liquefaction.                                     [4 marks]

             Liquefaction is a decrease in the cohesion and stability [1 mark] of the soil or
             unconsolidated materials [1 mark] resulting in increased liquidity. As a result of
             earthquakes, the soil becomes a viscous fluid creating problems with any structures.
             This phenomenon of liquefaction can cause excessive displacements of the ground.
             Building foundations can slide or unevenly settle [2 marks]. Alternative approaches,
             such as focusing entirely on the causes of liquefaction in detail, are acceptable.

      (iii) Distinguish between primary and secondary earthquake hazards.              [2+2 marks]

             Primary hazards are associated with the earthquake event itself and occur at that time
             [1 mark]. They include shaking ground, subsidence and uplift of land, and the collapse
             of buildings, bridges, freeways and overhead cables [1 mark].
             Secondary hazards are a consequence of primary hazards and occur after the event
             [1 mark].
             They include fires, disease, contaminated water, landslides and tsunamis [1 mark].

             Some hazards may be justifiably classified as either primary or secondary and include
             liquefaction, tsunamis and avalanches.

      (iv) Compare human responses to earthquakes in countries with
           contrasting levels of development.                       [10 marks]

             It would be expected that candidates use appropriate and relevant examples here to
             illustrate differences in response. In countries with higher levels of socio-economic
             development, reference may be made to preparedness or mitigation, response to the
             event and recovery from the event. Good answers should refer to techniques and
             planning used. Seismographs, tilt-meters, (a)seismic design in buildings, seismic gap
             theory, recurrence intervals, evacuation procedures, insurance, education and urban
             planning are some of the responses which may be cited. In LEDCs the responses are
             likely to be different. There is less use of modern technology and secondary effects
             may be longer-lasting. There is often a heavy reliance on outside aid.

             Although examples are not a specific requirement of the question, they would be
             expected in those answers achieving bands D and above. Answers including specific
             comparison of the responses are likely to be credited at bands E/F.

             Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.
                                                 – 11 –            N10/3/GEOGR/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


A5. Ecosystems and human activity

    Either

    (a)   Essay

          Examine the relationships between climate and structure, function and
          human activity in one specific ecosystem.                             [20 marks]

          The answers given to this question will be dependent upon the selected ecosystem.
          The answer should focus on an examination of key relationships between climate and the
          other variables. The type of climate should be specified, and the salient links to the structure
          of the ecosystem, how it functions, and the nature of human activity.

          It is likely that rainforests may be the ecosystem of choice; however there are many other
          viable alternatives at a variety of scales. It may be that an ecosystem is chosen at a small
          scale, perhaps where a candidate has carried out fieldwork – coastal dunes for example.
          If rainforests or ecosystems on a broader scale are chosen, the answer should show a clear
          understanding of the relationships. The climatic effects of rainfall and sunlight on the
          structure of the forest (height of trees, canopies, leaf form, lianas, epiphytes), soils, nutrient
          cycling and the ways in which humans utilize the forest should be examined.

          Not all of the above are required for an answer to reach band F, but answers should examine
          all of the relationships although not necessarily in equal depth. Answers that cover fewer
          relationships, such as only structure and human activity, should not move above band D.
          Answers that offer explicit examination are likely to be credited at bands E/F. Omission of
          one specific ecosystem or weak examination of the relationships will be self-limiting and such
          answers may only achieve a maximum of band D.

          Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.
                                             – 12 –            N10/3/GEOGR/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Or

(b)   Structured question

      (i)    Describe the changes in vegetation cover in the area shown.                    [4 marks]

             Award [3 marks] for three valid points referring to both pattern and trends in vegetation
             cover. An additional [1 mark] should be allocated for quantification.

      (ii)   Explain how the concepts of invasion, competition and dominance may
             have played a role in the changes which have taken place.        [2+2+2 marks]

             Invasion of species depends on conditions created by earlier colonists (plant species).
             In this case, the conditions created by the shrubland (organic matter, shelter), for
             example, may have modified the environment so as to increase the competitive ability
             of species which are then able to invade, displace and succeed them – the various types
             of forests [2 marks]. Competition for space, light and nutrients results in some species
             gaining ground at the expense of others [2 marks]. Succession proceeds toward
             dominance in terms of number, size, productivity or biomass by longer-lived species
             and this is clearly seen here by the dominance of the woodland species by 1979
             [2 marks]. Other valid points may be credited.

      (iii) Discuss the differences in the conservation strategies used in one
            grassland ecosystem and one forest ecosystem.                      [10 marks]

             To answer this question, two specific ecosystems (biomes), one grassland and one
             forest, should be chosen. Contrasting the conservation strategies is central to producing
             a good response. The strategies may include forest management, reforestation,
             sustainable tourism, community based initiatives, sustainable logging, species
             protection and many other viable alternatives. The strategies may contrast in terms of
             their success but should be explicit and show specific and real knowledge of the chosen
             examples. A discussion of both ecosystems is required to access bands E/F.

             Answers that include relevant and located examples are likely to be credited at band D
             and above. Answers including specific comparison of the strategies are likely to be
             credited at bands E/F.

             Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.
                                                – 13 –            N10/3/GEOGR/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


A6. Climatic hazards and change

    Either

    (a)   Essay

          “Droughts are more predictable, but their impacts are less serious than
          tropical cyclones (hurricanes).” Discuss this statement.                [20 marks]

          This open-ended question should encourage some critical reasoning about two very different
          climatic events. Candidates may choose to either agree or disagree with the statement,
          provided their reasoning and arguments are sound. All kinds of impacts (human, property,
          economic, social, environmental) may be considered.

          Stronger answers are likely to discuss the reasons why droughts can be predicted further
          ahead of time than tropical cyclones, as well as the reasons why the precise path of tropical
          cyclones can rarely be predicted entirely accurately. The concept of severity of impacts may
          be discussed either in terms of spatial extent or in terms of human or economic consequences.
          It may equally be discussed in terms of temporal variations between droughts (the most severe
          of which are long-term) and tropical cyclones. The strongest answers are likely to consider
          most of these aspects.

          Answers including explicit discussion of the statement are likely to be credited at bands E/F.

          Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.
                                              – 14 –            N10/3/GEOGR/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


      Or

(b)   Structured question

      (i)    Describe the pattern shown on the map for 1983–85.                               [3 marks]

             Answers should identify a core area of high acidity [1 mark] (extending southwest from
             the Great Lakes), surrounded by rings of progressively lower acidity [1 mark]. Award
             the final [1 mark] for any quantification. Note that the correct identification of places is
             not required for the award of full marks.

      (ii)   Suggest three reasons for the trend shown by the three maps.                     [3 marks]

             The trend is one of decreasing acidity. Award [1 mark] each for up to three reasons.
             Possible reasons include: a reduction in industrial or power output between 1983–85
             and 1995–97; Government restrictions on the emissions causing acid deposition; the
             employment of cleaner technologies reducing the emissions at individual industrial
             plants; the substitution of polluting raw materials with cleaner alternatives. Other valid
             suggestions, including possible natural sources of acidity such as forest fires, should
             also be credited.

      (iii) Explain how a volcanic eruption may cause temporary changes in global
            climate.                                                              [4 marks]

             Volcanic eruptions often eject particulates (aerosols) into the troposphere and
             stratosphere. These particulates will have several temporary effects on climate,
             including the formation of dust veils absorbing and back-scattering incoming radiation,
             and an increase in the availability of hygroscopic particles in the atmosphere, thereby
             increasing the likelihood of condensation and precipitation. Volcanic particulates are
             also thought to be responsible for the depletion of ozone in the lower layers of the
             stratosphere, contributing to the formation of ozone holes. The changes are temporary
             because eventually the volcanic particulates settle out of the atmosphere and are
             deposited back on the land or in the ocean. Volcanic dust settling on ice will reduce the
             ice’s albedo and tend to increase its rate of melting.

             Award [1 mark] for each valid statement made, reserving the final [1 mark] for some
             comment about why the changes are only temporary and not permanent.

             Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.
                                    – 15 –            N10/3/GEOGR/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(iv) Examine the reasons for variations in the intensity of urban
     heat islands.                                                [10 marks]

    The intensity of urban heat islands will vary in time and space, and both aspects should
    be considered in the best answers. The spatial extent of urban heat islands will change
    as cities grow and expand, and will reflect areas of high density buildings, the location
    and size of urban parks, and the number and type of transport used by the city’s
    inhabitants, as well as the city’s latitude and local site conditions. Urban heat islands
    tend to be more significant in winter months than in summer, under anti-cyclonic
    conditions, and are more pronounced in the early morning than in the late afternoon.
    There will be a regularity to both their diurnal and seasonal development. Urban heat
    islands will increase in intensity with time, if cities increase in size.

    Answers reaching the higher markbands should examine a range of reasons,
    though some reasons may be treated more superficially than others. They should also
    demonstrate a clear understanding not only of the formation of urban heat islands,
    but also of the reasons why they vary greatly in intensity.

    Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.
                                                – 16 –             N10/3/GEOGR/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                             SECTION B

B7. Contemporary issues in geographical regions

     Either

     (a)   Essay

           “The contemporary geographical issues of regions are usually caused by their
           physical geography.” Referring to examples, discuss this statement.          [20 marks]

           The degree of influence of physical geography on contemporary geographical issues will
           depend on the examples chosen. The physical geography and contemporary geographical
           issues of the examples discussed must be described and/or explained accurately for answers to
           reach bands E/F.

           Most contemporary geographical issues are likely to be at least partly due to human,
           economic or social factors as to physical geography. Some may be due to external factors
           which the region is unable to control or influence in any meaningful way.

           It is equally acceptable for answers to conclude that physical geography is irrelevant to
           contemporary geographical issues, as for them to conclude that a region’s physical geography
           is a prime cause of its contemporary geographical issues.

           The discussion should be based on more than one region. Answers that discuss only a single
           example/region may not be credited beyond band D.

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.
                                              – 17 –            N10/3/GEOGR/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Or

(b)   Structured question

      (i)    State how many minutes travel time is required to travel to the hospital
             from Villarluengo.                                                               [1 mark]

             Award [1 mark] for either 43 or 44 minutes (the units are not essential for the mark).

      (ii)   Describe the pattern of accessibility to the hospital shown on the map.         [4 marks]

             The general pattern is that it takes much longer for places in the northwest than in the
             southeast of the region because the hospital is located in the southeastern part of the
             region [1 mark]. Award a further [1 mark] for any example or examples and [1 mark]
             for referring to the concept of distance decay or to the gravity model. The final
             [1 mark] is reserved for further development or mention of any anomaly, such as the
             fact that travel from the south and east is faster (a greater distance can be covered in 15
             minutes) than from the north or west.

      (iii) By means of an annotated map only, identify the defining
            characteristics of your local region and its boundaries. [5 marks]

             The precise mark balance may be varied at the discretion of the examiner, depending on
             the region chosen, but up to [2 marks] should normally be reserved for the accuracy of
             the map and its boundaries, with a further [3 marks] allocated to the annotations
             identifying the defining characteristics of the region and its boundaries. No credit may
             be given for written material which is not either on the map, or clearly linked to it by
             means of a key, arrows or similar means.

      (iv) Discuss the essential differences between a geographical region and a
           geographical place.                                                   [10 marks]

             Answers should discuss the idea that a place is a single geographical entity, whereas a
             region is an area of places which share some characteristic or characteristics. There are
             many different kinds of region, and answers may choose to focus on only one kind, such
             as formal regions, or discuss several different kinds. Either approach may receive full
             marks provided that sufficient depth of knowledge of places and regions is
             demonstrated. The best answers may use developed examples to illustrate the main
             points, but an entirely theoretical approach may also be awarded full marks, if the ideas
             are clearly expressed and well developed.

             Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.
                                                – 18 –            N10/3/GEOGR/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


B8. Settlements

    Either

    (a)   Essay

          “Urban areas in countries with different levels of development share similar
          problems.” Discuss this statement.                                           [20 marks]

          Candidates may interpret “different levels of development” either in terms of rich and poor
          countries (economic) or in terms of the HDI or other valid ways of distinguishing levels of
          economic, social or cultural development.

          The problems may include the impacts of selective out- and in-migration, formal and informal
          enclaves (such as shanty towns, slums and edge cities), unemployment, industrial decline,
          environmental problems (dereliction, congestion, waste disposal and water and air quality),
          and social inequalities (ghettos, slums and crime). These are not separate problems but are
          often interlinked.

          Candidates should compare and contrast urban areas at different levels of development and
          identify both similarities and differences. Answers which do this are likely to be credited at
          bands E/F.

          If the cities are chosen from countries that have similar levels of development, the answer
          may only achieve a maximum of band D.

          Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.
                                             – 19 –            N10/3/GEOGR/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Or

(b)   Structured question

      (i)    State the minimum urban population of settlement A in:

             (a)   1970,                                                                     [1 mark]

                   200 thousand.

             (b)   2000.                                                                     [1 mark]

                   Over 1000 thousand (1 million).

      (ii)   Define the following terms:

             (a)   urban growth,                                                             [1 mark]

                   Urban growth – the increase in the number of people living in urban areas or the
                   physical growth of the urban area.

             (b)   urbanization.                                                             [1 mark]

                   Urbanization – an increase in the proportion of people living in urban areas.

      (iii) Using evidence from the diagrams, describe three changes relating to
            urban settlements in South Korea between 1970 and 2000.              [6 marks]

             Award [2 marks] for each of three distinct changes supported by evidence from
             the map. Changes include an increase in the number of cities, an increase in the size of
             individual cities, and spatial changes such as increased urban clustering in the north-
             west and greater dispersal nationally.

      (iv) Referring to located examples, discuss the changes that are taking place
           on the periphery of cities.                                              [10 marks]

             Candidates may interpret “periphery” either narrowly, as the edge of a built up area,
             or more widely, to include rural-urban fringe, green belts and commuter zones. Either
             interpretation is equally valid.

             Changes on the periphery of cities may include:
              Less open space, forest and cultivated land
              Settlement – edge cities, commuter villages and other forms of residential
               development, informal settlements (squatter settlements, shanty towns)
              Retailing – out-of-town shopping centres
              Industry – out-of-town industrial estates and science parks
              Recreation – sports grounds, parks, nature reserves, golf courses, plant nurseries
              Transport – ring roads, motorway intersections, junctions, new train stations,
               bus stations, airports
              Public utilities – waste treatment and disposal.
                              – 20 –           N10/3/GEOGR/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Candidates need not discuss all of these changes but the approach must be analytical.
Answers discussing a limited number of changes in depth can access bands E/F.
Examples are a specific requirement of the question, hence they would be expected in
those answers achieving band D and above.

Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.
                                                – 21 –             N10/3/GEOGR/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


B9. Productive activities: aspects of change

     Either

     (a)   Essay

           Using examples, analyse the emergence of high wage core areas and low wage
           periphery areas at a global scale.                                         [20 marks]

           Answers should show an appreciation of the location of global high wage core regions and
           some understanding of their emergence, first as major manufacturing areas that monopolized
           invention, innovation and production by skilled labour. Rising living standards resulted in
           high wages while industrial processes became more mechanized making the availability of
           cheaper unskilled and semi-skilled labour a major locating factor. High wage core areas
           therefore began to emerge concentrating more on research, development and services,
           all requiring high levels of education and demanding high wage levels. As production
           methods become more routine and skill requirements drop, industries “filter down” to areas
           where cheaper labour is available. These areas require high levels of capital investment from
           the high wage core areas. TNCs have been the main driving force in moving routine
           production operations to areas where cheap labour is available, resulting in the emergence of
           low wage manufacturing regions. Improvements in transport, lower relative transport costs,
           and improved communications have allowed this relocation of industry to take place. The
           high wage core areas are now the location for the headquarters of the world’s largest TNCs
           and financial institutions.

           Answers should include examples of high wage core areas such as North America, Western
           Europe and Japan, and low wage manufacturing regions such as South and South East Asia,
           in order to reach bands E/F. Examples of individual TNCs that operate in both types of area
           are also valid.

           Answers that refer to other advantages for TNCs and their host countries as reasons for the
           emergence of low wage manufacturing regions should be credited. Answers which focus on
           primary activities are likely to be self-limiting.

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.
                                             – 22 –            N10/3/GEOGR/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Or

(b)   Structured question

      (i)    Describe one similarity and one difference in the value of agricultural
             production for the world and LEDCs from 1965 to 2005.                 [2+2 marks]

             Similarities include:
              rising value of agricultural production
              fluctuations over time

             Differences include:
              accelerating rate of increase in LEDCs

             Award [1 mark] for each valid similarity and difference and [1 mark] if each is
             correctly identified.

      (ii)   Explain three reasons for the rise in agricultural production in
             developing countries.                                        [2+2+2 marks]

             Award [2 marks] for each of any three valid reasons, but in each case a brief
             explanation as to how it has caused production to rise should be given. Valid reasons
             could include land reform, the Green Revolution, improved irrigation and water
             management, soil conservation measures, the use of appropriate technology, improved
             access to markets, training of farmers, and better credit systems.

      (iii) Evaluate the need for more sustainable agriculture in MEDCs.                  [10 marks]

             Some understanding of the term sustainable agriculture should be demonstrated.
             Answers should mention examples of practices that are not sustainable and that result in
             environmental degradation. These might include the use of chemical fertilizers,
             monoculture, over-emphasis on productivity and profit, intensive animal farming,
             and agribusiness. Answers should judge the severity of the effects of such practices and
             evaluate whether more sustainable methods, such as organic farming, should be
             introduced. It is also acceptable to conclude that sustainable methods might cause a fall
             in production or a rise in prices and therefore reject the need for more sustainable
             agriculture. Examiners should be flexible in view of the wide variety of possible
             approaches. Answers that simply describe unsustainable practices and sustainable
             solutions without evaluation should not move above band D.

             Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.
                                                 – 23 –            N10/3/GEOGR/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


B10. Globalization

     Either

     (a)   Essay

           “The growth of international tourism in LEDCs brings short-term benefits,
           but long-term problems.” Discuss this statement with reference to examples. [20 marks]

           The approach, structure, and argument may vary, and credit should be given for a
           comprehensive answer covering a range of benefits and costs. The classification and
           distinctions between long and short-term are flexible.

           The short-term economic benefits of tourism in LEDCs include an influx of foreign currency
           and tourist revenue which boost the local economy. In the longer term, tourism may be used
           as a development strategy in LEDCs and may contribute significantly to GDP.

           The socio-cultural benefits of tourism are generally long-term and typically involve the
           learning of language skills, the preservation of indigenous cultures and heritage attractions.

           There are a limited number of environmental benefits and these include reinvestment of
           tourist revenue to promote local initiatives, such as ecotourism, and other projects such as
           nature reserves and national parks.

           Short-term economic loss may result from loss of tourist confidence and falling demand in the
           wake of the natural hazard event, a terrorist incident or a pandemic. Long-term economic
           problems result from leakage of tourist revenue by foreign owned hotels, airlines and
           imported food. Tourism may also result in the development of economic disparities with
           local rich tourist enclaves and poor peripheries. Most serious is a long-term decline in tourist
           demand for a destination relating to changing tastes and competition from new ones.

           Long-term environmental damage usually results from tourist impact exceeding carrying
           capacity. Where fragile environments combine with fragile economies, high-impact mass
           tourism is unsustainable. Long-term problems of resource depletion (water in particular),
           soil erosion, ecosystem destruction, and all types of pollution and waste overburden are
           typical of many LEDC tourist destinations where remedial practices are limited and short-
           term financial gain is a necessity.

           Examples are a specific requirement of the question, hence they would be expected in those
           answers achieving band D and above. A good answer attaining markbands E/F should
           include a range of ordered short-term benefits and long-term problems, but thereafter the
           emphasis will depend upon the direction of the argument.

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.
                                             – 24 –            N10/3/GEOGR/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Or

(b)   Structured question

      (i)    State the two languages which show the greatest difference in ranking
             between the two graphs.                                               [2 marks]

             Arabic and English. No other answer is acceptable.

      (ii)   Suggest two reasons why the rate of growth of some languages used on
             the internet is greater than others.                                 [4 marks]

             The reasons might include the differences in population growth rates of different
             nations, initial level of internet use in 2003 in individual countries, rates of economic
             development, education developments, population structure and acceptance of
             technology. There may be other valid reasons.

             Award [2 marks] for each developed reason.

      (iii) Explain how the actions of government can limit cultural integration.           [4 marks]

             Governments may attempt to restrain the process of cultural integration by the adoption
             of a variety of cultural controls. There is a large range of possible controls and they
             might include some of the following: media restrictions to limit the diffusion of foreign
             cultural traits, immigration restrictions to limit the influx and movement of foreigners,
             regulation and control of TNC activities, strategies to educate the public and limit
             consumerism, and restrictions on the consumption of cultural imports such as fast food,
             dress and music. The answer should be more than a list and should explain at least two
             actions of a government to reduce cultural dilution.

      (iv) Examine the importance of economic agreements and trading blocs in
           the integration of world economic activity.                        [10 marks]

             An understanding should be shown of economic integration meaning the merging of
             economic systems and the increase in international flows of goods and finance.
             Economic agreements usually focused on trade, are encouraged by individual nations
             and global institutions such as the WTO, IMF and the World Bank. Such agreements
             have led to trading blocs such as EU, NAFTA, LAFTA and COMECON.

             Other important factors might be considered briefly, besides economic agreements and
             trading blocs in the integration of world economic activity. These are the growth and
             dominance of TNCs associated with new international division of labour (NIDL) and
             increasing flows of Foreign Direct Investment. In addition, the improvement in global
             communications networks facilitates the easy flow of people, goods, services, capital
             and ideas, resulting in time-space convergence.

             Answers examining the importance of economic agreements and trading blocs
             compared with brief mention of other factors that encourage economic integration are
             likely to be credited at bands E/F.

             Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.
                                                – 25 –            N10/3/GEOGR/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                            SECTION C

C11. Topographic mapping

    (a)   Using the map, identify point A on the photograph.                                    [1 mark]

          A is Leopold II Dam [1 mark].

    (b)   The scale of the map is 1:50 000. Estimate the scale of the photograph.               [1 mark]

          The scale of the photograph is 1:25 000 or 4 cm:1 km [1 mark].
          Allow 1:20 000 to 1:30 000.

    (c)   Describe and suggest reasons for the pattern of settlement shown on the map. [6 marks]

          There is almost continuous urban development to the west (Blankenberge) and to the east
          (Knokke Heist) of the port of Zeebrugge. There is evidence of suburbanization with linear
          extensions of settlement leading in a south-easterly direction from Blankenberge and Knokke
          Heist. These areas of dense urban settlement may be explained by the economic pull of this
          coastline which provides employment associated with port activities and tourism. This
          physically attractive coastline is also likely to attract retirees.
          The settlement pattern on the rest of the map away from the coastline is scattered and consists
          of many isolated hamlets and farms. The flat and open landscape with ample (excessive)
          water supply has allowed for settlement dispersion.
          Both the coastal and rural patterns need to be recognized and described [3 marks] with valid
          reasons being given to explain the pattern [3 marks]. This balance can be altered in
          exceptional cases at the discretion of the examiner.

    (d)   Describe three advantages of the aerial photo over the map in showing
          human geography.                                                  [2+2+2 marks]

          Advantages of the photo include:
           The photo shows road and sea traffic, whereas these are absent on the map
           Field boundaries are evident on the photo, but not so distinct on the map
           Different agricultural land uses for individual fields are evident on the photo, but not on
            the map
           Building height can be ascertained through the appearance of shadows on the photo.
            No such three-dimensional features are evident on the map.

          The relative advantages should be stated throughout.

          Other valid advantages may be credited.
                                              – 26 –             N10/3/GEOGR/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(e)   Compare the advantages and disadvantages of sites X and Y for the location
      of a large shopping centre.                                                [6 marks]

      A good answer achieving [6 marks] should recognise at least three advantages/disadvantages
      and compare the sites with respect to each one. There may be other valid approaches to this
      comparison.

      Accessibility: both sites are accessible, but X is likely to suffer from freight and tourist traffic
      from Zeebrugge. This would be acute during the peak tourist season and the rush hour. This
      is likely to deter business and annoy locals. Proximity to the port of Zeebrugge is a
      disadvantage in this respect. Site Y is easily accessible at a major route intersection and
      would be less affected by port traffic.

      Cost: X has the disadvantage of being more constricted with a shortage of open space and the
      land is likely to be more expensive because of competition with other users. Costs of land at
      Y may also be lower because it is further from the coast. Y also has the advantage of being
      away from likely areas of coastal flooding which might prove to be costly.

      Environment: X is a better choice because it may be a brownfield site. Y is likely to be a
      greenfield site which would involve ecological destruction and increased traffic emissions,
      congestion and noise in this rural area. Answers may examine advantages and disadvantages
      to the shopping centre owners as well as shoppers and residents.

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.
