N10/3/PHILO/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




       88105601


PHILOSOPHY
HIGHER LEVEL
PAPER 1

Thursday 18 November 2010 (afternoon)

2 hours 30 minutes


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

 Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Section A: answer one question.
 Section B: answer two questions, each chosen from a different Optional Theme.




8810-5601                                                                                         5 pages
                                                          © International Baccalaureate Organization 2010
                                                                –2–                        N10/3/PHILO/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

In your answers you are expected to:

         present an argument in an organized way
         use clear, precise and appropriate language
         identify any assumptions in the question
         develop a clear and focused argument
         identify the strengths and weaknesses of your response
         identify counter-arguments to your response, and address them if possible
         provide relevant supporting material, illustrations and/or examples where appropriate
         conclude by making a clear, concise and philosophically informed personal response to the
          examination question.

                                                           SECTION A

Answer one question from this section. Each question in this section is worth [30 marks].

Core Theme: What is a human being?

1.       Read the following passage and develop your response as indicated below.

         Human beings are animals with a peculiar character and role. They are … alert to the values of
         personhood, life, order, and existence as such, to his or her community, to his or her environment,
         to the cosmos. As a member of the community of nature, the human being may be regarded as
         guardian of respect for it, to exercise reverence towards it and, if it has a maker, towards its maker.

            [Source: Extract from David Braine, (1994), The Human Person: Animal and Spirit, University of Notre Dame Press]



         Write a response (of approximately 800 words) in which you:

         • identify a central philosophical concept or philosophical issue in this passage that addresses
           the question, “what is a human being?”
         • explore two different philosophical approaches to the philosophical concept or philosophical
           issue you identified
         • explain and evaluate the philosophical concept or philosophical issue you identified.




8810-5601
                                                       –3–                       N10/3/PHILO/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

2.    Study the following cartoon and develop your response as indicated below.




                         [© Mark Lynch. Reproduced with the permission of CartoonStock.com.]



      Write a response (of approximately 800 words) in which you:

      • identify a central philosophical concept or philosophical issue in this cartoon that addresses
        the question, “what is a human being?”
      • explore two different philosophical approaches to the philosophical concept or philosophical issue
        you identified
      • explain and evaluate the philosophical concept or philosophical issue you identified.




8810-5601                                                                                          Turn over
                                                    –4–                   N10/3/PHILO/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                                SECTION B

Answer two questions from this section, each chosen from a different Optional Theme. Each question in
this section is worth [30 marks].

Optional Theme 1: Grounds of epistemology

3.    Explain and discuss the role of scepticism in approaching the possible basis of knowledge.


4.    Critically evaluate the view that induction offers the best route to knowledge.



Optional Theme 2: Theories and problems of ethics

5.    “Morality differs in every society and in every culture and is, therefore, a convenient term for socially
      approved habits.” Discuss and critically evaluate.


6.    Critically evaluate the claim that we should never treat a person as a means to an end.



Optional Theme 3: Philosophy of religion

7.    Critically evaluate the claim that to understand religious experience you must abandon reason.


8.    Critically evaluate the claim that the existence of evil and suffering is an argument against the
      existence of a God.



Optional Theme 4: Philosophy of art

9.    To what extent is art an imitation or representation of reality?


10.   To what extent should art have a moral purpose?




8810-5601
                                                   –5–               N10/3/PHILO/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Optional Theme 5: Political philosophy

11.   “Some people are born rich and some are born poor. If this is unjust, should anything be done
      about it?” Discuss and critically evaluate.


12.   To what extent might there be a right to revolution?



Optional Theme 6: Non-Western traditions and perspectives

13.   Explain and discuss the relationship between the individual and the community with regards to
      moral life in one or more of the non-Western traditions you have studied.


14.   Evaluate philosophically the ideas of filial loyalty and piety in at least one of the non-Western
      traditions that you have studied.



Optional Theme 7: Contemporary social issues

15.   “Contemporary society’s emphasis on consumerism, consumptionism and materialism has challenged
      our understanding of leisure time.” Evaluate philosophically.


16.   “Human trafficking is a violation of basic human rights, a devaluation of personhood and a modern
      form of slavery and human bondage.” Discuss and evaluate philosophically.



Optional Theme 8: People, nations and cultures

17.   “It is impossible to make judgments about cultures other than one’s own.”           Discuss and
      critically evaluate.


18.   Evaluate philosophically the implications that globalization might have for the development of
      self-identity.




8810-5601
