N10/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                      November 2010



                       PSYCHOLOGY



                        Higher Level



                               Paper 3




6 pages
                              –2–            N10/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                                  –3–               N10/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 3 Markbands

In applying the markbands the concept of “best fit” should be used: a response that meets most of the
statements in a particular markband, but not necessarily all, can still be awarded marks in the markband.
The markband that best fits the response should be determined first. Then, by reference to the markband
above and the markband below, the mark should be determined.

9 to 10    The response shows accurate knowledge of qualitative methods. There is evidence of clear
           explanation and identification of conditions appropriate for the application of each method,
           and evaluation of the strengths and weaknesses of each method. There are no significant
           errors or omissions. The demands of the question are addressed effectively in a focused and
           logical manner.

7 to 8     The response shows an accurate knowledge of qualitative methods. There is a good attempt
           at explanation, at identifying conditions appropriate for the application of each method, and at
           evaluating the strengths and weaknesses of each method. Omissions or errors are relatively
           minor. The demands of the question are addressed effectively within a structured framework.

5 to 6     The question is addressed and contains some accurate knowledge of qualitative research
           methods. There is a reasonable attempt at explanation, at identifying conditions appropriate
           for the application of each method, and at evaluating strengths and weaknesses of each
           method, but there are some omissions or errors. There is a limited but reasonable attempt to
           organize the answer.

3 to 4     Although there is an attempt to answer the question, knowledge of qualitative research
           methods is limited, often inaccurate and of marginal relevance to the question. There is a
           minimal attempt at explanation, or at identifying conditions appropriate for the application of
           each method, or at evaluating the strengths and weaknesses of each method. There is minimal
           evidence of organizational structure.

1 to 2     There is very little or no understanding of the question, nor is there evidence of knowledge of
           qualitative research methods. The answer is no more than a collection of generalizations, or is
           a paragraph of few relevant facts. There is almost no organizational structure.

0          If the answer does not achieve the standard described in markband 1 to 2, a mark of 0 should
           be recorded.
                                                 –4–               N10/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.   A questionnaire is to be used by a school administration to survey attitudes of
     parents towards the proposed introduction of lessons on birth control and sexually
     transmitted diseases.

     Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of using e-mail as a means of obtaining
     research data for this specific survey.                                          [10 marks]

     Refer to the paper 3 markbands when awarding marks.

     Shy or reserved participants may contribute more in an e-mail questionnaire than a
     face-to-face interview, especially given the sensitive nature of this specific survey.
     E-mail allows questionnaires to be conducted economically in terms of time and cost –
     responses can be readily copied and pasted into data analysis software or into reports.
     Standardization and minimization of researcher expectancies are more readily achieved
     by using e-mail questionnaires rather than in face-to-face interviews.

     However, while the absence of non-verbal cues from the researcher can be considered
     an advantage, the same absence of non-verbal cues from the participant reduces the
     quality of the data obtained.

     More non-verbal information is likely to be inserted by participants in the form of
     acronyms (e.g. LOL) and emoticons (e.g. ;-) or :-( ) than in responses to paper-based
     questionnaires. However, these are neither spontaneous nor as varied as those
     discernable from face-to-face or telephone surveys. Hesitations, pauses, changes in
     pitch, volume and speed of responses are all present in face-to-face communication
     but not in e-mail communication. Neither anonymity nor verification of identity can
     be assured.

     Award [7 to 10 marks] for responses that effectively discuss both advantages and
     disadvantages of e-mail questionnaires in relation to the specific context provided.

     Award [4 to 6 marks] for responses that present a limited discussion of both advantages
     and disadvantages of e-mail questionnaires or responses lacking explicit reference to the
     specific context provided.

     Award [1 to 3 marks] for responses in which the discussion relates generally to
     questionnaires rather than e-mail questionnaires specifically, or for answers that do not
     relate to the specific context provided.

     If only advantages or disadvantages are discussed, award up to a maximum of
     [5 marks].
                                                 –5–              N10/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



2.   Contrast the use of a conversational interview with the use of a semi-structured
     interview for investigating the musical preferences of young people in their
     early adulthood.                                                                 [10 marks]

     Refer to the paper 3 markbands when awarding marks.

     Responses should make reference to the context provided of musical preferences of
     young adults.

     In conversational interviews there is a greater reciprocity in the exchange of ideas and
     the direction that the interview takes. Conversation implies turn-taking. There is a
     mutual handing over of initiative as each conversationalist relinquishes speech and
     allows the other to speak in turn. A conversational interview occurs in a more natural
     manner and therefore has greater ecological validity. Because the interviewer and
     interviewee perceive themselves to be at the same level of control, the rapport will be
     greater between them and therefore richer data about musical preference is more likely
     to be obtained. Conversational interviews do tend to present more material that may
     not be relevant to the researcher’s aims, and they are generally more time-consuming
     to analyse.

     Although semi-structured interviews follow the same order of presentation and the same
     wording for the main questions in the interview schedule, they permit some control of
     the direction of the interview by the researcher through the use of sub-questions in
     response to the interviewee’s answers. A degree of creativity is required by the
     interviewer since sub-questions have to be thought out instantly in responding to the
     interviewee’s replies to the main questions. In the hands of a skilled interviewer this
     type of response may also reveal valuable information that may otherwise not have
     been revealed.

     It is possible, for example, that many young people will state that rock music is their
     musical preference since their peers prefer this music. If the interviewers have noted
     that one of their sub-questions is to be on listening to classical music, the young
     interviewee may indicate that they also listen to classical music. This statement may
     never have arisen in a conversational interview.

     Award [7 to 10 marks] for responses that clearly explain several differences between
     the two types of interviews in the context provided in the question.

     Award [4 to 6 marks] for responses that provide limited accounts of differences
     between the two types of interview, or responses lacking reference to the context of
     musical preferences of young adults provided in the question.

     Award [1 to 3 marks] for responses that merely describe each type of interview without
     reference to the concept of musical preferences.
                                                  –6–               N10/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   (a)   Discuss how researcher expectancies that can occur in qualitative research
           may invalidate the findings.                                               [4 marks]

           Candidates should discuss how the operation of researcher expectancies may
           make the resulting findings invalid. For example, in relation to qualitative content
           analysis, researchers may take a less than objective view of a transcript;
           predetermined rather than emergent themes may be selected and emphasized,
           leading to bias. This bias can be multiplied when themes are combined into larger
           categories and when conclusions are drawn. Participant observers’ stereotypes of
           a group under study may bias their analysis. Unstructured interviews are
           susceptible to bias as the beliefs and attitudes of the interviewer may influence
           the interview.

           Award [4 marks] for a well developed discussion that includes reference to
           researcher expectancies and the possibility of invalidation of research findings.

           Award [2 to 3 marks] for a limited discussion where reference to the impact of
           researcher expectancies on validity of research findings is not made clear.

           Award [1 mark] for a descriptive account of research expectancies in qualitative
           research.



     (b)   Explain precautions that could be taken to overcome the problem of
           researcher expectancies.                                           [6 marks]

           Researcher triangulation, where different researchers contribute to the process of
           research, should ensure that potential bias of any one individual researcher will be
           minimized. Good practice in qualitative research ensures that individual
           researchers use the method of reflexivity to examine their beliefs, attitudes and
           values at the beginning and end of the research process. The aim of this
           procedure is to make researchers themselves aware of potential biases and
           this may be enhanced by having other researchers question the neutrality of
           the research.

           Award [5 to 6 marks] for clear explanation of more than one relevant precaution.

           Award [3 to 4 marks] for clear explanation of only one precaution or for limited
           explanation of more than one relevant precaution.

           Award [1 to 2 marks] for limited description of one or more relevant precautions.
