N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                      November 2010



                       PSYCHOLOGY



           Higher Level and Standard Level



                               Paper 2




29 pages
                              –2–            N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                                  –3–              N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 2 Markbands

In applying the markbands the concept of “best fit” should be used: a response that meets most of the
statements in a particular markband, but not necessarily all, can still be awarded marks in the markband.
The markband that best fits the response should be determined first. Then, by reference to the markband
above and the markband below, the mark should be determined.

Markband

17 to 20   The demands of the question are addressed effectively in a focused and logical structure.
           Arguments are supported by appropriate knowledge and understanding and in-depth analysis.
           Evaluation is balanced and well developed. Cultural, ethical, gender or methodological
           considerations are an integral part of the response.

14 to 16   The demands of the question are addressed effectively within a structured framework.
           The argument is supported by appropriate knowledge and understanding from the options.
           The answer contains appropriate analysis, but there may be minor omissions. Evaluation is
           clear and applied appropriately. Cultural, ethical, gender or methodological considerations
           are present and appropriate to the question.

11 to 13   The demands of the question are addressed mainly within a structured framework.
           The answer contains accurate knowledge and understanding. Some limited analysis is
           offered. Evaluation is limited or may not be well developed. Cultural, ethical, gender or
           methodological considerations are present and appropriate to the question.

8 to 10    There is a basic structure to the answer. The question is addressed. The answer contains
           accurate knowledge and understanding but is mainly descriptive. There may be minimal
           reference to cultural, ethical, gender or methodological considerations appropriate to the
           question.

6 to 7     There is an attempt to structure the answer but it is not sustained throughout the answer.
           The question is partially addressed, with limited accurate, relevant and factual knowledge and
           understanding. There may be minimal reference to cultural, ethical, gender or methodological
           considerations appropriate to the question.

4 to 5     There is little sense of structure in the answer. Although there is an attempt to answer the
           question, knowledge and understanding of the options is limited, often inaccurate and of
           marginal relevance to the question. There is no reference to cultural, ethical, gender or
           methodological considerations.

1 to 3     There is almost no organizational structure. There is very little or no understanding of the
           question, nor evidence of knowledge of the options. The answer consists of no more than a
           few relevant facts.

0          If the answer does not achieve the standard described in markband 1 to 3, a mark of 0 should
           be recorded.
                                                 –4–               N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Comparative Psychology

1.   Explain how methodological considerations affect the interpretation of behaviour
     in studies of comparative behaviour.                                             [20 marks]

     Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

     Candidates may justifiably claim that ethical and methodological issues play a major
     part in the way that behaviour is interpreted by comparative psychology. Most national
     psychological associations (e.g. the American Psychological Association, the British
     Psychological Society) publish guidelines that prohibit cruelty or the causing of pain to
     animals, including humans. However, candidates could show an awareness that neither
     association (explicitly) prohibits investigations involving pain. Decisions are usually
     made by ethics committees that consider the perceived benefits (usually to humans) of
     the investigation compared to its costs (usually to non-human animals). Candidates
     could point out that without such ethical judgments it may not have been possible to
     arrive at interpretations of, say, operant conditioning for humans and non-human
     animals alike.

     Candidates could indicate that the choice of methodology (e.g. observation or
     experiment) also affects interpretations. Experiments are frequently conducted in the
     controlled conditions of a laboratory. The resulting data may not be ecologically valid.

     Candidates could also consider the interpretation of behaviour in terms of the
     positivistic and interpretivist approaches. The former may use a stimulus-response
     approach measuring input and output, relying on quantitative data and the establishment
     of causal links (e.g. Pavlov and Skinner). Ethical considerations abound in such work.
     Observational studies are usually not so positivistic in their approach and are
     exemplified by the work of ethologists such as Lorenz or Tinbergen. Their work was
     not always ethical and their interpretation was sometimes tenuous. Candidates who
     answer at this level of cognition deserve to score high marks.

     Award [14 to 20 marks] for well developed methodological considerations that clearly
     show how these affect interpretation of behaviour in studies of comparative behaviour.

     Award [8 to 13 marks] for limited methodological considerations that have some
     success in showing how these affect interpretation of behaviour in studies of
     comparative behaviour.

     Award [1 to 7 marks] for rudimentary considerations that have little success in showing
     how these affect interpretation of behaviour in studies of comparative behaviour.

     Responses which simply describe an experiment or situation where ethical and/or
     methodological issues are raised, but do not then proceed to show how these affect
     interpretation, should be awarded up to a maximum of [10 marks].

     The listing of ethical and/or methodological considerations without reference to the
     interpretation of behaviour should attract a maximum of [5 marks].

     If just one methodological consideration is presented, award a maximum of [10 marks].
                                                 –5–               N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   Assess the effectiveness of attempts to teach language to non-human animals
     (e.g. apes, parrots or dolphins).                                           [20 marks]

     Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

     It is probable that candidates will attempt to define language using Hockett’s design
     features. If they do so, they may well make claims that a form of language is used by
     non-human species, such as honey bees and their use of “displacement” in their
     communication by either round dances or waggle dances. Marks should be awarded for
     such attempts dependent upon the quality and depth of the case put forward. Most
     candidates are likely to consider the various studies using apes. These include Gardiner
     and Gardiner’s work with Washoe, Patterson with her gorilla Koko, Terrace with the
     chimpanzee Nim, and Savage-Rumbaugh with the bonobo Kanzi. Candidates should be
     able to discuss these studies and their shortcomings, such as the criticism by Terrace of
     the study of Washoe that the behavioural phenomena observed was a more recent
     version of the “Clever Hans effect” formerly observed by Pfungst. Each of these
     examples is well documented in the literature alongside work with other animals
     including dolphins and parrots.

     Higher marks should be awarded where studies and the theoretical concepts of language
     are clearly understood and linked. Each of these studies has attracted criticism in terms
     of the methodology employed, claims for success, ethics and researcher interpretation of
     language. Responses should indicate the relative success that such attempts have
     achieved, keeping in mind that the earlier efforts were breaking new ground and had
     little in the way of theories or other studies on which to build.

     Higher scoring responses are likely to address the meaning of language in the context of
     teaching non-human animals. While there is no need to justify that the language
     employed must be human in origin, there should be an attempt to justify it as a language
     that can be deciphered as such by humans.

     Award [14 to 20 marks] for a detailed assessment of the success of at least two attempts
     to teach language to non-human animals.

     Award [8 to 13 marks] for a limited assessment of the success of at least two attempts
     to teach language to non-human animals.

     Award [1 to 7 marks] for a superficial description of relevant studies that does not
     address the “effectiveness” aspect of the question.

     Responses that link this work with the theoretical concepts of language, but are limited
     in their attempts, should be awarded up to [13 marks].

     Responses which present only descriptive work for these studies should receive a
     maximum of [10 marks].

     Award up to a maximum of [10 marks] where only one attempt is assessed.
                                                  –6–                N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   To what extent does any one evolutionary theory from comparative psychology
     help to explain behaviour in non-human animals?                             [20 marks]

     Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

     Although Darwinism may be the most popular description, there are alternatives –
     e.g. the selfish gene theory mainly associated with Dawkins, and the now largely
     discredited theory of Lamarck. It may also be the case that either or both of the latter
     may justifiably be used as an evaluation of Darwinism. The emphasis of the question is
     on behaviour per se. Although Darwin was still alive at the time of Mendel’s discovery
     of gene inheritance and was indeed contacted by Mendel, the important link to his own
     theory was not apparently made by Darwin. Examiners should not credit material that
     makes the claim that Darwin was the discoverer or founder of genetic theory. There
     should be other attempts to evaluate Darwinism, both positive and negative.

     Given the potentially controversial nature of this question, examiners should be fairly
     relaxed about what constitutes an evolutionary theory. It is straightforward enough to
     accept Darwin, Wynne-Edwards or Dawkins as evolutionists, each of whom has
     produced theories that have been described as ultimate theories of evolution. However,
     in the context of this question, examiners should be prepared to accept the work of
     researchers who are less well known but have made important theoretical contributions
     to our understanding of evolution. These could include theorists such as Tinbergen,
     von Frisch, Lorenz, Hrdy & E O Wilson.

     Since many responses may focus on Darwin as a major contributor, answers may, as
     Alcock suggests, identify common features of living things that include:
        variation – members of the same species differ in their characteristics
        heredity – parents pass on some of their characteristics to their offspring
        differential reproduction – some species within the same population leave more
        offspring than other individuals.

     Darwin’s book On the Origin of Species (1859) was published before knowledge of
     genetics was generally known, although it is thought that Mendel may have tried to
     contact Darwin with his new ideas on genetic mechanisms. Responses attributing
     genetic knowledge to Darwin should not be awarded marks by examiners.

     Wynne-Edwards (1962) proposed an argument that uses the notion “for the good of the
     group” to explain a type of mechanism that helps to control the survival of the group by
     ensuring a population-regulating mechanism. A group or population of animals that has
     no self-regulating mechanisms could exhaust its supply of resources and the entire
     species be wiped out. Self-regulating behaviour is seen in langurs, lions, jacana,
     sand sharks, and mallards, among many other species. Each of these species practises
     infanticide to limit its population. Dawkins advanced the selfish gene theory which
     claims that the individuals in all animal species are gene carriers and their ultimate task
     is to ensure their own fitness and reproduce themselves.

     Responses that show sound knowledge and understanding in their discussion of
     evolutionary theory, and show how these theories help to explain behaviour in
     non-human animals should be awarded [14 to 20 marks].
                                            –7–               N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Responses that show understanding and knowledge in the description of evolutionary
theory, but are limited in their discussion of how this theory helps to explain behaviour
in non-human animals, should be awarded [8 to 12 marks].

Answers that describe evolutionary theory without any discussion should be awarded
[1 to 7 marks].
                                                –8–               N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Cultural Psychology

4.   Assess the extent to which ethnocentricity affects the interpretation of human
     behaviour in cultural psychology.                                              [20 marks]

     Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

     The concept of ethnocentricity assumes that variations in behaviour across cultures are
     qualitatively different and that one’s own culture is a standard for comparison.
     Ethnocentricity also implies a value judgment that a person’s own ethnic group is
     superior to other ethnic groups. This is not only reflected in cognitive schema common
     to one culture, but also the behaviour of some people within a culture. While it is
     challenging to put aside deeply ingrained ethnocentric beliefs, researchers within
     cultural psychology are required to forgo judgment and remain neutral if they desire to
     truly understand the behaviour of another culture.

     Award [14 to 20 marks] for a well reasoned and supported response that clearly
     assesses the extent to which ethnocentricity affects the interpretation of human
     behaviour in cultural psychology.

     Award [8 to 13 marks] for a limited but appropriate explanation of how ethnocentricity
     affects the interpretation of human behaviour in cultural psychology. However, the
     command term “assess the extent” is addressed in a limited way and may not be fully
     integrated into the response.

     Award [1 to 7 marks] for responses that provide a basic and general description of
     ethnocentricity. Responses that provide extensive use of examples of ethnocentric
     behaviour should be awarded marks in this range.
                                                –9–               N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



5.   Discuss how cultural differences in communication may influence behaviour when
     people from different cultures interact.                                       [20 marks]

     Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

     Communication can vary along a variety of characteristics, including context,
     non-verbal communication, gestures, uncertainty and anxiety, semantic differences, etc.
     Candidates could provide examples of differences in communication styles or factors in
     communication (e.g. Cohen, Ting-Toomey, Gudykunst, Triandis, Hofstede). Although
     not required by the wording of the question, some responses might elaborate the
     discussion by addressing methods of improving communication or coping with
     communication differences, such as training or the use of culture assimilators.

     Award [14 to 20 marks] for carefully constructed responses that explicitly address the
     link between communication and interaction between people from different cultures.

     Award [8 to 13 marks] where the link between communication and interaction is
     addressed, but not clearly expressed.

     Award [1 to 7 marks] for broad or basic comments on communication differences.

     Responses focusing on differences in communication styles or factors in isolation,
     without relating these concepts to inter- or cross-cultural communication, could be
     awarded up to a maximum of [7 marks].

     Anecdotal commentary should not earn marks.
                                                – 10 –            N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



6.   Examine how problems in cross-cultural research may affect the findings from
     studies of behaviour in cultural psychology.                                 [20 marks]

     Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

     When examining the results of any study, the research methods used must be carefully
     considered. Research in cultural psychology faces some unique challenges due to the
     very nature of the field. Ethnocentrism, researcher bias, cultural differences in gender
     roles, and problems with translation are some of the many challenges facing research in
     this area. With each possible confound there are unique outcomes that should be
     considered when looking at the results of the research.

     Award [14 to 20 marks] where the problems relevant to cultural psychology are
     addressed and the link is made explicit to how these may impact on the findings.

     Award [8 to 13 marks] for description of relevant problems in cross-cultural research,
     but the impact on research findings is limited.

     Award [1 to 7 marks] for broad generalizations or where the research problems
     included are of limited relevance to cultural psychology.

     Anecdotal commentary should not earn marks.
                                                 – 11 –            N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The Psychology of Dysfunctional Behaviour

7.   Using psychological research, evaluate one model or theory of dysfunctional
     behaviour.                                                                  [20 marks]

     Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

     A range of examples of models may be appropriately chosen, such as medical model,
     learning model, cognitive model, humanistic model, etc. More specific theories such as
     the dopamine hypothesis, cognitive triad or learned helplessness may also be used to
     explain dysfunctional behaviour and are equally acceptable.

     Responses may refer to specific dysfunctional behaviour e.g. anxiety or depression, or
     to dysfunctional behaviour in general.

     Responses should present a conclusion supported with knowledge-based arguments.
     Since the question asks for a critical approach, the model/theory chosen could be
     evaluated with respect to several dimensions. For instance, how ethical considerations
     may affect the model’s interpretation of behaviour, is the model/theory based on
     empirical studies, how applicable is the model/theory in terms of applying it to the
     therapeutic process, what basic assumptions underlie the model/theory, etc. Higher
     quality responses will discuss supporting/challenging empirical research and findings.

     To achieve marks in the top bands, [14 to 20 marks], responses are expected to offer a
     well-structured, thorough evaluation of the selected model or theory.

     Award [8 to 13 marks] for responses that are overly descriptive with limited evaluation.

     Award [1 to 7 marks] when the response consists of no more than a few relevant facts.
     The response offers superficial, limited knowledge of one model/theory of
     dysfunctional behaviour.
                                                 – 12 –             N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



8.   (a)   Outline two therapies or treatments for one specific dysfunctional behaviour.          [8 marks]

           Expect a range of different therapies to be offered by candidates. There is a
           wide variety of appropriate therapies and treatments which may include
           drug treatments, cognitive behavioural therapies, non-directive therapies
           (e.g. humanistic therapies), etc.

           Award [6 to 8 marks] for responses offering an accurate outline of two
           therapies/treatments containing relevant information.

           Award [4 to 5 marks] for responses that present an accurate but overly brief outline
           of two therapies/treatments.

           Award [1 to 3 marks] for responses offering minimal knowledge of selected
           therapies/treatments.

           Responses that provide an outline of only one therapy/treatment may earn up to
           [4 marks].

           If more than two therapies/treatments, or more than one specific dysfunctional
           behaviour, is outlined then only the first responses should be credited.
                                               – 13 –             N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



(b)   Explain ethical considerations of one therapy or treatment of one specific
      dysfunctional behaviour.                                                   [12 marks]

      Refer to the scaled paper 2 markbands below when awarding marks.

      Responses may refer to the therapy/treatment outlined in part (a) or another
      therapy/treatment. Either approach should be given equal credit. A thoughtful
      appraisal of relative benefits and disadvantages of one form of treatment should
      be closely related to ethical concerns regarding physical or psychological distress
      and potentially damaging outcomes or side-effects of treatments/therapies.
      For example, if the biological approach to treatment has been chosen, issues such
      as the following may be explained:
         Research studies tend to indicate that drug treatment is quick and relatively
         effective but unpredictable, and sometimes irreversible neurological
         side-effects may appear.
         ECT is administered as a treatment for depression in severe cases when drugs
         are not effective. However, it is not yet clear what changes ECT causes and in
         many instances ECT can induce serious side-effects such as memory loss.
         Responses may refer to the issue of informed consent of mental patients and
         rights to refuse treatment.

      Award [8 to 12 marks] for responses offering a clear explanation of ethical
      considerations relevant for a selected treatment/therapy of one clearly identified
      specific dysfunctional behaviour.

      Award [4 to 7 marks] for responses describing ethical considerations that are relevant
      to the selected therapy/treatment but offer a limited explanation, or where the link to a
      specific dysfunctional behaviour is only implicit.

      Award [1 to 3 marks] for responses offering only rudimentary, superficial
      understanding of ethical considerations related to one therapy/treatment, or for
      accurate descriptions of ethical guidelines without relating them to one specific
      therapy/treatment.
                                                 – 14 –            N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Scaled paper 2 markbands out of 12

11 to 12   The demands of the question are addressed effectively in a focused and logical
           structure. Arguments are supported by appropriate knowledge and understanding
           and in-depth analysis. Evaluation is balanced and well-developed.

9 to 10    The demands of the question are addressed effectively within a structured
           framework.    The argument is supported by appropriate knowledge and
           understanding from the options. The answer contains appropriate analysis, but
           there may be minor omissions. Evaluation is clear and applied appropriately.

7 to 8     The demands of the question are addressed mainly within a structured framework.
           The answer contains accurate knowledge and understanding. Some limited
           analysis is offered. Evaluation is limited or may not be well developed.

5 to 6     There is a basic structure to the answer. The question is addressed. The answer
           contains accurate knowledge and understanding but is mainly descriptive.

3 to 4     There is an attempt to structure the answer but it is not sustained throughout the
           answer. Although there is an attempt to answer the question, knowledge and
           understanding of the options is limited, often inaccurate and of marginal relevance
           to the question.

1 to 2     There is almost no organizational structure. There is very little or no
           understanding of the question, nor evidence of knowledge of the options. The
           answer consists of no more than a few relevant facts.

0          If the answer does not achieve the standard described in markband 1 to 2, a mark
           of 0 should be recorded.
                                                 – 15 –             N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



9.   Discuss the concepts of normality and abnormality.                                           [20 marks]

     Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” asks candidates to make an appraisal of the concepts of
     normality and abnormality. Discussion may be made in terms of strengths and limitations,
     empirical support, appropriateness of concepts to contemporary society, possible cultural
     considerations, problems in describing individual differences, etc.

     Normality and abnormality may be said to be an elusive concept and there are opposing
     views regarding its existence and nature. These concepts present a broad framework based
     on theoretical principles or standards for evaluating normal and abnormal behaviour.
     Popular concepts of normality and abnormality may include the following: the statistical
     criterion, abnormality as personal distress, the mental health criterion, abnormality as
     mental illness, etc. Also, the psychoanalytic, learning, cognitive and/or humanistic
     explanation of the concept of abnormality may be discussed.

     Candidates may refer to some research findings when discussing certain issues –
     e.g. research on social class differences in defining abnormality; ethnic differences in
     determining abnormality due to diagnostic bias or error.

     Award [14 to 20 marks] for responses offering clear and thorough discussion of several
     concepts of normality and abnormality.

     Award [8 to 13 marks] for responses characterized by a limited discussion of several
     concepts.

     Award [1 to 7 marks] for responses offering only limited superficial understanding of the
     concepts of normality and abnormality.

     Award a maximum of [10 marks] for responses providing discussion of only one concept of
     normality and abnormality, however detailed, or for responses offering only description of
     different concepts of normality and abnormality.
                                                  – 16 –             N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Health Psychology

10.   Discuss ways in which physical and mental health may be interrelated.                        [20 marks]

      Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

      There are a variety of ways in which this question may be answered, including a
      discussion of research studies and/or theories to illustrate the interrelationship between
      physical and mental health.

      Whichever studies are chosen, they should be amenable to claims that both elements of
      health tend to affect each other. Studies or theories that are appropriate include the
      Holmes and Rahe study that gave rise to the Social Readjustment Rating Scale, the
      Hassles and Uplifts study developed by the Lazarus group, and the General Adaptation
      Syndrome associated with Selye. Since the question does not necessarily focus on
      humans it is acceptable for animal studies to be included, providing that they are made
      relevant. These could include Brady’s executive monkey study or Weiss’s partial
      replication using rats – both using ulceration avoidance or susceptibility to stress
      conditions.

      Award [14 to 20 marks] where there is well developed discussion of the
      interrelationship of physical and mental health demonstrated.

      Award [8 to 13 marks] where the discussion of the interrelationship of physical and
      mental health is limited.

      Award [1 to 7 marks] for answers where there is only a superficial description of
      physical and mental health but these are not interrelated.

      Award up to [10 marks] where candidates discuss only one way in which physical and
      mental health may be interrelated.
                                                  – 17 –            N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



11.   Describe and evaluate empirical studies related to substance use and misuse.              [20 marks]

      Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

      Responses should focus on empirical studies; anecdotal evidence should receive no
      credit. Substance use is most likely to occur under medical authority, whilst misuse is
      associated with recreational or criminal ways of taking drugs.

      Award [14 to 20 marks] for a thorough description of empirical studies of substance use
      and misuse. There must be at least one study dealing with use and at least one dealing
      with misuse, or more than one study dealing with both use and misuse. There must also
      be relevant evaluation of the studies; this may often include consideration of the
      methodology, sampling or cultural differences.

      Award [8 to 13 marks] if the writing includes limited argument that is not balanced.

      Award [1 to 7 marks] if empirical evidence is presented without sound argument or
      evidence. Responses characterized by limited descriptive content should be awarded
      marks in this range.

      Award up to a maximum of [10 marks] for responses which describe empirical studies
      but where evaluation of these studies is omitted.

      Both substance use and misuse should be considered. Award up to a maximum of
      [10 marks] for responses which only address either substance use or misuse.
                                                  – 18 –            N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



12.   Examine ways in which individuals are able to cope with stress.                             [20 marks]

      Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

      Stress clinics and individual professionals may offer several alternatives following
      diagnosis of the problems and potential causes of stress. Physical exercise is proposed
      by an increasing number of therapists, not least because it is cheap and has long-term
      benefits for many. The alternative use of relaxation practices also has many adherents,
      as do more modern applications of cognitive behavioural techniques, inoculation
      training and bio-feedback. But in many cultures, especially those in the West, there is a
      tendency to turn to medicine for relief from stress. Inevitably there are some patients
      who then become addicted if the substance offered has an addictive quality. Candidates
      may refer to either positive or negative coping strategies, such as turning to alcohol or
      smoking, for stress relief.

      Whichever strategies are chosen, candidates should include research and evaluation as
      an important part of their response.

      Award [14 to 20 marks] where the content is relevant and effectively addressed, where
      there is in-depth knowledge and understanding, informed description, evaluation is clear
      and reasonably balanced and the answer is well structured.

      Award [8 to 13 marks] where the content is relevant and there is a structured framework
      that contains limited analysis and presents informed description and evaluation that is
      not necessarily well developed.

      Award [1 to 7 marks] for answers that show little organization, where knowledge and
      understanding are very limited and the question is only partially addressed.

      Award up to [10 marks] where only one relevant strategy is described and evaluated.
                                                  – 19 –             N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Lifespan Psychology

13.   Discuss two empirical studies related to separation in lifespan psychology.                  [20 marks]

      Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

      There are numerous studies that can be discussed in relation to short-term or long-term
      effects of separation on human development. For instance, Robertson and Bowlby
      (1952) based their conclusions regarding the short-term effects of separation on
      observations of the behaviour of children aged between 1 and 4 years old. Cockett and
      Tripp (1994) found more long-term separation effects in children from re-ordered
      families than those children who lived in intact but discordant families. In his study,
      Schaffer (1990) pointed out that the impact of the removal of the key attachment figure
      may be mitigated or exacerbated by other aspects of the social context. Rutter (1981)
      also concluded that generally, the long-term effects of short separations are rarely
      disastrous.

      It would also be appropriate to discuss studies of the long-term effects of
      institutionalization such as research done by Donates et al. (1985), Hodges and Tigard
      (1989), Downey et al. (1985) and Rutter and Quinton (1984). The studies confirmed
      that institutionalization puts an individual at risk but also that it does not necessarily
      eradicate all prospects of well-being in adulthood.

      Discussion of studies may include reference to methodology, cultural or ethical
      considerations or the possibility of application of findings.

      Award [14 to 20 marks] for responses that present a clear description of relevant
      studies, culminating with an informed and well-developed discussion of two empirical
      studies.

      Award [8 to 13 marks] where responses are mainly descriptive, offering a limited
      discussion of two empirical studies related to separation.

      Award [1 to 7 marks] where responses present a superficial description of the empirical
      studies without any discussion.

      Award a maximum of up to [3 marks] for responses providing theories of separation
      with no reference to specific empirical studies.

      For responses that refer to only one empirical study, a maximum of [10 marks] should
      be awarded.
                                                  – 20 –             N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



14.   Explain how methodological considerations may affect the interpretation of
      behaviour in lifespan psychology.                                          [20 marks]

      Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

      The focus here is on how the use of different methods and techniques of research has an
      impact on the interpretation of behaviour offered by lifespan psychologists. Responses
      offering in-depth explanation of a limited number of methodological considerations or a
      less thorough explanation of several methodological considerations may be awarded
      equal credit.

      Appropriate content may discuss the fact that cross-sectional designs inevitably
      confound age and cohort, while longitudinal studies confound age change and time of
      testing. However, one or another form of sequential designs can help sort out these
      effects; they also allow researchers to shift from talking merely about age differences to
      analysis of age changes. Other methodological issues of concern to developmental
      psychologists include problems such as subject selection, age equivalence of measures,
      or the fact that research data could be biased by expectations of researchers and subjects
      about people of different age groups. Another specific concern in conducting research
      in lifespan psychology is to distinguish between the emic approach and the etic
      approach, between culture specific and culture universal data.

      Award [14 to 20 marks] for responses that offer a well-developed explanation of how
      methodological considerations in lifespan psychology may affect the interpretation of
      human behaviour.

      Award [8 to 13 marks] where responses present an appropriate description of research
      methods used in lifespan psychology with a limited explanation of their impact on the
      interpretation of human behaviour.

      Award [1 to 7 marks] where responses offer a superficial description of research
      methods used in lifespan psychology without explaining the way they may affect the
      interpretation of behaviour.

      Award up to a maximum of [10 marks] for responses that explain how only one
      methodological consideration affects the interpretation of behaviour in lifespan
      psychology.
                                                 – 21 –            N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



15.   Examine controversies related to concepts of adolescence.                                  [20 marks]

      Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

      High scoring responses would be based on theories that highlight the controversial
      nature of this period of human development.

      The traditional view of identity formation in adolescence is one of identity crisis,
      “storm and stress” and the rejection of parental values creating a generation gap.
      Theorists such as Anna Freud, Blos or Erikson support, in different ways, the idea that
      adolescence involves a long period of crisis.

      However, this view has been challenged by the alternative view of adolescent identity
      development which suggests adolescence does not always cause antagonism towards
      parents and does not necessarily create highly stressful experiences for the adolescent.
      For instance, Coleman’s focal theory suggests that most issues and worries that
      adolescents have to deal with seem to peak at different ages and only when
      several coincide will stress occur. Moreover, cross-cultural researchers such as Mead or
      Offer and his colleagues have drawn a fascinating picture of the universal and
      not-so-universal understanding of adolescence.

      Award [14 to 20 marks] where responses present a well-developed analysis of
      controversies related to the period of adolescence.

      Award [8 to 13 marks] for responses that include appropriate description of the
      controversial nature of this period of human development with a limited analysis of
      these controversies.

      Award [1 to 7 marks] where responses show a superficial understanding of the
      controversies related to adolescence.

      Award [1 to 3 marks] for responses that offer a general account of the concept of
      adolescence with no reference to its controversial nature.
                                                  – 22 –             N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Psychodynamic Psychology

16.   Analyse the extent to which the development of the psychodynamic perspective has
      been affected by historical and cultural contexts.                               [20 marks]

      Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

      Responses should offer an analysis of the historical and cultural conditions that
      favoured the advent of psychoanalysis and the factors responsible for the growth of the
      psychodynamic perspective. Responses do not have to make a distinction between
      historical and cultural contexts.

      Freud initiated the psychodynamic approach but his theory was influenced by the ideas
      of his time. For instance, he was influenced by Darwin’s concept of evolution,
      Fechner’s works on the notion of threshold, Helmholtz’s mechanistic orientation, and
      Mesmer’s and Charcot’s works on hypnotic phenomena. Moreover, many of Freud’s
      ideas had been anticipated. For instance, ideas about unconscious were very much a
      part of the intellectual climate of the 1880s in Europe. In the years before Freud
      advanced his sex-based theory, many studies had been published on sexual pathologies
      and infantile sexuality. The concept of catharsis was also popular before Freud
      published any of his work.

      In the twentieth century, however, new disciplines were suggesting other ways of
      viewing human nature. For example, research in anthropology, sociology and social
      psychology had found that much human behaviour stemmed from social conditioning
      rather than attempts to satisfy biological needs. The intellectual spirit of the times was
      calling for a revised conception of human nature. Analysts such as Fromm, Adler,
      Horney, Klein, and Erikson, drifted away from orthodox psychoanalysis and began to
      reshape Freudian theory along the lines of the social sciences.

      Award [14 to 20 marks] for responses that offer a well-developed analysis of the extent
      to which factors had an impact on the development of psychodynamic psychology.

      Award [8 to 13 marks] where responses are mainly descriptive. Responses in this
      category may include some appropriate but limited analysis of the extent to which
      historical and cultural contexts influenced the development of the psychodynamic
      perspective.

      Award [1 to 7 marks] for responses that offer a minimal description of historical and
      cultural factors relevant to the development of the psychodynamic perspective with
      minimal or no analysis.
                                                 – 23 –            N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



17.   Making reference to specific examples of studies, describe and evaluate two
      research methods (e.g. case study, observation) that are used in psychodynamic
      psychology.                                                                                [20 marks]

      Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

      Responses should accurately describe and evaluate two research methods used by
      psychodynamic psychology, offering informed commentary on both strengths and
      limitations. At least one research study for each research method should be used to
      support the arguments.

      Appropriate content may refer to research methods such as case study, observation,
      or interview and may refer to Erikson’s psychohistory method, Jung’s
      word-association test, and/or Freud’s case histories and self-analysis. Relevant content
      may also present the attempts to test psychodynamic concepts experimentally: many
      studies have examined the scientific credibility of psychodynamic theories. Dream
      analysis and free association should not be described as research methods in themselves,
      but are acceptable as part of research techniques used in case study investigation.
      Appropriate answers should make it clear that a psychodynamic approach can be
      scientifically valid in some aspects and unscientific in others. Indeed, psychodynamic
      psychology has difficulty in clearly meeting empirical standards because its focus is on
      the unconscious contents and processes of the mind. However, techniques are available
      to make these phenomena more accessible.

      Award [14 to 20 marks] where responses describe and evaluate two relevant research
      methods with explicit references to appropriate examples of research studies from the
      psychodynamic perspective.

      Award [8 to 13 marks] for responses that offer an appropriate description of two
      relevant methods with a limited attempt at evaluation. Responses may not clearly refer
      to examples of research studies but explicitly link the methods described to the
      psychodynamic perspective.

      Award [1 to 7 marks] where responses present a minimal description of appropriate
      research methods without evaluation or reference to the psychodynamic perspective.

      For responses that refer to only one relevant research method, a maximum of
      [10 marks] should be awarded.
                                                   – 24 –             N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



18.   Compare and contrast two neo-Freudian theories on the influence of childhood
      experience on behaviour.                                                     [20 marks]

      Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

      Whichever theories are presented, it is important that the focus of the answer is on their
      attempts to understand behaviour by analysing the formative role of childhood
      experience. Similarities and differences between the two interpretations must be
      offered.

      On one hand, psychodynamic theories have several common ideas about the importance
      of childhood experience. For instance, most psychoanalytic theorists focus their
      attention on the early years of life and agree that psychological development occurs in
      stages. Moreover, they share the assumption that adult behaviour and ongoing problems
      are determined by experiences in early childhood.

      On the other hand, psychodynamic theories view the importance of childhood
      experience in different ways. For instance, object-relations theorists such as Klein or
      Winnicott emphasize the importance of the first two years of life rather than the Oedipal
      phase, the infant’s relationships to important figures rather than sexual needs and drives.
      Self theorists such as Kohut view the self as the central construct in personality which is
      structured in the early years of life as the child interacts with important self-objects in
      the environment. Persons with an autonomous self are able to engage people in intimate
      and fulfilling relationships. Ego theorists such as Anna Freud, Hartmann or Erikson,
      emphasize the mechanisms used by the ego to deal with the world.

      Answers that refer to the influence of childhood experience on children or adolescent
      behaviours are equally acceptable.

      Award [14 to 20 marks] where responses provide a well-developed comparison
      between two theories with regard to the influence of childhood experience on
      behaviour.

      Award [8 to 13 marks] where responses are mainly descriptive. Responses of this
      category may include some appropriate but limited comparison.

      Award [1 to 7 marks] where responses compare two psychodynamic theories without
      relating these to the influence of childhood experience on behaviour, or offer an
      appropriate but minimal description of the theories without any comparison.

      Where only similarities or differences are addressed, no more than [10 marks] should be
      awarded.
                                                  – 25 –            N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Social Psychology

19.   (a)   Describe one psychological research study on obedience.                               [6 marks]

            Responses will probably refer to Milgram’s study on obedience and replications
            of it, e.g. cross-cultural studies. There may also be reference to Zimbardo since
            this study is related to obedience to social roles.

            Award [5 to 6 marks] for responses that clearly describe one study on obedience
            in depth.

            Award [3 to 4 marks] for responses that identify one study but only give a limited
            descriptive account.

            Award [1 to 2 marks] for responses that identify and give a superficial description
            of the study on obedience.


      (b)   Discuss the extent to which methodological and cultural considerations affect
            research on obedience.                                                        [14 marks]

            Refer to the scaled paper 2 markbands below when awarding marks.

            Research may include theory or empirical studies. Methodological considerations
            could include participant variables, demand characteristics, type of obedience
            task, artificiality, ecological validity.

            Cultural considerations could include cultural norms, gender differences,
            individualism versus collectivism, historical differences.

            Responses referring to ethical considerations are acceptable as long as they are
            linked to methodological aspects of the studies.

            Award [11 to 14 marks] for responses that clearly identify and discuss
            methodological and cultural considerations and offer a balanced view supported
            by evidence on how these affect findings of research on obedience.

            Award [6 to 10 marks] for responses that identify methodological and cultural
            considerations but only give a limited discussion of how these methodological or
            cultural considerations affect the research on obedience.

            Award [1 to 5 marks] for responses that outline how methodological and cultural
            considerations affect the findings of research on obedience.
                                                 – 26 –            N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Scaled paper 2 markbands out of 14

12 to 14   The demands of the question are addressed effectively in a focused and logical structure.
           Arguments are supported by appropriate knowledge and understanding and in-depth analysis.
           Evaluation is balanced and well-developed. Cultural, ethical, gender or methodological
           considerations form an integral part of the response.

10 to 11   The demands of the question are addressed effectively within a structured framework. The
           argument is supported by appropriate knowledge and understanding from the perspectives.
           The answer contains appropriate analysis, but there may be minor omissions. Evaluation is
           clear and applied appropriately. Cultural, ethical, gender or methodological considerations
           are present and appropriate to the question.

8 to 9     The demands of the question are addressed mainly within a structured framework. The
           answer contains accurate knowledge and understanding. Some limited analysis is offered.
           Evaluation is limited or may not be well developed. Cultural, ethical, gender or
           methodological considerations are present and appropriate to the question.

5 to 7     There is an attempt to structure the answer but it is not sustained throughout the answer. The
           answer contains accurate knowledge and understanding, but is mainly descriptive. There may
           be minimal reference to cultural, ethical, gender or methodological considerations appropriate
           to the question.

3 to 4     There is little sense of structure in the answer. Although there is an attempt to answer the
           question, knowledge and understanding of the perspectives is limited, often inaccurate and of
           marginal relevance to the question. There is no reference to cultural, ethical, gender or
           methodological considerations.

1 to 2     There is almost no organizational structure. There is very little or no understanding of the
           question, nor evidence of knowledge of the perspectives. The answer consists of no more
           than a few relevant facts.

0          If the answer does not achieve the standard described in markband 1 to 2, a mark of 0 should
           be recorded.
                                                  – 27 –            N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



20.   Describe and evaluate one theory of collective behaviour.                                 [20 marks]

      There are a number of different ways in which evaluation of one theory can be
      approached, e.g. supporting or refuting the theory, comparison with another theory or
      providing practical applications.

      Theories could include Le Bon’s contagion theory.

      If candidates used conformity or de-individuation as collective behavior it needs to be
      approached from the perspective of the group rather than the individual in order to be
      credited.

      Award [14 to 20 marks] for responses that clearly describe the theory and offer a
      thorough evaluation.

      Award [8 to 13 marks] for an adequate description but a limited evaluation.

      Award [1 to 7 marks] for a superficial description without evaluation.
                                                 – 28 –            N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



21.   (a)   Distinguish between prejudice and discrimination.                                  [4 marks]

            Part (a) requires a clear statement of the differences between the attitude of
            prejudice and the behaviour of discrimination.

            Award [3 to 4 marks] for responses where a clear distinction between prejudice
            and discrimination is made.

            Award [1 to 2 marks] for a response which defines each term but does not
            mention their distinguishing factors.



      (b)   Describe two studies that investigate prejudice and discuss how they have
            contributed to an understanding of the origins of prejudice.                        [16 marks]

            Refer to the scaled paper 2 markbands below when awarding marks.

            The term “origins” could include a selection of factors within a theory or a
            number of different theories.

            Responses may discuss theories such as schema theory, frustration–aggression
            theory, scapegoating theory, personality theories.

            Studies could include Elliot (Brown Eyes/Blue Eyes), Sherif ’s Robber’s Cave.

            Discussion may highlight the strengths and limitations of the studies, their
            applicability, how they may be used to reduce prejudice, cultural and
            methodological issues, gender differences.

            Award [11 to 16 marks] for a sound description of more than one origin of
            prejudice.

            Award [7 to 10 marks] for an appropriate description but limited discussion of
            origins of prejudice.

            Award [1 to 6 marks] for superficial description of origins of prejudice without
            discussion of origins of prejudice.
                                                 – 29 –            N10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Scaled paper 2 markbands out of 16

14 to 16   The demands of the question are addressed effectively in a focused and logical structure.
           Arguments are supported by appropriate knowledge and understanding and in-depth analysis.
           Evaluation is balanced and well-developed. Cultural, ethical, gender or methodological
           considerations form an integral part of the response.

11 to 13   The demands of the question are addressed effectively within a structured framework. The
           argument is supported by appropriate knowledge and understanding from the options. The
           answer contains appropriate analysis but there may be minor omissions. Evaluation is clear
           and applied appropriately. Cultural, ethical, gender or methodological considerations are
           present and appropriate to the question.

9 to 10    The demands of the question are addressed mainly within a structured framework. The
           answer contains accurate knowledge and understanding. Some limited analysis is offered.
           Evaluation is limited or may not be well developed. Cultural, ethical, gender or
           methodological considerations are present and appropriate to the question.

7 to 8     There is a basic structure to the answer. The question is addressed. The answer contains
           accurate knowledge and understanding but is mainly descriptive. There may be minimal
           reference to cultural, ethical, gender or methodological considerations appropriate to the
           question.

5 to 6     There is an attempt to structure the answer but it is not sustained throughout the answer. The
           question is partially addressed, with limited accurate, relevant and factual knowledge and
           understanding. There may be minimal reference to cultural, ethical, gender or methodological
           considerations appropriate to the question.

3 to 4     There is little sense of structure in the answer. Although there is an attempt to answer the
           question, knowledge and understanding of the options is limited, often inaccurate and of
           marginal relevance to the question. There is no reference to cultural, ethical, gender or
           methodological considerations.

1 to 2     There is almost no organizational structure. There is very little or no understanding of the
           question, nor evidence of knowledge of the options. The answer consists of no more than a
           few relevant facts.

0          If the answer does not achieve the standard described in markband 1 to 2, a mark of 0 should
           be recorded.
