N10/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                      November 2010



                       PSYCHOLOGY



                        Higher Level



                               Paper 1




13 pages
                              –2–            N10/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                                 –3–               N10/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                             SECTION A

Paper 1 section A markbands

In applying the markbands the concept of “best fit” should be used: a response that meets most of the
statements in a particular band, but not necessarily all, can still be awarded marks in the markband.
The markband that best fits the response should be determined first. Then, by reference to the markband
above and the markband below, the mark should be determined.

Markband

7 to 8     The demands of the question are addressed effectively within a logical structure. The
           argument is clearly supported by appropriate knowledge and understanding from the
           perspectives. The answer contains appropriate analysis but there may be minor omissions.
           At the top of this markband the demands of the question are addressed effectively, in a
           focused and logical structure. Arguments are supported by appropriate knowledge and
           understanding, and analysis.

5 to 6     At the bottom of this markband the question is addressed. The answer contains accurate
           knowledge and understanding but is mainly descriptive with some implicit analysis that is not
           sufficiently related to the question. There is a basic structure to the answer.
           At the top of this markband the demands of the question are addressed, mainly within a
           logical structure. The response is sufficiently accurate, relevant and adequate to support a
           sound answer. Analysis may not be well developed.

3 to 4     The question is partially addressed, with limited accurate, relevant and factual knowledge and
           understanding. There is an attempt to structure the answer but it is not sustained throughout
           the answer.

1 to 2     There is an attempt to answer the question, but knowledge and understanding of the
           perspective is limited, often inaccurate and of marginal relevance to the question.

0          If the answer does not achieve the standard described in markband 1 to 2, a mark of 0 should
           be recorded.
                                                  –4–              N10/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Biological Perspective

1.   Explain one strength of one study from the biological perspective.                          [8 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands when marking this question.

     Candidates can address the question in several ways: strengths could include
     methodology, such as control of variables, application of findings, advancements in
     technology, development of knowledge, ethics. These strengths should be made
     explicit, not implicit. The focus should be on the strength, not the study.

     A broad range of studies is available, including experiments, correlations, case studies,
     observations.

     The answer should focus on the explanation of the strength, not the description of the
     study.

     Award [7 to 8 marks] for a response that explicitly explains one strength of one study.

     Award [4 to 6 marks] where the appropriate strength is described but not fully
     explained.

     Award [1 to 3 marks] where the study is described but the explanation of the strength is
     not explicit.
                                                  –5–               N10/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Cognitive Perspective

2.   Describe how one theory or study from the cognitive perspective has been applied
     to one psychological or social question.                                         [8 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands when marking this question.

     It is not necessary for candidates to describe their chosen theory beyond the detail
     required to describe how it has been applied to explain one psychological or social
     question. Neither is it necessary for candidates to identify whether the question is
     psychological or social.

     A wide variety of psychological or social questions or issues may be made applicable to
     this question; examples in the guide include aggression, gender differences or stress.
     Other issues such as eyewitness testimony, depression, amnesia, or therapy may also be
     relevant as long as the response focuses on the application of a cognitive
     theory/explanation to the question or issue.

     Award [7 to 8 marks] for a response that identifies a relevant theory or study and
     appropriately describes how it has been applied to one psychological or social question.

     Award [4 to 6 marks] for a response that describes a relevant theory or study, but fails to
     make clear how this has been applied to one psychological or social question.

     Award [1 to 3 marks] for a response that provides a limited account of a cognitive
     theory or study but makes little or no attempt to apply this to a psychological or social
     question.
                                                  –6–               N10/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Learning Perspective

3.   Explain how one historical or cultural condition has affected the development of
     the learning perspective.                                                        [8 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands when marking this question.

     No distinction or qualification needs to be made between historical and cultural
     conditions. Among other conditions, the influence of developments in science,
     pre-existing psychological perspectives and the practicality of Western societies could
     be considered relevant in response to this question. In all cases a brief but explicit link
     should be made between a relevant historical or cultural condition and the development
     of the perspective. The phrase “development” can be taken to mean either the initial
     rise of the perspective or subsequent influences as it continued to evolve; both of these
     approaches are acceptable.

     Award [7 to 8 marks] where responses explicitly explain how an identified, relevant
     historical or cultural condition affected the development of the learning perspective.

     Award [4 to 6 marks] where an appropriate condition is described, but the explanation
     of its effect on the development of the learning perspective is not made clearly.
     Responses may be overly descriptive, but relevant.

     Award [1 to 3 marks] for rudimentary responses that demonstrate some understanding
     of the development of the learning perspective but make no attempt to explain the
     impact of the condition.

     If more than one historical or cultural condition is explained, credit should only be
     given to the first.
                                                 –7–               N10/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Humanistic Perspective

4.   Identify one assumption of the humanistic perspective and explain how one key
     concept is related to this assumption.                                        [8 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands when marking this question.

     The question requires candidates to identify a basic assumption from the humanistic
     perspective, e.g. that humans are self-directed and have the potential for growth, that
     humans are unique and experience the world in their own unique way
     (phenomenology), or that humans are free to choose the course of their life. Other
     typical assumptions to be expected in the answer could be innate goodness and
     goal-orientation.

     A range of key concepts can be explained, such as self-actualization, the self, the
     organismic valuing process, congruence and the hierarchy of needs. A thorough
     description of the theory is not necessary in response to this question. Responses should
     provide enough detail about the theory in order to link the assumption clearly and
     explicitly to the key concept.

     Award [7 to 8 marks] for responses that clearly explain the connection between the key
     concept and the assumption.

     Award [4 to 6 marks] for responses that present a description of a relevant key concept
     and offer a limited explanation of how it is related to the assumption.

     Award [1 to 3 marks] for responses that present a description of a key concept or an
     assumption but offer no link between them.
                                                 –8–               N10/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                             SECTION B

Paper 1 section B markbands

In applying the markbands the concept of “best fit” should be used: a response that meets most of the
statements in a particular band, but not necessarily all, can still be awarded marks in the markband.
The markband that best fits the response should be determined first. Then, by reference to the markband
above and the markband below, the mark should be determined.

Markband

17 to 20   The demands of the question are addressed effectively in a focused and logical structure.
           Arguments are supported by appropriate knowledge and understanding and in-depth analysis.
           Evaluation is balanced and well-developed. Cultural, ethical, gender or methodological
           considerations are an integral part of the response.

14 to 16   The demands of the question are addressed effectively within a structured framework. The
           argument is supported by appropriate knowledge and understanding from the perspectives.
           The answer contains appropriate analysis, but there may be minor omissions. Evaluation is
           clear and applied appropriately. Cultural, ethical, gender or methodological considerations
           are present and appropriate to the question.

11 to 13   The demands of the question are addressed mainly within a structured framework. The
           answer contains accurate knowledge and understanding. Some limited analysis is offered.
           Evaluation is limited or may not be well developed. Cultural, ethical, gender or
           methodological considerations are present and appropriate to the question.

8 to 10    There is a basic structure to the answer. The question is addressed. The answer contains
           accurate knowledge and understanding but is mainly descriptive. There may be minimal
           reference to cultural, ethical, gender or methodological considerations appropriate to the
           question.

6 to 7     There is an attempt to structure the answer but it is not sustained throughout the answer. The
           question is partially addressed, with limited accurate, relevant and factual knowledge and
           understanding. There may be minimal reference to cultural, ethical, gender or methodological
           considerations appropriate to the question.

4 to 5     There is little sense of structure in the answer. Although there is an attempt to answer the
           question, knowledge and understanding of the perspectives is limited, often inaccurate and of
           marginal relevance to the question. There is no reference to cultural, ethical, gender or
           methodological considerations.

1 to 3     There is almost no organizational structure. There is very little or no understanding of the
           question, nor evidence of knowledge of the perspectives. The answer consists of no more
           than a few relevant facts.

0          If the answer does not achieve the standard described in markband 1 to 3, a mark of 0 should
           be recorded.
                                                  –9–               N10/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



5.   Explain how historical or cultural considerations may affect interpretation of
     behaviour from the biological perspective.                                     [20 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B markbands when awarding marks.

     Cultural and historical considerations in this context should be interpreted quite broadly
     by examiners. Since “considerations” is in the plural, it is important that at least two of
     these should be mentioned, although more considerations may be included. The fewer
     considerations presented, the greater the detail required.

     Differences in the interpretation of behaviour according to culture should be explained.
     For example, the behaviour of some people who have schizophrenia who react openly to
     images that are created in their own minds, is received with some element of fear in
     Western cultures. In certain Asian cultures the same behaviour may be perceived as
     conferring an honour upon the person involved. The interpretation of behaviour may
     also reflect the cultural context and schemas of individuals involved. The wild
     behaviour of some European youths in city centres is often viewed with alarm by older
     citizens but accepted as relatively normal by the peer group of young people.

     Award [14 to 20 marks] for well-developed explanations of how historical or cultural
     considerations may affect biological perspective interpretations of behaviour.

     Award [8 to 13 marks] for limited explanations of how historical or cultural
     considerations may affect biological perspective interpretations of behaviour.

     Award [1 to 7 marks] for superficial explanations of how cultural considerations affect
     biological perspective interpretations of behaviour, or for descriptions of relevant
     historical or cultural considerations without reference to their impact on interpretation
     of behaviour.

     Award up to a maximum of [3 marks] for a general description of the perspective.

     If only one historical or cultural consideration is explained, award up to a maximum of
     [10 marks].
                                                – 10 –            N10/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



6.   With reference to empirical studies from the cognitive perspective, discuss
     strengths and limitations of two research methods (e.g. verbal protocols,
     case studies, experiments).                                                 [20 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B markbands when awarding marks.

     The focus of the response should be on evaluation of two research methods illustrated
     by relevant research studies, rather than evaluation of the studies themselves. A range
     of examples of psychological studies may be appropriately chosen to illustrate relevant
     research methods, such as Loftus’s experiments, Newell and Simon’s verbal protocols,
     Neisser’s case studies of John Dean’s testimony, diary studies or computer simulations,
     etc. Studies on animal behaviour researching topics such as cognitive maps, perceptual
     development or problem solving may also be appropriate. Examples selected must
     clearly be from the cognitive perspective or focus on cognitive aspects of behaviour.

     Examples of some strengths of research methods in the cognitive perspective:
     Experiments
       rigorous control by the researcher is possible
       can be replicated
       cause-effect relationship can be established
     Case studies
       possibility to investigate behaviour which could not possibly be engineered in
       research laboratories
       high ecological validity
     Diary studies
       high ecological validity

     Examples of some limitations of research methods in the cognitive perspective:
     Experiments
       lack of ecological validity in experiments conducted in artificial settings
       reductionism
     Case studies
       problems with generalization
       participant variables
     Diary studies
       problems with self-report
       social desirability influences what the participant records in the diary

     Award [14 to 20 marks] for responses characterized by balanced consideration of both
     strengths and limitations of two relevant research methods, clearly illustrated by
     research studies.

     Award [8 to 13 marks] for descriptive responses with limited discussion of strengths and
     limitations, or for descriptions of research methods with limited and unbalanced
     discussion.
                                          – 11 –           N10/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Award [1 to 7 marks] for responses that amount to limited and general description of
research methods with minimal reference to cognitive studies, or that offer detailed
description of empirical studies rather than research methods.

Responses considering strengths and limitations of only one research method should be
awarded up to a maximum of [10 marks].

Responses which only discuss strengths or only discuss limitations should be awarded
up to a maximum of [10 marks].
                                                  – 12 –            N10/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



7.   Explain the extent to which the concept of free will relates to the learning
     perspective.                                                                 [20 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B markbands when awarding marks.

     This question might prove challenging as learning perspective theories are generally not
     thought of as illustrating much free will. Various types of determinism are more
     prevalent within this perspective. That being said, the question asks for an examination
     of the “extent to which” free will is related to the perspective. Responses could very
     well focus on how many learning perspective theories and studies ignore or discount the
     role of free will. In such cases, responses may also discuss determinism in order to
     illustrate the explanation of free will. It should be noted, however, that in order to earn
     high marks the response must stay close to the topic of free will.

     Topics within the learning perspective that may be argued to show some degree of
     free will could include:
        latent learning (cognitive maps)
        vicarious learning
        self-efficacy

     Responses could also argue about the apparent lack of free will associated with classical
     and operant conditioning.

     Award [14 to 20 marks] for well constructed responses that clearly explain the extent to
     which free will is relevant or not within this perspective.

     Award [8 to 13 marks] for limited, but appropriate explanation of the relevance of
     free will to this perspective. The issue of the “extent” is addressed, but this is limited
     and may not be fully integrated into the response.

     Award [1 to 7 marks] for rudimentary commentary about free will within this
     perspective. While the comments may be relevant, they are not explained and may be
     disjointed. Responses focusing only on determinism, rather than free will, should be
     limited to marks in this range.

     Award [1 to 3 marks] for general comments about the learning perspective which are
     not related to the concept of free will.
                                                 – 13 –            N10/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



8.   “Concepts from the humanistic perspective have been applied to many areas,
     including international relations, counselling, education, and personnel
     management.”

     Discuss one application of a concept or a theory from the humanistic perspective.           [20 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B markbands when awarding marks.

     Concepts and theories from the humanistic perspective have been applied in many
     areas. For example, Rogers’ self theory is central to his client-centred therapy.
     Self-actualization has helped the development of student-centred learning, as used at
     Summerhill School. Empathic listening has been applied to conflict resolution.
     Hierarchy of needs is applied in organizational psychology to help increase
     productivity. The application discussed need not be of an entire theory but could be
     based on a concept or aspect of a theory.

     Award [14 to 20 marks] for responses that discuss an application with clear reference to
     the humanistic concepts or theories on which it is based.

     Award [8 to 13 marks] for responses that describe an application but the link between
     the application and theory is not well developed.

     Award [1 to 7 marks] for responses describing a theory or concept from the humanistic
     perspective without reference to an application, or responses that describe only a theory
     without reference to an application, or which describe an application without reference
     to a theory.
