N10/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                      November 2010



              SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
                ANTHROPOLOGY



                        Higher Level



                               Paper 1




5 pages
                              –2–            N10/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                                   –3–               N10/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.   Describe how kayakers record and communicate their experience stories.                        [6 marks]

     In answering this question, candidates will refer to George’s diary and Roberto’s recounting from
     this text, the former written and personal, and the latter spoken, oral and hence immediate and for
     an audience. Candidates will use their own words to describe the process of telling, writing,
     recounting, and narrating an experience. The kayakers transcribe and articulate a social reality
     through different media. The kayakers intend to record, savour and communicate their experiences
     – by diary, conversation and photo – for posterity (for George) and to attain “social capital” and
     status (for Roberto).

     Photographs play a part in the narration of experience, as a souvenir (literally “to see again”) or
     physical evidence of the event. They constitute the proof of the stories told. Unfortunately, here,
     the photographs were either not very good, or reminded the participants that they had not been so
     extreme in the reality of their adventures as they wanted to portray themselves.

     There is an undercurrent through the piece about the story and its connection with reality
     and history. A thorough answer will point to the latitude possible in talking to non-kayakers who
     are more easily impressed because they are less informed about kayaking. The candidates will note
     that there is also the danger that the stories take on a generic quality of heroism and thrill. The skill
     following the physicality of the kayaking is to know one’s audience and what to stress or downplay
     in one’s storytelling. If they create the right experience story they will gain status and prestige.


            Marks                            Level descriptor
                  0 The work does not reach a standard described by the
                    descriptors below.
               1–2 There is an attempt to organize the response and identify
                   relevant points but the response relies too heavily on
                   quotations from the text and/or limited generalizations
                   are offered.
               3–4 The response is organized, identifies and explains relevant
                   points, and offers generalizations.
               5–6 The response is organized, identifies and explains relevant
                   points and links them to generalizations, demonstrating good
                   anthropological understanding.
                                                   –4–              N10/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   Incorporating theoretical perspectives in your answer, explain how the authors use
     “social capital” to understand why the kayakers change their experience stories for
     different audiences.                                                                [6 marks]

     The authors of the piece use the term “social capital” a number of times. Candidates will be
     expected to demonstrate appropriate comprehension and interpretation of these instances in
     connection with the overall point of the anthropological piece. “Social capital” is given to those
     with the most compelling stories. “Social capital” comes from experience of kayaking in
     prestigious destinations (or access to destinations – by helicopter here), but the experience has to be
     balanced and appreciated by the audience. They are therefore shaped by and for the audience.
     Stories have the potential to be overplayed by the teller who wants to recount the dangerousness of
     their circumstances, but not the recklessness or loss of control in their actions. The “social capital”,
     then, is a social negotiation with a particular context to its telling – kayaking audiences are more
     informed and probably harder to impress than the non-kayaking audience, to Roberto’s chagrin.

     A full answer to the question would clearly explain the meaning of social capital within the context
     of this passage and would relate this understanding to examples that refer to multiple audiences.
     This will be approached in a logical and organized manner.

     Candidates may link “social capital” to Bourdieu but are not required to in order to gain full marks.

     This knowledge should clearly refer to relevant theoretical works or perspectives.


           Marks                            Level descriptor
                 0 The work does not reach a standard described by the
                   descriptors below.
              1–2 The response is mainly descriptive and relies on quotations,
                  but may demonstrate limited understanding of anthropological
                  issues and concepts.
              3–4 The response demonstrates some understanding of
                  anthropological issues and concepts or theory, or the response
                  recognizes the viewpoint of the anthropologist, but not all
                  of these.
              5–6 The response demonstrates a critical understanding of
                  anthropological issues, concepts and theory, and recognizes
                  the viewpoint of the anthropologist.
                                                 –5–             N10/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   Compare and contrast how kayakers present themselves to their audiences with
     how another group presents itself to its audiences.                          [8 marks]

     Candidates may – but do not need to – select societies or groups that directly compare or contrast
     the recording and recounting of the kayakers’ tourist experiences with very similar records and
     narratives of tourist experiences. Candidates may choose any ethnographic example that illustrates
     how individuals and groups fashion their self-presentation for different audiences. Candidates may,
     for example, present instances of how individuals or groups present themselves to others who are
     similar or the same (“insiders”) and contrast this with their self-presentation to those who are
     different (“outsiders”). In other words, a good answer to this question will be one where a
     candidate is able to produce a strong and convincing comparison and contrast utilizing relevant and
     suitably contextualized ethnographic material. Better candidates will be able to draw attention to
     the contextual and strategic nature of all self-presentation.

     Candidates must situate the comparative case in terms of group, place, author and ethnographic
     context to gain more than [4 marks].


           Marks                           Level descriptor
                 0 The work does not reach a standard described by the
                   descriptors below.
               1–2 Comparative ethnography is presented in limited detail and its
                   relevance is only partly established. It is not identified in
                   terms of place, author or historical context. The response may
                   not be structured as a comparison.
               3–4 Comparative ethnography is presented in limited detail but its
                   relevance is established. The comparative ethnography is
                   identified in terms of place, author and historical context,
                   or the response is clearly structured as a comparison.
               5–6 Comparative ethnography is presented and its relevance is
                   successfully established. The comparative ethnography is
                   identified in terms of place, author and historical context,
                   and the response is clearly structured as a comparison.
                   Either similarities or differences are discussed in detail,
                   but not both.
               7–8 Comparative ethnography is presented and its relevance is
                   successfully established. The comparative ethnography is
                   identified in terms of place, author and historical context,
                   and the response is clearly structured as a comparison.
                   Similarities and differences are discussed in detail. The
                   response demonstrates good anthropological understanding.
