N10/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




       88105801


SOCIAL AND CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
HIGHER LEVEL
PAPER 1

Tuesday 16 November 2010 (afternoon)

1 hour


INSTRUCTIONS to candidates

 Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Read the passage carefully and then answer all the questions.




8810-5801                                                                                          3 pages
                                                           © International Baccalaureate Organization 2010
                                                      –2–                 N10/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Texts in this examination paper have been edited: word additions or explanations are shown in square
brackets [ ]; substantive deletions of text are indicated by ellipses in square brackets […]; minor changes
are not indicated.

Extract from “An Adventure Tourist Experience” by Maurice Kane and Hazel Tucker in The
Discipline of Leisure: Embodying Cultures of “Recreation”, (eds) Simon Coleman and Tamara Kohn,
Berghahn Publications: Oxford, pages 57–72, (2007).

This passage examines how the participants on a white-water kayaking package tour negotiate
the expectations, roles, images and narratives of this experience. There are several ways that kayakers
record and share the narratives of their experiences; through diaries, storytelling and photographs.

Here is an extract from George’s kayaking diary:

            “The water pushed the kayak over the steep drop as I was thrown to the left and was pinned
            onto a huge boulder. I was being pulled underwater by the current […] I had never thought I’d
            drown kayaking. I could do nothing, and then I hit the tree. I had a burst of adrenaline, got a
            hold, reached along to the next broken branch, hoping I was going up out of the darkness, to air.
     5      Having survived the near-death experience, all of a sudden I felt more alive than ever before.”

            Kayakers like to sit around and talk about where they have been, scripting, telling and
            re-telling their tour stories, which river rapids they have kayaked and their near escapes from the
            “jaws of death”. Kayakers like to highlight the importance of experience stories that recount their
            adventures in prestigious kayaking destinations. These stories help them to gain “social capital”
   10       with certain audiences. […]

            In an effort to impress his peers, another kayaker, Roberto recounted his experiences:
            “I shouldn’t have been there but I was excited by the danger! My guide book said that if I fell out
            of the kayak there I would probably drown. I was tossed out of the kayak again and again but I
            survived and swam back to my kayak each time.” Roberto was viewed as heroic for surviving
   15       such a dangerous passage but also lacking in skill for falling out of his kayak. Among kayakers
            skill and not just heroic commitment is valued. […]

            Some kayakers participate in the even more dangerous sport of heli-kayaking where they are
            transported by helicopter to remote and otherwise inaccessible rapids. On one heli-kayaking
            trip on the West Coast of New Zealand, kayakers reviewed, selected and exchanged photos.
   20       Images taken from the helicopter, or of participants arriving at the riverside by helicopter,
            were particularly desired as this confirmed their participation in the unique adventure of
            West Coast heli-kayaking. These images replicated those of the kayaking elite whose promotion
            of the West Coast had drawn the participants to this tour.




8810-5801
                                                       –3–                 N10/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

            What the participants did not have, however, were on-the-water action images that were
     25     identical or even similar to the kayaking elite. Also, they had completed easier heli-kayaking
            rivers than those conquered by the kayaking elite. For the participants to gain “social capital”
            from their stories they had to focus on the novelty of their helicopter experience complete with
            verifying images. Participants understood they had not experienced extreme elite kayaking.
            Yet this tour experience gave them the freedom to create experience stories that could, dependent on
     30     the audience, influence their “social capital”. This was only successful if their audiences accepted
            their stories as qualitatively different from “just a tourist story”.

            The constraint on their storytelling was that the stories had to relate and adapt to each audience.
            Each participant had a specific status amongst the kayakers and their […] social awareness and
            knowledge of kayaking was critical to their stories’ success. To gain “social capital”, the stories
     35     had to demonstrate the valued qualities of their serious leisure, commitment, perseverance and
            gaining of skills, but they also needed to be believable in relation to their present status. […]

            The participants had more freedom in telling their tour stories to non-kayaking peers. These were
            stories of adventure tourism where heroism and thrill replaced tests of skills and perseverance.
            A non-kayaking audience lacked the knowledge and experience to confirm these stories of
     40     thrill-seeking and risk-taking. […] With this audience they could present reflections of the imagined
            reality of the kayaking elite.

1.    Describe how kayakers record and communicate their experience stories. 		                       [6 marks]


2.        Incorporating theoretical perspectives in your answer, explain how the authors use
          “social capital” to understand why the kayakers change their experience stories for
          different audiences. 					                                                                  [6 marks]


3.        Compare and contrast how kayakers present themselves to their audiences with how
          another group presents itself to its audiences. 			                                         [8 marks]




8810-5801
