                                                  -3-                                           5523-7001



     Introduction
     You have just ended a video conferencing call with your two friends, Jungmin and Lijing. They
     have an idea for an online business venture and they want your help. The business will be called
     Ivexfsfar lt will provide an application so that users can view the work of artists who have yet to
5    bediscovered.

     Artists may include actors, singers, screenwriters, comedians, painters, sculptors and filmmakers.
     In fact, any artist who wants to demonstrate a talent will be able to upload files to the application.
     The uploaded content can be rated by all users. Based on these ratings, the application
     recommends new content to each user.

10    Jungmin and Lijing plan to make the Ivexfsfarwebsite free to join and believe that they will be able
     to make money from advertising once there are enough users. They realize that this application
     will eventually require a great deal of storage, so they are looking at cloud-hosting companies.
     Once enough content has been added, the application will incorporate a recommender system.

     The following Information provides an outline of what has already been researched and includes
15    some challenges foryou to consider.


     Cloud computing
     Hosting appllcations that utilize data at an enterprise level are widely available and affordable
     thanks to cloud computing. Users only pay for the resources they use, so they can start small and
     add more resources as they grow. This makes cloud computing ideal for a start-up like Ivexfsfar.

20   There are a number of a/out/ dep/oymenf moc/e/s that could be used to host rvexfs!a/s data.
     There are also three cloud delivery models.. software as a service (Saas), platform as a service
     (Paas), and infrastructure as a service (Iaas). Nextstar .in\ends to use laas .

     Machine learning

     Machine learning is a subfield of artificial intelligence. There are three main types c>f machine
25   learning: supervised learning, unsupervised learning and re/.nforcemenf /earning (see Figure 1).

                         Figure 1 : The three main types of machine learning

                   (Data with labels)      (Data without labels)    (States and actions)
                         Input                    Input                     Input




                        Output                   Output                   Output


                                                                                                Turn over
                                                   -4-                                            5523-7001


     A supervised learning algorithm uses labelled ira/.n/.r)g data to learn a function that produces an
     appropriate output when given new unlabelled data. Typically, supervised learning is used to
     classify data or make predictions.

     An unsupervised learning algorithm learns patterns from unlabelled data. These algorithms draw
30    references from observations of the live input data. The system can organize data into subsets,
     or clusters, that have not been pre-classified by the programmers.

     A reinforcement learning algorithm learns in an interactive environment by trial and error using
     feedback from its own actions and experiences. Some recommender systems can be seen as a
     type of reinforcement learning because positive behaviour, such as reviewing content, is rewarded
35   with better recommendatic)ns.


     Recommender systems
     Where there is a huge amount of content available, a recommender system directs a user to
     content that they have not seen but may be of interest to them. Recommender systems use
     data for content that users have already rated (actual data) to generate predicted preferences
40    for content that they have not already rated (predicted data).

     The majority of recommender systems utilize supervised learning. The use of unsupervised
     learning and reinforcement learning is less common.

     F\ecommender systems can use content-based filtering, collaborative filtering, or a comb.inatiior\
     of both. Hybrid recommender systems combine several machine learning algorithms. This was
45    demonstrated on 21 September 2009, when BellKor's Pragmatic Chaos team won the Netflix
     Prize and USD 1000000 for the best collaborative filtering movie recommender system. This
     recommender system combined 107 different algorithms in a hybrid model that ctutperformed
     Netflix's own algorithm's roof-near)-sol/are error /RMSEJ score by 10.06 0/o.


     Content-based filtering

50    Content-based filtering, sometimes called item-Item filtering, focuses on an item's attributes
     rather than using user interactions and feedback. The content-based approach is one of
     user-specific classification, in which the classifier learns the user's likes and dislikes based
     on an item's attributes.

     Since Ivexfsfar's recommender system will contain video clips, attributes might include genre,
55    release date, artist, language, gender, and age. For example, lf a user rates stand-up comedy
     clips highly, the system is likely to recommend more comedy clips to them (see Figure 2).
                                                  -5-                                             5523-7001


                           Figure 2: An example of content-based filtering

                                             Viewed by user




                                                                       Similar
                                                                      content




                                      Recommended to same user


     Collaborative filtering

     With collaborative filtering, the recommendations for each user are generated by using the rating
     information from other users and items. The core assumption is that users who have agreed in the
60    past tend to agree in the future. So, if two users scored content similarly, other content rated highly
     by one user is likely to be enjoyed by the other user. Thus, that content can be recommended
     to the second user (see Figure 3). One of the limitations of collaborative filtering recommender
     systems is papu/ar/.fy b/.as, where popular content is recommended too frequently.

                            Figure 3: An example of collaborative filtering

                                      Content viewed by both users




                                       /ill\
                                ®+Similarusers+®

                                       \EiE/
                                        Viewed by one user and
                                      recommended to another user

     Collaborative filtering can use different algorithms to recommend new content. Two types of
65   algor'ithm that can be used are k-nearest neighbour (k-NN) ancl matrix factorization.




                                                                                                  Turn over
                                                                         -6-                                                5523-7001


     K-nearest neighbour (k-NN)

     The k-NN algorithm uses feature similarity to predict the values of any new or missing data.
     This means that new data points are assigned a value based on how closely they resemble
     other data points in the training set.


70    The k-NN algorithm makes its predictic>ns based on the nearest neighbours. The "k" aspect of
     this algorithm represents the number of neighbours and is simply a hyperparamefer that can
     be adjusted using a trial-and-error approach.

     Matrix factorization

     Matrix factorization is an alternative to the k-NN algorithm. The difficulty with using standard
75   matrix factorization approaches for recommender systems is that the dataset is not complete.
     To overcome this limitation, values need to be estimated for the smaller matrices using an
     iterative algorithm.


     In Figure 4, the user-item interaction matrix represents each user's rating (rows) of each content
     item (columns). User 1, represented by US1, has rated the first three Items but has not rated item
80    4 or item 5, represented by lT4 and lT5.

                                        Figure 4: User-item interaction matrix

                                                            Item

                        lT1          lT2                    lT3    lT4        lT5

               US1          3           2                    3
                                                                          zjfffz?7arlarfffff2ife




               US2      A-(aei          2                    2     2

               US3          3           4                          4              2
                                                                    as

               US4          2           2                    4                     1

                                 •,ff!ke».^x*>ffif/i::2;2

               US5          2                                3     2               1               Key:

               uS6                                           3      1              1                      Unknown content
                                        See,%




     Matrix factonzation works by decomposing the large user+tern interaction matrix into two smaller
     matrices-an item-feature matrix and a user-feature matrix-to capture the most important
     features required for learning. If the values in the item-feature matrix and the user-feature matrix
     are changed, the corresponding values in the user-Item interaction matrix will also change
85    (seeFigure5).
                                                     -7-                                            5523-7001


                                         Figure 5: Matrix factorization


                                               Item-feature matrix

                                                           Item

                                             IT1    lT2     lT3    lT4     lT5

                                   F1        1.2    3.1     2.1    4.5     0.7

                                   F2       2.6     1.5     4.4    0.4     1.1




                 User-feature matrix                      User-item interaction matrix

                            Feature                                        Item

                           F1      F2                       lT1    lT2     IT3     lT4     lT5

                  US1      0.3     0.7             US1     2.18   1.98    3.71     1.63   0.98

                  US2      0.3     0.4             US2      1.4   1.53    2.39     1.51   0.65

                  US3      0.7     0.8             US3     2.92   3.37    4.99    3.47     1.37


                  US4      0.4     0.6             US4     2.04   2.14    3.48    2.04     0.94

                  US5      0.7     0.4             US5     1.88   2.77     3.23   3.31     0.93

                  US6      0,1     0.6             US6     1.68   1.21    2.85    0.69     0.73


      The matrices are tuned by generating predicted preferences for content where actual preference
      data already exists. Once the prediction values approach the actual rating, the assumption is that
      the matrices will be able to effectively predict preferences for which no actual data exists.

      A process called sfochasf/'c grad/'enf descent uses a cost funcft.on to adjust each cell by making a
90    small change to the Item-feature and user-feature matrices. For example, in Figure 4, the value
      in the Usl and lTl intersecting cell is 3, but in Figure 5 this value is 2.18. So, the error for this
      cell is (3 -2.18)2, or 0.6724.


      Training recommender systems

      A recommender system can be evaluated using train/test splits. The ratings data is split into
95     a training set and a testing set. A commonly used split is when 80 0/a of the data is assigned to
      the training set and the other 20 % to the testing set.

      A recommender system learns the relationships between items and the relationships between
      users. Once trained, it makes predictions about how a user might rate an item that they haven't
      rated yet.

100    A common problem of training a machine learning algorithm is overfff/.ng, where the model fits too
      closely to the training dataset. When the model trains for too long on the training data, or when the
      model is too complex, it can start to learn the Irrelevant features within the dataset. Consequently,
      the model fails to generalize effectively against new data.




                                                                                                    Turn over
                                                    -8-                                              5523-7001



      Evaluating recommender systems

105    Recommender system accuracy can be evaluated through two different measures: mean abso/ufe
      emor (MAE) and root-mean-square error (RMSE). These measures give an indication of how the
      recommender systems perform on training/test data.

      However, the effectiveness Of a recommender system is not fully known until it has been used by
      the public. A recommender system is not performing well if it fails to recommend content the user
110    would like or recommends content that they do not like.

      Prec/s/.on and reca// are performance metrics used on live data. Precision is a measure of
      exactness, the fraction of relevant instances among the retrieved instances. Recall is a measure
      of completeness. The F-measure provides a single score that balances the cc)ncerns of precision
      and recall.

115    The way that recommendations are displayed to users is also important. A list might be sufficient,
      or it may be possible to select recommended content by groups or subgroups. These groups might
      be organized by genre, gender, age or any number of possible categories.


      Social and ethical concerns
      When building a model from users' behaviour, two types of behav/.oura/ c/afa can be used: explicit
120   data and implicitdata.


      Explicit behavioural data refers to data gathered from users' submitted data, such as when a user
      rates a video clip, enters their preference, or searches for an item. Users may believe this is the
      only data that is used to make recommendations.

      Implicit behavioural data refers to data that the user is not aware is being collected. This might
125    include click data, purchase data, or even the use of a key logger.

      The quality of user data is critical to the success of the Ivexfsfar project, but there are ethical
      concerns about the collection, storage and use of behavioural data. Ivexfsfar also needs to
      consider .i+s users' right to anonymity and right to privacy.


      Challenges faced
130    To help your friends with their new business venture, there are a number of challenges that you
      need to research:
      • Understanding the similarities and differences between supervised learning, unsupervised
          learning and reinforcement learning.
      •   understanding how the k-NN algorithm and matrix factorization can be used within
135        recommender systems.
      •   Understanding how to train, test and evaluate a recommender system.
      •   Comparing content-based filtering and collaborative filtering recommender systems.
      •   Understanding the ethical concerns linked to the collection, storage and use Of users'
          behavioural data.



Candidates are not required to know the mathematical equations relating to recommender systems.
                                                              -9-                                                        5523-7001



Additional terminology
Behavioural data
Cloud delivery models:
     Infrastructure as a service (laas)
      Platform as a service (Paas)
      Software as a service (Saas)
Cloud deployment models
Collaborative filtering
Content-based filtering
Cost function
F-measure
Hyperparameter
K-nearest neighbour (k-NN) algorithm
Matrix factorization
Mean absolute error (MAE)
Overfitting
Popularity bias
Precision
Recall
Reinforcement learning
Right to anonymity
Right to privacy
Root-mean-square error (RMSE)
Stochastic gradient descent
Training data



Some companies, products, or individuals named in this case study are fictitious and any
similarities with actual entities are purely coincidental.




Disclaimer:

Content used in 18 assessments is taken from authentic, third-party sources The views expressed within them belong to their
individual authors and/or publishers and do not necessarily reflect the views of the 18.


References:

Figure 1        Jctnes, M. T., 2017. Mode/s for machi.ne /earring. [online] Available at. https://cleveloper Ibm.com/articles/cc-
              models-machine-learning/ [Accessed 15 October 2021 I. souRCE ADAPTED.
