N20/2/LATIN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                         Markscheme


                         November 2020


                                  Latin


                               Higher level


                                 Paper 1




6 pages
                                           –2–                  N20/2/LATIN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de
tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris,
sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de
tutorat ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement
supérieur, des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes
d’études, des gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des
développeurs d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la
procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse suivante :
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios
de apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores
de aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u
ofrezcan recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este
enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia:
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.
                                                   –3–                   N20/2/LATIN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The translation is assessed in its basic units of clause and sentence. To this end, the original text is
chunked in a fixed number of sections (or “sense units”), 15 at SL and 30 at HL. Every section is awarded
two separate marks according to the two descriptors outlined below.

Each section is awarded 0 to 3 marks for descriptor A (Meaning) and 0 to 3 marks for descriptor B
(Vocabulary & Grammar).

The range of marks for each section is therefore 0 to 6, while the maximum number of marks for the
whole text is 180 at HL (30 sections ´ 6 marks).

Criterion A (Meaning) assesses how well the meaning of each sense unit has been communicated.

Criterion B (Vocabulary & Grammar) assesses how correctly vocabulary and grammar have been
rendered in relation to each sense unit. The term ‘grammar’ here includes syntax and accidence.

As a guideline, criterion A tends to look at the translation as a whole (eg stylistic, literal and idiomatic
meanings conveyed), while criterion B tends to assess the conformity of the single section with the
original text (eg grammatical accuracy of translation, apparent understanding of source language syntax
and vocabulary).

While it may not always be possible to give the full range of marks for a single sense unit, the range of
marks necessary for differentiation is present over the whole exam.

By way of example, the marking of different translations of the sense unit omnia tela totius accusationis in
Oppianicum coniciebantur, found in an Ovid passage (HL specimen papers), would be as follows:
• “The entire force of the whole accusation was hurled against Oppianicus”: A=3, B=3.
• “The strength of the accusation was fully directed against Oppianicus”: A=3, B=2 (grammar is
   rendered adequately despite inaccuracies).
• “The weapons of the accuser were hurled against Oppianicus”: A=2 (the meaning has been partially
   communicated; errors impair the translation), B=2 (grammar is rendered adequately
   despite inaccuracies).
• “Every bit of the accusation was aimed into Oppianicus”: A=2 (the meaning has been partially
   communicated), B=1 (limited grammar is rendered accurately).
• “The attack of the accusation was focused intently on Oppianicus”: A=1 (the translation conveys
   some meaning), B=1 (little grammar is rendered appropriately).

Square brackets [ ] indicate that the words in the sense unit have been inserted out of the order of the
text.
                                           –4–                   N20/2/LATIN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



                                       (A) Meaning

      How well has the student communicated the meaning of each sense unit?

Marks                                         Level descriptors

  0         The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.


            The meaning has not been communicated adequately.
  1
            The translation conveys some meaning; errors impair the translation significantly.


            The meaning has been partially communicated.
  2
            The translation is mostly logical; errors impair the translation.

            The meaning has been fully communicated.
  3
            The translation is logical; errors do not impair the translation.



                              (B) Vocabulary & Grammar

How correctly has the student rendered vocabulary and grammar in relation to each
                                   sense unit?

Marks                                         Level descriptors

  0         The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

            Vocabulary and grammar are not rendered adequately.
  1         Limited vocabulary is rendered appropriately for the context.
            Limited grammar is rendered accurately.

            Vocabulary and grammar are rendered adequately despite inaccuracies.
  2         Some vocabulary is rendered appropriately for the context.
            Some grammar is rendered accurately and effectively.

            Vocabulary and grammar are rendered correctly.
  3         Most vocabulary is rendered appropriately for the context.
            Most grammar is rendered accurately and effectively.
                                                   –5–   N20/2/LATIN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Text 1                                                                      A         B
1.   tendit ad vos virgo Vestalis manus supplices
2.      easdem quas … tendere consuevit
3.      pro vobis dis immortalibus
4.      cavete ne periculosum superbumque sit
5.      vos … repudiare
6.      eius … obsecrationem
7.      cuius preces si di aspernarentur
8.      haec salva esse non possent
9.      videtisne subito, iudices, virum fortissimum,
10.     M. Fonteium … lacrimas profudisse
11.     parentis et sororis commemoratione
12.     qui numquam in acie pertimuerit
13.     qui se armatus saepe … immiserit
14.     in hostium manum multitudinemque
15.     cum … arbitraretur
16.     … in eius modi periculis
17.     eadem se solacia suis relinquere
18.     quae suus pater sibi reliquisset
19.     idem nunc … pertimescit
20.     conturbato animo
21.     ne non modo … non sit suis
22.     ornamento et adiumento
23.     sed etiam … relinquat
24.     aeternum dedecus miseris atque ignominiam
25.     cum acerbissimo luctu
26.     o fortunam longe disparem, M. Fontei,
27.     si deligere potuisses
28.     ut potius … tibi … intereundum esset
29.     telis … Gallorum
30.     quam periuriis

                                                                           90         90
Total                                                                           180
                                                   –6–   N20/2/LATIN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Text 2                                                                      A         B
1.   inde ... vertuntur in Orphea
2.      cruentatis ... dextris
3.      et coeunt ut aves,
4.      si quando luce … cernunt
5.      vagantem noctis avem
6.      structoque utrimque theatro
7.      ceu … cervus periturus
8.      praeda canum est
9.      matutina harena
10.     vatemque petunt
11.     et fronde virentes coniciunt thyrsos
12.     non haec in munera factos
13.     hae glaebas [torquent]
14.     illae direptos arbore ramos [torquent]
15.     pars torquent silices
16.     neu desint tela furori
17.     forte boves presso subigebant vomere terram
18.     nec procul hinc multo fructum sudore parantes
19.     dura lacertosi fodiebant arva coloni
20.     agmine qui viso fugiunt
21.     operisque relinquunt arma sui
22.     vacuosque iacent dispersa per agros
23.     sarculaque rastrique graves longique ligones
24.     quae postquam rapuere ferae
25.     cornuque minaces divulsere boves
26.     ad vatis fata recurrunt
27.     tendentemque manus
28.     et ... inrita dicentem
29.     in illo tempore primum
30.     sacrilegae perimunt

                                                                           90         90
Total                                                                           180
