

Business management

Higher and standard level



Specimen papers 1 and 2




For first examinations in 2016
                             CONTENTS

Business management higher level paper 1 specimen question paper


Business management higher level paper 1 specimen markscheme


Business management higher level paper 2 specimen question paper


Business management higher level paper 2 specimen markscheme


Business management standard level paper 1 specimen question paper


Business management standard level paper 1 specimen markscheme


Business management standard level paper 2 specimen question paper


Business management standard level paper 2 specimen markscheme


Business management specimen case study
SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




BUSINESS MANAGEMENT
HIGHER LEVEL
PAPER 1

SPECIMEN PAPER

2 hours 15 minutes


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

   Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
   A clean copy of the Business Management case study is required for this examination paper.
   Read the case study carefully.
   A clean copy of the Business Management formulae sheet is required for this examination paper.
   Section A: answer two questions.
   Section B: answer question 4.
   Section C: answer question 5.
   A calculator is required for this examination paper.
   The maximum mark for this examination paper is [60 marks].




                                                                                                     7 pages
                                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2013
                                                 –2–                SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                             SECTION A

Answer two questions from this section.

1.   (a)   With reference to B-Pharma, describe two ways in which corporate social
           responsibility (CSR) could be important.                                           [4 marks]

     (b)   Apply the Boston Consulting Group (BCG) matrix to B-Pharma’s product
           portfolio.                                                                         [6 marks]


2.   (a)   With reference to B-Pharma, outline two key features of operating as a public
           limited company.                                                                   [4 marks]

     (b)   Explain the importance of branding for B-Pharma.                                   [6 marks]


3.   (a)   Describe two benefits for B-Pharma of a cost-plus (mark-up) pricing strategy for
           its drugs.                                                                         [4 marks]

     (b)   Analyse the effectiveness of Susan James’ leadership style at the Canadian
           subsidiary of B-Pharma.                                                            [6 marks]
  –3–        SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




Blank Page




                                Turn over
                                                     –4–                SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                              SECTION B

Answer the following question.

4.   Suzuko Tanaka now has more financial information for the USA subsidiary of B-Pharma:

                                                        2013             2014
                           Cash                         $50m             $40m
                           Creditors                   $800m            $850m
                           Debtors                     $350m            $410m
                           Short term loans            $200m            $400m
                           Stock                       $360m            $375m

                           Ratios:
                           Current ratio                   0.76          0.66
                           Acid test (quick) ratio         0.40          0.36

     She is concerned with the changes in the subsidiary’s liquidity.

     In addition the Board of Directors at B-Pharma are considering strategic Option 2 for future growth:

     Market penetration in China

     Likely overall cost: $50 million.

     In China, B-Pharma supplies private clinics, hospitals and a small consumer segment. Option 2 is to
     penetrate further the large Chinese market. Production for this market would be outsourced to Chinese
     manufacturers that use flow production in the most up-to-date facilities. This contrasts with batch
     production used at B-Pharma. There is rapid economic development in the region and increasing life
     expectancy in China. Marketing the drugs in China will be achieved through franchising. However
     some directors are concerned that:
     • some local businesses may illegally copy some of B-Pharma’s products
     • delegation of quality control to the Chinese manufacturers may mean quality will be difficult to
        manage
     • cultural differences between China and Japan could negatively impact on the implementation of
        this option.

     (a)   Define the term franchising.                                                          [2 marks]

     (b)   Explain one advantage and one disadvantage to B-Pharma of using batch
           production in the production of pharmaceuticals.                                      [4 marks]




                                                            (This question continues on the following page)
                                                –5–               SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

(Question 4 continued)

     (c)   If B-Pharma implements Option 2 (market penetration in China), explain one
           advantage and one disadvantage to B-Pharma of outsourcing.                       [4 marks]

     (d)   Using the financial information for 2011 to 2014 (Appendix 1 and table on
           page 4), discuss two strategies to improve liquidity at the USA subsidiary of
           B-Pharma.                                                                       [10 marks]




                                                                                           Turn over
                                                   –6–              SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                              SECTION C

Answer the following question.

5.   The Board of Directors at B-Pharma are now exploring the other two strategic options:

     Option 1: Market development in Europe

     Likely overall cost: $100 million.

     To gain productive capacity and a network of distribution channels in Europe, B-Pharma could enter
     this market through hostile takeover of several European companies. The businesses could be bought
     cheaply.

     However, to achieve synergies, some obstacles must be overcome:
     • the plants available for acquisition need modernizing. As a result they could benefit from factories
       latest total quality management (TQM) methods
     • European workers expect empowerment and are likely to resist any attempts at restructuring
     • European workers are concerned about B-Pharma’s reputation after hearing about the animal
       testing scandal.


     Option 3: Diversification of the product portfolio

     Likely overall cost: $120 million.

     Some directors think that the company could be seen as more ethical if they made products to improve
     animal welfare. B-Pharma could produce a range of drugs for animals to be sold to vets. This huge
     and growing market around the world is very competitive and for B-Pharma has several risks. This
     market is completely new to B-Pharma so a joint venture with an experienced Japanese company has
     been suggested. B-Pharma is considering a new brand name.

     The two options are summarized on the decision tree below:

                                     Probability         Forecast revenue

                Option 1            Successful 0.9             $220m
                 $100m            Not successful 0.1            $30m



                                                                                             Predicted
                                                                                  Option
                                                                                             outcome
                                    Successful 0.3             $800m                  1       $101m
                Option 3
                                                                                      3         ??
                 $120m            Not successful 0.7            $40m

                                                          (This question continues on the following page)
                                                  –7–               SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

(Question 5 continued)

     Using quantitative and qualitative data from the case study and the additional stimulus
     above, recommend which option 1 or 3 is best for achieving B-Pharma’s objective of
     growth.

     You will find it useful to calculate the predicted outcome for Option 3 in the above
     decision tree.                                                                            [20 marks]
SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                  MARKSCHEME


                   SPECIMEN PAPER



            BUSINESS MANAGEMENT



                        Higher Level



                            Paper 1




14 pages
                                              –2–           SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

The markbands and assessment criteria on pages 2–5 should be used where indicated in
the markscheme.

       Section A                               Level descriptor
        Part (b)

        Marks

          0        The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

         1–2        Little knowledge and understanding of relevant issues and business
                     management tools (where applicable), techniques and theories.
                    Little use of business management terminology.
                    Little reference to the stimulus material.

         3–4        A description or partial analysis of some relevant issues with some use
                     of business management tools (where applicable), techniques and
                     theories.
                    Some use of appropriate terminology.
                    Some reference to the stimulus material that goes beyond the name of a
                     person(s) and/or the name of the organization.
                    At the lower end of the markband, responses are mainly theoretical.

         5–6        An analysis of the relevant issues with good use of business
                     management tools (where applicable), techniques and theories.
                    Use of appropriate terminology throughout the response.
                    Effective use of the stimulus material.
                                       –3–           SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Section B                               Level descriptor
 Part (d)

 Marks

   0        The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

  1–2        Little understanding of the demands of the question.
             Few business management tools (where applicable), techniques and
              theories are explained or applied, and business management
              terminology is lacking.
             Little reference to the stimulus material.

  3–4        Some understanding of the demands of the question.
             Some relevant business management tools (where applicable),
              techniques and theories are explained or applied, and some appropriate
              terminology is used.
             Some reference to the stimulus material but often not going beyond the
              name of a person(s) and/or the name of the organization.

  5–6        Understanding of most of the demands of the question.
             Relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques
              and theories are explained and applied, and appropriate terminology is
              used most of the time.
             Some reference to the stimulus material that goes beyond the name of a
              person(s) and/or the name of the organization.
             Some evidence of a balanced response.
             Some judgments are relevant but not substantiated.

  7–8        Good understanding of the demands of the question.
             Relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques
              and theories are explained and applied well, and appropriate
              terminology is used.
             Good reference to the stimulus material.
             Good evidence of a balanced response.
             The judgments are relevant but not always well substantiated.

  9–10       Good understanding of the demands of the question, including
              implications, where relevant.
             Relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques
              and theories are explained clearly and applied purposefully, and
              appropriate terminology is used throughout the response.
             Effective use of the stimulus material in a way that significantly
              strengthens the response.
             Evidence of balance is consistent throughout the response.
             The judgments are relevant and well substantiated.
                                                  –4–            SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

Section C, question 5

Criterion A: Knowledge and understanding of tools, techniques and theories
This criterion addresses the extent to which the candidate demonstrates knowledge and understanding of
relevant business management tools, techniques and theories, as stated and/or implied by the question.
This includes using appropriate business management terminology.

      Marks    Level descriptor
       0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
       1       Superficial knowledge of relevant tools, techniques and theory is demonstrated.
       2       Satisfactory knowledge and understanding of relevant tools, techniques or theories
               is demonstrated.
        3      Good knowledge and understanding of relevant tools, techniques and theories is
               generally demonstrated, though the explanation may lack some depth or breadth.
        4      Good knowledge and understanding of relevant tools, techniques or theories is
               demonstrated.


Criterion B: Application
This criterion addresses the extent to which the candidate is able to apply the relevant business
management tools, techniques and theories to the case study organization.

      Marks Level descriptor
       0    The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
       1    The relevant business management tools, techniques and theories are connected to
            the case study organization, but this connection is inappropriate or superficial.
       2    The relevant business management tools, techniques and theories are appropriately
            connected to the case study organization, but this connection is not developed.
       3    The relevant business management tools, techniques and theories are generally well
            applied to explain the situation and issues of the case study organization, though the
            explanation may lack some depth or breadth. Examples are provided.
       4    The relevant business management tools, techniques and theories are well applied to
            explain the situation and issues of the case study organization. Examples are
            appropriate and illustrative.


Criterion C: Reasoned arguments
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate makes reasoned arguments. This includes
making relevant and balanced arguments by, for example, exploring different practices, weighing up their
strengths and weaknesses, comparing and contrasting them or considering their implications, depending
on the requirements of the question. It also includes justifying the arguments by presenting evidence for
the claims made.

      Marks    Level descriptor
       0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
       1       Statements are made but these are superficial.
       2       Relevant arguments are made but these are mostly unjustified.
       3       Relevant arguments are made and these are mostly justified.
       4       Relevant, balanced arguments are made and these are well justified.
                                                  –5–             SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

Criterion D: Structure
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate organizes his or her ideas with clarity, and
presents a structured piece of writing comprised of:

   an introduction
   a body
   a conclusion
   fit-for-purpose paragraphs.

       Marks Level descriptor
        0    The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
        1    Two or fewer of the structural elements are present, and few ideas are clearly
             organized.
        2    Three of the structural elements are present, or most ideas are clearly organized.
        3    Three or four of the structural elements are present, and most ideas are clearly
             organized.
        4    All of the structural elements are present, and ideas are clearly organized.


Criterion E: Individual and societies
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate is able to give balanced consideration to the
perspectives of a range of relevant stakeholders, including individuals and groups internal and external to
the organization.

       Marks    Level descriptor
        0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
        1       One individual or group perspective is considered superficially or inappropriately.
        2       One relevant individual or group perspective is considered appropriately, or two
                relevant individual or group perspectives are considered superficially or
                inappropriately.
          3     At least two relevant individual or group perspectives are considered appropriately.
          4     Balanced consideration is given to relevant individual and group perspectives.
                                                 –6–           SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

                                               SECTION A

1.   (a)   With reference to B-Pharma, describe two ways in which corporate social
           responsibility (CSR) could be important.                                [4 marks]

           Customers need confidence in B-Pharma drugs, and image is important for trust.
           Some of B-Pharma’s past unethical behaviour has damaged its image; CSR
           should limit unethical behaviour and could strengthen B-Pharma’s brand image.
            CSR could include banning testing on animals, which would reduce negative
              publicity.
            For some investors and shareholders, B-Pharma’s CSR may be a very
              important factor to decide to invest in B-Pharma, as opposed to other
              companies.
            For some other stakeholders, such as new employees, researchers and
              scientists, it may be very important to work for a company that takes CSR and
              business ethics seriously, especially in the pharmaceutical industry which is
              sometimes seen as controversial.
            As business ethics is increasingly important in society, B-Pharma may want to
              plan for the long-term and consider its image in 2050 as the most ethical
              pharmaceutical company in the industry.

           Accept any other relevant answer.

           Mark as 2+2.

           Award [1 mark] for each way identified and [1 mark] for a description of that
           way in the context of B-Pharma. Award up to a maximum of [2 marks].
                                                         –7–   SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(b)   Apply the Boston Consulting Group (BCG) matrix to B-Pharma’s product
      portfolio.                                                           [6 marks]

      The BCG matrix distinguishes between four types of products according to their
      market share and the growth rate of the market in which they are sold.

                                      Relative market share
                                       High           Low
         Market growth rate

                              High




                                                   Question
                                       Stars        marks
                              Low




                                     Cash cows       Dogs



      B-Pharma’s product portfolio lends itself well to a BCG matrix and the following
      applications are possible:
       Pharmax is a cash cow: it has a well-established, high market share of “around
        one-third of the market [for painkillers] in Japan and the USA” (lines 21–22) in
        a market which is “growing very slowly” (line 23)
       Pharmaflo is a star: launched less than ten years ago, it already has a
        15 % share in a market that is still growing rapidly (lines 26–27)
       Pharmaslim is a question mark: “the market […] is growing rapidly” though
        sales are poor (lines 28–29).

      Accept any other relevant application eg about Pharmatics.

      Award a maximum of [2 marks] if the matrix is only drawn/described with no
      application. Award a maximum of [4 marks] if the matrix is correctly applied but
      with no explanation / justification.

      Award [6 marks] if the matrix is correctly applied and explained in relation to the
      situation facing B-Pharma.

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 2.
                                                    –8–        SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

2.   (a)   With reference to B-Pharma, outline two key features of operating as a public
           limited company.                                                              [4 marks]

           Key features include the following points:
            B-Pharma sells its shares to the general public, so anyone can be an investor
             and have part ownership of the company
            B-Pharma has access to large capital markets and is thereby able to raise more
             funds
            B-Pharma’s accounts must be audited and released to the public (they are
             public information)
            B-Pharma may be vulnerable to takeover bids; its value may also be very
             dependent upon stock exchange fluctuations
            any other relevant feature.

           Mark as 2+2.

           Award [1 mark] for each correct key feature identified, and [1 mark] for the
           development of each of these key features in the context of B-Pharma, up to a
           maximum of [2 marks].

     (b)   Explain the importance of branding for B-Pharma.                                    [6 marks]

           Relevant issues include:
            it is a multinational in a variety of markets
            it has a wide range of branded products
            it has attracted brand loyalty
            the brand is well known for quality and safety – important for pharmaceuticals
            there is competition from cheaper, generic drugs so it is important that
             branding works.
           But:
            B-Pharma operates in many countries for which a pharmaceutical brand may
             not universally appeal
            it seems to contradict the existence of subsidiaries – they may well want to
             develop their own brands
            it may ignore local cultures and languages, for example for the names of drugs.

           Accept any other relevant explanation.

           Award a maximum of [2 marks] if branding issues are explained with no
           application.
           Award a maximum of [4 marks] if the response lacks depth in the explanation.
           Award [6 marks] if the explanation has depth and is applied.

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 2.
                                                 –9–            SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   (a)   Describe two benefits for B-Pharma of a cost-plus (mark-up) pricing strategy
           for its drugs.                                                               [4 marks]

           Benefits of a cost-plus (mark-up) pricing strategy for B-Pharma include the
           following:
            it is a relatively easy method, but costs may be difficult to identify (eg past
              R&D)
            it can help ensure a profit is made (by ensuring break-even)
            it is essential since past R&D costs must be recovered
            it allows for a “desired” profit margin
            it is the standard practice in many industries including pharmaceuticals.

           Accept any other relevant benefit.

           Mark as 2+2.

           Award [1 mark] for each valid benefit identified and [1 mark] for a description of
           each benefit identified up to a maximum of [2 marks].

     (b)   Analyse the effectiveness of Susan James’ leadership style at the Canadian
           subsidiary of B-Pharma.                                                    [6 marks]

           Susan’s leadership style can be defined as autocratic, as she tends to impose her
           decisions without listening to employees’ requests and desires: she has “rejected
           requests for greater empowerment” (line 46), and she seems unable to
           communicate with employees (line 49).

           The style may seem ineffective, as it is exacerbating the tensions between
           employees and management (threats of strike action (line 47)). This is rather the
           view from the employees who are unhappy with Susan’s leadership style.

           The style may be effective, as strict measures must be implemented in order to
           redress the productivity problems (“the Canadian subsidiary has recently suffered
           lower levels of productivity compared to other B-Pharma subsidiaries” (lines 42–
           43)).    Only an autocratic leadership style may result in productivity
           improvements. This is rather the view from Yukio and the directors at the B-
           Pharma headquarters, which is why they appointed Susan.

           Accept any other relevant analysis.

           Award a maximum of [2 marks] if leadership issues are analysed with no
           application.
           Award a maximum of [4 marks] if the response lacks depth in the analysis.
           Award [6 marks] if the analysis has depth and is applied.

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 2.
                                                 – 10 –          SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

                                             SECTION B

4.   (a)   Define the term franchising.                                                         [2 marks]

           Franchising is the method of external growth whereby a business is allowed to use
           an existing business model (eg brand or production methods) in return for paying
           rights / royalties and following strict conditions.

           Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

           Award [2 marks] for a definition that demonstrates clear understanding.
           Award [1 marks] for a definition that only demonstrates partial understanding.

     (b)   Explain one advantage and one disadvantage to B-Pharma of using batch
           production in the production of pharmaceuticals.                                     [4 marks]

           Advantages of using batch production in the production of pharmaceuticals
           include:
            it suits the production of differentiated drugs, for example the size of tablets
            it enables batch sizes to meet the demand for particular drugs
            it is a standard method of production in the industry
            B-Pharma has a wide range of drugs, so flow production may not be
              appropriate
            the quality is easier to manage, which is essential for drugs.

           Disadvantages of using batch production in the production of pharmaceuticals
           include:
            it may miss opportunities for economies of scale
            it is less flexible than other methods
            it may involve higher stock holding costs, which may be a problem for drugs
              which can go out of date.

           Accept any other relevant advantage / disadvantage.

           Mark as 2+2.

           Award [1 mark] for a relevant advantage / disadvantage identified, award an
           additional [1 mark] for a relevant explanation of that advantage / disadvantage in
           the context of B-Pharma. Up to a maximum of [2 marks].
                                             – 11 –          SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(c)   If B-Pharma implements Option 2 (market penetration in China), explain one
      advantage and one disadvantage to B-Pharma of outsourcing.                 [4 marks]

      Possible advantages of outsourcing include:
       no need for investment in China
       third party may do a better job as they focus on it (specialization)
       there may be lower costs.

      Possible disadvantages of outsourcing include:
       quality control can become an issue
       it may be difficult to prevent illegal copying.

      Accept any other relevant advantage / disadvantage.

      Mark as 2+2.

      Award [1 mark] for a relevant advantage / disadvantage identified, award an
      additional [1 mark] for a relevant explanation of that advantage / disadvantage in
      the context of B-Pharma. Up to a maximum of [2 marks].
                                           – 12 –          SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(d)   Using the financial information for 2011 to 2014 (Appendix 1 and table on
      page 4), discuss two strategies to improve liquidity at the USA subsidiary of
      B-Pharma.                                                                     [10 marks]

      Liquidity is clearly worse.

      Current ratio declined from 1.5 (generally regarded as an ideal level) to 0.66.
      Very high risk of liquidity problems.
      Acid test (quick) ratio declined from 1 (again an ideal level) to 0.36.

      Looking at individual items:
       Clearly a worry with creditors going unpaid. They may demand their money
        back once they realise there is a problem.
       B-Pharma seems to be borrowing to get out of the problem. Bad strategy as
        banks may demand their money and short-term borrowing is usually expensive
       Stock has grown a lot. Is this because of increased sales? If so, may not be
        such a problem, but more likely it is because of poor management.
       Debtors has more than doubled. Poor credit management. Who are the
        debtors? Individuals or businesses?

      Strategies include:
       Improved stock control. Maybe be good because drugs often have a short
         “shelf life”. Production is managed locally so this could be feasible.
       Better credit management. Who are the debtors? Why are they not paying?
         What credit controls are there?
       Debt factoring. A quick source of finance, good but expensive. This may have
         an impact on the current levels of liquidity, but does not solve the underlying
         problems.
       Borrow or getting more credit does not solve the problem.
       Sell more – but not an instant solution and may well increase liquidity.

      Purely theoretical answer, or no effective use of case study material award a
      maximum of [4 marks].
      Only one strategy considered in context award a maximum of [5 marks].
      Two strategies considered, but limited use of data award a maximum of
      [6 marks].
      Two strategies considered, good use of data, but limited discussion award a
      maximum of [8 marks].
      For full marks, data used effectively, two strategies considered and discussed.

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                 – 13 –          SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

                                             SECTION C

5.   Using quantitative and qualitative data from the case study and the additional
     stimulus above, recommend which option 1 or 3 is best for achieving B-Pharma’s
     objective of growth.

     You will find it useful to calculate the predicted outcome for Option 3 in the above
     decision tree.                                                                      [20 marks]

     Option 1:
      overall cost less than option 3
      lower predicted outcome than option 3 ($101 million rather than $148 million)
      lower risk of failure than other option
      so purely on decision tree, not the best, unless risk is the major factor
      would hostile takeover work?
      businesses could be bought cheaply, may give long term benefit
      businesses would have local market knowledge
      risk spread among several firms
      also markets more similar to their traditional markets.
     However:
      costs of modernizing
      workforce issues.

     Option 3:
      by far the highest predicted outcome, but risks very high and highest cost
      may help to appear more ethical
      huge and growing market worldwide.
     However:
      cost of failure is the highest
      would joint venture work?
      new to this market.

     Decision largely depends on B-Pharma’s attitude to risk. There is no market research
     on which to base the decision.

     Accept any other relevant substantiation.

     Marks should be allocated according to the assessment criteria on pages 4–5.

     The text below gives additional guidance for when applying the assessment criteria.

     Criterion A: Knowledge areas could include: risk, decision trees and predicted
     outcomes, Ansoff matrix, diversification, market development, takeovers, joint
     ventures, strategic decision making. No understanding of decision trees / predicted
     outcomes, award a maximum of [3 marks].

     Criterion B: Application will be judged by the use of the stimulus material in particular
     the extra material. If only one option considered, award a maximum of [2 marks].

     Criterion C: For full marks, there needs to be a balanced comparison between the two
     options. If no comparison but analysis of one option, award a maximum of [2 marks].
                                        – 14 –         SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion D: see criterion.

Criterion E: Likely issues include: impact on workers, views of the shareholders /
management, other stakeholders.

Note – a recommendation that a decision cannot be made due to lack of information
(eg market research) can be regarded as a decision provided the arguments are
supported.
SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX




BUSINESS MANAGEMENT
HIGHER LEVEL
PAPER 2

SPECIMEN PAPER

2 hours 15 minutes


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

   Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
   A clean copy of the Business Management formulae sheet is required for this examination paper.
   Section A: answer one question.
   Section B: answer two questions.
   Section C: answer one question.
   A calculator is required for this examination paper.
   The maximum mark for this examination paper is [70 marks].




                                                                                                     8 pages
                                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2013
                                                             –2–                       SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                                        SECTION A

Answer one question from this section.

1.   Safe Passage (SP)

     Trent Peters is one of seven partners at Safe Passage (SP). It provides bodyguard* services to
     film stars, politicians and other important people in Europe and the Americas. With increasing income
     levels and greater wealth, Asia has become a potential market opportunity and Trent has been tasked
     with developing the workforce planning.

     Trent has identified two options for the recruitment and training of bodyguards in Asia. These are:
      offshoring by setting up its own overseas branch in Asian country X or Y or Z
      outsourcing/subcontracting by using an external agency in Asian country X or Y or Z.

     The forecast costs and revenues of offshoring are given below (all figures in US$ millions):

      Option                                   Forecast costs Forecast revenue if Forecast revenue if
                                                                  successful        not successful

                                                                       Probability: 0.3        Probability: 0.7
      1. Offshore to country X                         1
         a) If there is a change of
            government                                                            4                   3
            (probability 0.2)
         b) If there is no change of
            government                                                            19                  2
            (probability 0.8)
      2. Offshore to country Y
         (no possibility of a change                   6                          21                  4
         of government)
      3. Offshore to country Z                         4
         a) If there is a change of
            government                                                            16                  4
            (probability 0.6)
         b) If there is no change of
            government                                                            12                  3
            (probability 0.4)


     (a)    Outline one feature of a partnership that would help SP as a business.                            [2 marks]

     (b)    Construct a fully labelled decision tree and calculate the predicted outcome of
            each offshoring option (show all your working). Identify the best option for SP.                  [8 marks]



     * bodyguard: a person who is responsible for protecting a person from harm
                                                  –3–              SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

2.   Dan Electro

     Dan Bowen is a sole trader who sells digital cameras directly to consumers. He owns an online
     business and all sales are processed electronically under the business name Dan Electro.

     Financial information for 2012 (all figures in US$)
      Fixed costs per year
      Rent                        20  000
      Marketing                     4000
      Administration                5000
      Interest payments             1000

     Variable costs per camera
     Camera                             135
     Transportation                      45
     Direct labour                       20

     Price per camera                   250

     Dan forecasts selling 700 cameras in 2012.


     (a)   Define the term variable costs.                                                   [2 marks]

     (b)   (i)    Construct a fully labelled break-even chart for Dan Electro for 2012.
                  Calculate and indicate the break-even point and the margin of safety and
                  calculate the forecasted profit from the sale of 700 cameras (show all
                  your working).                                                             [6 marks]

		         (ii)   Calculate the number of cameras Dan Electro must sell in order to double
                  the forecasted profit (show all your working).                             [2 marks]




                                                                                             Turn over
                                                               –4–                     SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                                          SECTION B

Answer two questions from this section.

3.   Hands

     Hands, a partnership set up in 1968 in southern Argentina, manufactures hand-knitted items such as
     sweaters, scarves, bags, carpets and blankets produced using the job production method. It employs
     around 300 craftswomen from the rural areas of Patagonia. Workers are paid on a piece rate basis.

     The business has faced several challenges over the years such as a lack of finance and economic
     recessions. Elizabeth Sosa, managing partner, said that Hands survival depended not only on
     the product, but also on the craftswomen’s loyalty to the business and the partners’ democratic
     leadership style. She said “our workers have developed a strong sense of belonging to Hands.
     We are a team, everyone’s opinion is heard”.

     The partners wanted Hands to enter into international markets. They consulted with the craftswomen
     several times over this idea. Reaching a consensus on the decision took a long time. For Hands to
     compete effectively in international markets, some craftswomen would have to be given managerial
     authority. Many craftswomen expressed concern over these proposed organizational changes.

     Despite fierce competition from hand-knitting companies in India, New Zealand and Uruguay,
     within two years Hands had entered both the American and European markets by using high
     quality raw material and quality control methods. It now supplies its products to well-known
     companies and designers such as Marc Jacobs, Donna Karan, and Polo Ralph Lauren. These new
     customers are outside the regional trading bloc* Mercosur, where Hands is located, requiring new
     distribution channels. Consequently, Hands’ working capital needs have increased.

                                  [Source: adapted from http://www.manos.com.uy, accessed 13 July 2010]



     (a)    Identify two features of quality control.                                                                      [2 marks]

     (b)    Explain one advantage and one disadvantage to Hands of using a piece rate
            rewards package for its workers.                                                                               [4 marks]

     (c)    Explain two challenges that Hands may have faced entering into international
            markets.                                                                                                       [4 marks]

     (d)    Evaluate the effectiveness of the democratic leadership style of the partners
            at Hands.                                                                                                     [10 marks]


     * regional trading bloc: a group of countries that restrict trade from non-member countries with mechanisms such as tariffs
                                                  –5–                 SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

4.   Maquinaria de la Oficina de Santiago, Ltda. (MOS)

     Maquinaria de la Oficina de Santiago, Ltda. (Office Machinery of Santiago Ltd., MOS) is a private
     limited company run by Maria Salazar, who in 2009 became Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the
     company after her father, Martino, retired. When Martino opened the business in 1959, he mainly
     sold typewriters. Now MOS sells the following for personal and small business use:
      modern mobile telephones (for example Apple iPhones)
      portable DVD players
      personal computers
      typewriters.

     Because of liquidity problems when she became CEO, Maria conducted a detailed analysis of sales
     and stock (inventory). She discovered the following:

                                                                                  Market      Estimated
                              % of % of                  % of Average
                                            Sales, 2011                           growth     MOS market
                              sales, sales,             stock, stock,
                                                in $                              rate, %,    share, %,
                              2009 2011                  2011 2011 in $
                                                                                    2011        2011
     Modern mobile
                                12     15      1  800  000      12     73  000        12           0.1
     telephones
     Portable DVD Players      30      34      4  080  000      31    188  000         2           2
     Personal computers        55      50      6  000  000      50    304  000         2           1
     Typewriters                3       1         120  000       7     43  000        –5          30
     Total                    100     100     12  000  000     100    608  000

     Maria concluded that MOS should stop selling typewriters, as they are at the end of their product
     life cycle. Reducing the stock of these items would release funds to help with the liquidity problem.
     The gross profit margin for the company on all products is 50 %, whereas for typewriters it is 60 %.

     Maria wants to modernize the image of MOS. She would like to change the name of the company
     to Electrónica Moderna de Santiago, Ltda. (Modern Electronics of Santiago Ltd.). Her father,
     a major shareholder in the company, dislikes the idea. He argues that too many loyal customers still
     use typewriters and that the company’s name is well-known in the Santiago business community.
     The legal and other costs of changing the name would use up all the funds released by the reduction
     in typewriter stock.



                                                             (This question continues on the following page)




                                                                                                 Turn over
                                                  –6–                SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

(Question 4 continued)

     (a)   Define the term product life cycle.                                          [2 marks]

     (b)   Calculate (show all your working):

		         (i)    the 2011 stock turnover in days at MOS.                               [2 marks]

		         (ii)   the 2011 stock turnover in days for typewriters.                      [2 marks]

  (c)      Analyse MOS’ product portfolio by applying the Boston Consulting Group
		         (BCG) matrix.                                                                [4 marks]

     (d)   Discuss Maria’s plans to stop selling typewriters and to change the name
           of MOS.                                                                     [10 marks]
                                                   –7–                SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

5.   Changing employment patterns and practices

     Following concerns about the falling level of motivation at work, the government has commissioned
     a report. The main conclusions are:
      employees are experiencing more stress at work and spend more time travelling to and from work
        than in previous years
      a majority of employees feel that job satisfaction is an important part of their life
      women see the number and pattern of hours of work as more important than the level of pay
      employees who are on long-term contracts are more committed to their work
      employees are more likely to leave their jobs if their employers have taken measures that create a
        fear of redundancy
      many office employees would like to make use of recent technological advances in order to work
        from home and to achieve a balance between their work and home life
      some employees, especially those in low paid jobs, seem to resist flexible work practices.

     Some employers have responded positively by introducing flexible work patterns and practices.
     After overcoming some resistance to change and enduring extra costs of implementing the new
     practices, some employers reported more organizational flexibility, an increase in employees
     commitment and, for some organizations, a higher level of profit.

     Some employers, however, do not like the idea of flexible work patterns and practices.


     (a)   Define the term redundancy.                                                            [2 marks]

     (b)   Explain two financial rewards that an organization can use to motivate employees.      [4 marks]

     (c)   Suggest two reasons why some employers do not like the idea of flexible work
           patterns and practices.                                                                [4 marks]

     (d)   With reference to two motivation theories, discuss the effects of the trend towards
           offering flexible work patterns and practices on employee motivation.                 [10 marks]




                                                                                                 Turn over
                                                 –8–               SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                             SECTION C

Answer one question from this section. The organizations featured in Sections A and B and in the Paper 1
case study may not be used as a basis to your answer.

6.   With reference to one or two organization(s) that you have studied, discuss how
     marketing strategies may differ in two cultures that you are familiar with.             [20 marks]

7.   With reference to one organization that you have studied, examine what changes
     globalization brings about in the management of human resources.                        [20 marks]

8.   With reference to one organization that you have studied, compare and contrast the
     importance of innovation and of ethics in product development.                          [20 marks]
SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                  MARKSCHEME


                   SPECIMEN PAPER



            BUSINESS MANAGEMENT



                        Higher Level



                            Paper 2




26 pages
                                             –2–            SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

The markbands and assessment criteria on pages 2–4 should be used where indicated in
the markscheme.

        Marks     Level descriptor

          0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

         1–2         Little understanding of the demands of the question.
                     Few business management tools (where applicable), techniques and
                      theories are explained or applied, and business management
                      terminology is lacking.
                     Little reference to the stimulus material.

         3–4         Some understanding of the demands of the question.
                     Some relevant business management tools (where applicable),
                      techniques and theories are explained or applied, and some appropriate
                      terminology is used.
                     Some reference to the stimulus material but often not going beyond the
                      name of a person(s) and/or the name of the organization.

         5–6         Understanding of most of the demands of the question.
                     Relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques
                      and theories are explained and applied, and appropriate terminology is
                      used most of the time.
                     Some reference to the stimulus material that goes beyond the name of
                      a person(s) and/or the name of the organization.
                     Some evidence of a balanced response.
                     Some judgments are relevant but not substantiated.

         7–8         Good understanding of the demands of the question.
                     Relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques
                      and theories are explained and applied well, and appropriate
                      terminology is used.
                     Good reference to the stimulus material.
                     Good evidence of a balanced response.
                     The judgments are relevant but not always well substantiated.

         9–10        Good understanding of the demands of the question, including
                      implications, where relevant.
                     Relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques
                      and theories are explained clearly and applied purposefully, and
                      appropriate terminology is used throughout the response.
                     Effective use of the stimulus material in a way that significantly
                      strengthens the response.
                     Evidence of balance is consistent throughout the response.
                     The judgments are relevant and well substantiated.
                                                  –3–             SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

Assessment criteria for Section C

Criterion A: Knowledge and conceptual understanding
This criterion addresses the extent to which the candidate demonstrates knowledge and
understanding of the given concepts and relevant business management content (theories,
techniques or tools, depending on the requirements of the question).

Marks Level descriptor
 0    The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
 1    Superficial knowledge of the given concepts is demonstrated. Business management
      content is not selected or the content selected is irrelevant.
 2    Satisfactory understanding of one or both of the given concepts is demonstrated.
      Some business management content selected is relevant. The relevant content is
      satisfactorily explained.
 3    Good understanding of one or both of the given concepts is demonstrated.
      The business management content selected is relevant, though it may not be
      sufficient. The relevant content is generally well explained, though the explanation
      may lack some depth or breadth.
 4    Good understanding of both of the given concepts is demonstrated. The business
      management content selected is relevant, sufficient and well explained.


Criterion B: Application
This criterion addresses the extent to which the candidate is able to apply the given concepts
and the relevant business management content (theories, techniques or tools, depending on the
requirements of the question) to his or her chosen real-world organization(s). The real-world
organization(s) must not be the organization featured in the prescribed case study for
paper 1.

Marks    Level descriptor
 0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
 1       The given concepts and/or any relevant business management content are connected
         to the real-world organization(s), but this connection is inappropriate or superficial.
   2     The given concepts and/or relevant business management content are connected
         appropriately to the real-world organization(s), but this connection is not developed.
   3     The given concepts and relevant business management content are generally well
         applied to explain the situation and issues of the real-world organization(s), though
         the explanation may lack some depth or breadth. Examples are provided.
   4     The given concepts and relevant business management content are well applied to
         explain the situation and issues of the real-world organization(s). Examples are
         appropriate and illustrative.
                                                   –4–            SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

Criterion C: Reasoned arguments
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate makes reasoned arguments. This
includes making relevant and balanced arguments by, for example, exploring different
practices, weighing up their strengths and weaknesses, comparing and contrasting them or
considering their implications, depending on the requirements of the question. It also includes
justifying the arguments by presenting reasonable evidence or other support for the claims
made.

Marks     Level descriptor
 0        The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
 1        Statements are made but these are superficial.
 2        Relevant arguments are made but these are mostly unjustified.
 3        Relevant arguments are made and these are mostly justified.
 4        Relevant, balanced arguments are made and these are well justified.


Criterion D: Structure
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate organizes his or her ideas with
clarity, and presents a structured piece of writing comprised of:

   an introduction
   a body
   a conclusion
   fit-for-purpose paragraphs.

Marks Level descriptor
 0    The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
 1    Two or fewer of the structural elements are present, and few ideas are clearly
      organized.
 2    Three of the structural elements are present, or most ideas are clearly organized.
 3    Three or four of the structural elements are present, and most ideas are clearly
      organized.
 4    All of the structural elements are present, and ideas are clearly organized.


Criterion E: Individuals and societies
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate is able to give balanced consideration
to the perspectives of a range of relevant stakeholders, including individuals and groups
internal and external to the organization.

Marks     Level descriptor
 0        The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
 1        One individual or group perspective is considered superficially or inappropriately.
 2        One relevant individual or group perspective is considered appropriately, or two
          relevant individual or group perspectives are considered superficially or
          inappropriately.
    3     At least two relevant individual or group perspectives are considered appropriately.
    4     Balanced consideration is given to relevant individual and group perspectives.
                                                 –5–               SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

                                             SECTION A

1.   (a)   Outline one feature of a partnership that would help SP as a business.       [2 marks]

           Features could include the following:
            up to 7 partners each specializing in an area or function
            limited or no requirement for published accounts depending on country of
             operation
            a written agreement / deed of partnership to be drawn to decide on
             responsibilities / profit and loss sharing / conflict resolution
            responsibilities are shared, implying collaboration in decision making.

           Accept any other relevant feature with a description.

           N.B.
            Features are attributes and are not advantages or disadvantages of this
             organizational form.
            Do not credit separately “the share of responsibility, profit and risk”
             (count as one answer).


           Mark as 1+1.

           Award [1 mark] for identifying an appropriate feature and [1 mark] for an
           appropriate outline of that feature with respect to SP up to a maximum of
           [2 marks].
                                           –6–            SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(b)   Construct a fully labelled decision tree and calculate the predicted outcome
      of each offshoring option (show all your working). Identify the best option
      for SP.                                                                      [8 marks]


                                                                                Forecast
                                                               Probability      revenue
                                                              Successful
                                                                                 US$4m
                                                                 0.3
                                            Change
                                                      a
                                             0.2
                                                               Not successful
                                                                                US$3m
                                                                 0.7
                       Option 1
                                      1
                       US$1m                                  Successful
                                              No                                 US$19m
                                                                 0.3
                                             change
                                                      b
                                              0.8
                                                              Not successful
                                                                                 US$2m
                                                                  0.7
                                                           Successful
                                                                                US$21m
                      Option 2                               0.3
                                             2
                      US$6m                                Not successful
                                                                                 US$4m
                                                             0.7
                                                               Successful
                                                                                US$16m
                                                                  0.3
                                            Change
                                                      a
                                             0.6
                                                               Not successful
                                                                                 US$4m
                      Option 3                                   0.7
                                      3
                       US$4m
                                                               Successful
                                              No                                 US$12m
                                                                  0.3
                                             change
                                                      b
            Key:                              0.4
                                                               Not successful    US$3m
                                                                 0.7
                    Decision node / decision point


                    Probability node / chance node


                    Rejected option
                                             –7–              SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

All predicted outcomes are in $US millions
Ev (1)   0.2  3.3   0.8  7.1  6.34  1.0  5.34
Ev 1(a)   0.3  4    0.7  3  1.2  2.1  3.3
Ev 1(b)   0.3 19    0.7  2   5.7  1.4  7.1
Ev (2)   0.3  21   0.7  4    6.3  2.8  6  3.1
Ev (3)   0.6  7.6   0.4  5.7    4.56  2.28  4  2.84
Ev 3(a)   0.3  16   0.7  4   4.8  2.8  7.6
Ev 3(b)   0.3  12    0.7  3  3.6  2.1  5.7

Country X (Option 1) is the best option.

Please note that candidates may represent the first branch off as “successful/not
successful” instead of “change/no change of government”. This is equally
acceptable as the decision tree shown above.

[0 marks]
The decision tree does not reach a standard described below.

[1–2 marks]
The decision tree is not accurately constructed, the calculations of each option are
not all presented or accurate. However, there is some evidence of a general
knowledge of the model.

[3–4 marks]
The principal elements of the decision tree are constructed, but may not be
entirely accurate.  The calculations of each option are largely correct.
Working may not be shown.

[5–7 marks]
The decision tree is accurately constructed. The calculations of each option are
correct and well presented. For [7 marks] a key is provided. Workings are
shown.

Award an additional [1 mark] for identifying the best option for SP.

N.B. For an accurately constructed decision tree with incorrect calculations,
award up to a maximum of [4 marks].

Apply candidate Own Figure Rule (OFR) throughout this response.
                                                 –8–            SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

2.   (a)   Define the term variable costs.                                                     [2 marks]

           Variable costs are costs that vary in direct proportion to change in output/level
           of production.


           Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

           Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge
           and understanding.

           Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
           understanding similar to the answer above.
                                               –9–              SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(b)   (i)   Construct a fully labelled break-even chart for Dan Electro for 2012.
            Calculate and indicate the break-even point and the margin of safety,
            and calculate the forecasted profit from the sale of 700 cameras (show
            all your working).                                                     [6 marks]

            The break-even point is:

             Fixed cost     US$30 000
                                         600 cameras
            Contribution US$250  US$200


             Cost/revenue                                                            Total revenue
              (US$000s)                                                                Profit
             180                                           Break-even
                                                              point                  Total costs
              160

              140

              120

              100

               80

               60

               40
                                                                                        Fixed costs
                                                                         Margin of
               20
                                                                          safety
                  0                                                                  Cameras
                       100      200      300         400      500       600   700

            The margin of safety is:
            700  600  100 units

            The forecasted profit at 700 units is:

            Margin of safety  contribution per unit  100 units  US$50  US$5000
            OR:
            Total revenue – total cost  US$175 000  US$30 000  (200  700)  US$5000

            Allow Own Figure Rule (OFR). Do not double penalize candidates.
                                         – 10 –         SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

       Award marks as follows:
       [1 mark] for appropriately labelled axes.
       [1 mark] for an accurately drawn and labelled total revenue curve and total
       costs curve.
       [1 mark] for identification of the break-even point and [1 mark] for
       showing calculation at the correct value of 600.
       [1 mark] for identification of the margin of safety.
       [1 mark] for correct calculation of the projected profit.

       If the candidate produces a table rather than a chart, award [0 marks].

       Award a maximum of [3 marks] if the chart is not neat, not drawn with a
       straight edge, or is not to scale.

(ii)   Calculate the number of cameras Dan Electro must sell in order to
       double the forecasted profit (show all your working).             [2 marks]

       The doubled level of profit is:

       Target: US$5000  2  US$10 000

       Fixed cost  target profit US$30 000  US$10 000
                                                        800 cameras
            Contribution                 US$50
       OR:
       To double its profit, Dan Electro would need to make another US$5000.
       Each additional unit sold contributes US$50.
       Therefore, 100 more units would need to be sold to make an additional
       US$5000 in profit: US$5000 / US$50  100units .

       To double its profit, Dan Electro would need to sell the original 700 units +
       100 units = 800 cameras.

       Allow Own Figure Rule (OFR). Do not double penalize for a mistake
       carried forward.

       Award [1 mark] for the correct workings and [1 mark] for the correct
       calculation. Award up to a maximum of [2 marks].
                                                  – 11 –           SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

                                              SECTION B

3.   (a)   Identify two features of quality control.                                                [2 marks]

           Features of quality control could include:
            it is a set of procedures intended to ensure a certain level of quality in a product
             or service
            it emphasizes testing of products to uncover defects
            it is product orientated instead of process orientated
            quality control activities are usually performed after the production has
             been completed
            it is reactive rather than proactive
            accept any other relevant feature.


           N.B. Some candidates may define quality control. If in their definition, two
           appropriate features are identified, award marks for identification of
           those                                                               features.

           Award [1 mark] for each correct and relevant feature of quality control identified
           up to a maximum of [2 marks].
                                          – 12 –         SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(b)   Explain one advantage and one disadvantage to Hands of using a piece rate
      rewards package for its workers.                                                 [4 marks]

      A piece rate reward package (scheme) is such that workers are paid purely
      on results.

      Advantages for Hands could include the following:
       It could increase motivation among workers and therefore increase
        productivity.
       It helps to reward extra productivity. This means that efficient and fast
        craftswomen who make an extra effort will be rewarded for it.
       It allows some labour costs flexibility. If the business faces a downturn in
        sales, labour cost can be easily adapted to the circumstances as craftswomen
        are only paid if they produce.
       Accept any other relevant advantage.

      Disadvantages for Hands could include the following:
       Craftswomen may worry about losing pay if production and sales are lowered.
       The quality of knitted items could be affected as workers mainly focus
        on production. This could negatively affect sales and threaten Hands’
        permanence in sophisticated and competitive markets.
       It could be more complicated to administrate than other payment schemes,
        as each craftswoman will see her wage calculated every payroll. This could
        lead to an increased administrative cost for the business.
       Innovation and group work could be discouraged as the workers’ main focus is
        quantity produced. This can particularly affect a business in the fashion
        industry like Hands, where creation of new designs is essential.
       Accept any other relevant disadvantage.


      Mark as 2+2.

      Award [1 mark] for each correct and relevant advantage/disadvantage identified
      and award an additional [1 mark] for a relevant explanation of the advantage/
      disadvantage up to a maximum of [2 marks].
                                          – 13 –         SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(c)   Explain two challenges that Hands may have faced entering into international
      markets.                                                                     [4 marks]

      The entrance into international markets may have placed several challenges
      on Hands.

      For example:
       Hands may have faced strong competition from other hand knitting companies
        from India, New Zealand and Uruguay wanting to reach the same markets.
        However, the usage of high quality raw materials and exhaustive quality
        controls methods may have helped Hands to finally access those markets.
       Additional working capital to expand internationally and to develop new
        distribution channels may have been difficult to find. This may have been
        solved through government grants, or financial support from international
        institutions helping small businesses in developing countries.
       Entering into international markets implied that some workers were given
        managerial authority; these organizational changes may have caused concern
        over workers and may have led to de-motivation and/or conflict among them.
        However, craftswomen’s loyalty to Hands may have helped to cope with
        these challenges.
       Exchange rate fluctuations between the Argentine Peso and the Euro and the
        US$, may affect sales and profitability.
       Hands may have faced problems when contacting important clients overseas
        and when bridging cultural and language barriers. Agents in the target
        countries where Hands was willing to export may have been contacted for
        this purpose.
       Hands may have faced additional innovation costs to introduce new knitting
        techniques and designs. It is possible that Hands may have contacted national
        and international designers to develop new products to meet the needs of top
        fashion markets.
       Accept any other relevant challenge.

      Candidates are not expected to incorporate all of the above points in their
      response.


      Mark as 2+2.

      Award [1 mark] for each correct and relevant challenge identified and an
      additional [1 mark] for a relevant explanation of the challenge up to a maximum
      of [2 marks].
                                              – 14 –        SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(d)   Evaluate the effectiveness of the democratic leadership style of the partners
      at Hands.                                                                              [10 marks]

      In a democratic leadership style workers are involved in the decision-making
      processes of the business; that is, consultation and collaboration are considered
      central elements.
       The collaborative environment created by a democratic leadership style could
         have resulted in better solutions to the challenges that the business had to face
         over the years, such as lack of finance and economic recessions.
       A democratic leadership style could have also enabled the sense of belonging
         and loyalty of craftswomen and thus increase motivation among them.
       A democratic leadership style probably enabled the sharing of ideas, designs,
         and knitting techniques which could have led to the success of Hands’ products
         in international markets.

      On the other hand:
       A democratic leadership style could have negatively affected the efficiency of
        the business by slowing down the decision-making processes. As the business
        employs around 300 craftswomen, coordination and cooperation although
        valuable, may have been chaotic, time consuming and therefore costly.
        Reaching a consensus over decisions may have been difficult.
       It is highly probable that most craftswomen belonging to Hands lacked
        managerial skills. For urgent decisions in challenging times, the democratic
        leadership style may have been inappropriate.

      Hands’ survival over the years and its current success seem to show that the
      application of a democratic leadership style was effective. Such success is clearly
      crystallized in the achievement of Hands’ challenges in entering into the world’s
      most demanding markets despite fierce competition.

      Accept any other relevant evaluation.


      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 2.
                                                  – 15 –           SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

4.   (a)   Define the term product life cycle.                                                    [2 marks]

           Any product introduced to a market typically goes through six sequential stages:
           development, introduction, growth, maturity, saturation, and decline. The term
           product life cycle refers to the full cycle of the different stages in the life of a
           product and the anticipated sales volume at each stage.


           N.B. Not all sources list six stages to the product life cycle. Some list only five
           and do not have saturation. A good definition for full marks does not have to
           include saturation.

           Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

           Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and
           understanding.

           Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
           understanding similar to the answer above.

     (b)   Calculate (show all your working):

           (i)    the 2011 stock turnover in days at MOS.                                         [2 marks]

                  Stock turnover is calculated with the formula:

                    Average stock
                                      365  stock turnover in days
                  Cost of goods sold

                      608 000
                                     365  37  36.99 to 2 d.p. days
                  50 %  12 000 000


                  Award [1 mark] for working and [1 mark] for the correct answer up to a
                  maximum of [2 marks].

           (ii)   the 2011 stock turnover in days for typewriters.                                [2 marks]

                  The stock turnover for typewriters can be calculated with the information
                  given:

                      43000
                                  365  327  326.98 to 2 d.p. days
                  40 %  120 000


                  Award [1 mark] for working and [1 mark] for the correct answer up to a
                  maximum of [2 marks].
                                            – 16 –          SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(c)   Analyse MOS’ product portfolio by applying the Boston Consulting Group
      (BCG) matrix.                                                                         [4 marks]

      The BCG matrix is a technique that is used by firms to analyse their overall
      product portfolio, showing market growth and relative market share on the two
      axes. The four product categories are star, cash cow, problem child and dog.
      The BCG matrix provides insight into the product mix at MOS.

      Personal computers (PCs) are cash cows. PC sales are growing only gradually
      and declining slightly at MOS which suggests saturation of the market and shift to
      sales at replacement rate.

      Typewriters are a dog: few sales in a contracting market. Though typewriters are
      probably very hard to find in Santiago, as indicated by MOS’ high relative market
      share, the company may want to discontinue offering them – big investment and
      limited sales.

      Modern mobile telephones are a “problem child” for the company – enormous
      growth potential, but, for whatever reason, people are not going to MOS to buy
      them.

      Though MOS has had success with portable DVD players, they may be eclipsed
      by video streaming, as indicated by slow market growth. Thus, despite the solid
      sales, they are probably not stars but soon to be cash cows: products at the top of
      the product life cycle.

      Accept any other relevant analysis.


      [1–2 marks]
      For basic reference to the BCG matrix, however it is not applied to MOS’ product
      portfolio. For [2 marks] there is good theoretical knowledge of the model.

      [3–4 marks]
      For application of the BCG matrix to MOS’ product portfolio. For [4 marks] the
      points are well analysed.
                                              – 17 –        SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(d)   Discuss Maria’s plans to stop selling typewriters and to change the name
      of MOS.                                                                  [10 marks]

      Maria’s plans for the business are driven by need (the liquidity problem) and by
      her desire to update the image of the company. By eliminating typewriters from
      the product line, she will be able to invest those funds currently invested in
      typewriters into items such as modern mobile telephones, portable DVD players,
      and personal computers, that turnover faster. She will also be able to give the
      business a fresher, newer look as typewriters, which are rarely used and have an
      outdated feel about them, will be removed from the shelves. These changes,
      coupled with the name change and, presumably, a new logo and business look,
      will give MOS a more modern feel. These kinds of changes can invigorate a
      business by attracting new customers and getting existing customers to consider
      new types of products and services.

      Her father, however, has reason to be concerned. One of the strengths of the
      business is its long-standing ties with the Santiago business community. Some of
      those loyal customers still use typewriters – and MOS owns a large part of this
      market in Santiago. If MOS no longer supplies them, these customers might start
      going to other office supply stores, giving MOS’ competition an opportunity to
      establish relationships with some of MOS’ oldest customers. At the least, these
      customers will feel slighted and feel that their business is less meaningful to MOS
      than previously. Moreover, these changes to the business may not immediately
      resolve the liquidity problem. Just to move out the typewriters, MOS may have to
      sell them at deep discounts, lowering their current above-average profitability.
      Changing the name and signs (and probably the logo) will be expensive, and there
      will be some disruption in the business community, unless MOS introduces the
      changes with an extensive marketing campaign, which will also involve expenses.

      Accept any other relevant discussion.


      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 2.
                                                 – 18 –         SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

5.   (a)   Define the term redundancy.                                                         [2 marks]
           The laying off (dismissal) of an employee because of a lack of available
           work, as the employer is unable to afford to employ them anymore or the
           business no longer has a need for an employee to carry out work of a
           particular kind.


           Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

           Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and
           understanding.

           Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
           understanding similar to the answer above.

     (b)   Explain two financial       rewards     that   an   organization   can   use   to
           motivate employees.                                                                 [4 marks]

           The financial rewards could include:
            salary
            wages (time and piece rates)
            commission
            profit-related pay
            performance-related pay (PRP)
            employee share-ownership schemes
            fringe payments (perks).

           Accept any other financial reward with an explanation.


           Mark as 2+2.

           Award [1 mark] for each correct financial reward identified and an additional
           [1 mark] for a relevant explanation of the reward up to a maximum of [2 marks].
                                           – 19 –          SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(c)   Suggest two reasons why some employers do not like the idea of flexible work
      patterns and practices.                                                              [4 marks]

      Some employers may not like the idea of flexible work patterns and practices for
      the following reasons:
       they may not be able to control the quality and/or quantity of work done by the
         employees (lack of supervision, quality control, time keeping)
       it may be difficult to organize structurally (as the company may need to be
         staffed at some specific opening hours, for example a school needs its teachers
         during the day; this is called “core times”)
       in some sectors, there must always be some employees on duty, for examples
         in hospital and in the police force (not only at some “core times”, but 24/7)
       coordinating flexibility may not be practical for some small businesses, where
         there are not enough employees to implement systems of flexible work patterns
         and practices.

      Accept any other relevant reason.


      Mark as 2+2.

      Award [1 mark] for each correct reason identified and an additional [1 mark] for
      a relevant development of the reason up to a maximum of [2 marks].
                                              – 20 –        SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(d)   With reference to two motivation theories, discuss the effects of the trend
      towards offering flexible work patterns and practices on employee
      motivation.                                                                 [10 marks]

      Candidates may refer to the following motivation theories: the works of Taylor,
      Maslow, Herzberg, Adams, Pink.

      Candidates are expected to use two theories in order to discuss the link (if any)
      between (a) the trend towards offering flexible work patterns and practices on the
      one hand, and (b) an increase in employee motivation. It is expected that
      candidates will demonstrate how the trend will positively result in improving
      employee motivation and continue their discussion while presenting opposing
      views of theories or parts of a particular theory. Candidates should be able to
      demonstrate that the link is not obvious. (Most theorists mentioned above wrote
      at a time when flexible work patterns and practices were not so common, and
      consequently did not explicitly refer to them.) Candidates are tested on their
      ability to apply theories with constant use of and reference to the information from
      the stimulus.

      Herzberg’s motivation factors, for example, can be widened so as to include job
      satisfaction through flexibility. Maslow’s higher level of needs can be reached
      due to empowerment and trust. Flexible working practices can be perceived as
      either motivating or de-motivating (due to uncertainty, short-term contracts).

      However, candidates should demonstrate understanding that some of the new
      practices also give employers the option of providing employees with
      short-term contracts only, which are subject to the market demand. This can
      cause insecurity and a feeling of injustice. Consequently the employees might be
      unmotivated and hence reduce their efforts. Some employees might not be
      interested in flexible working practices and will appreciate more money.
      Employees might also feel isolated professionally and socially and some may
      fear change.

      The above are just brief examples of two-sided analysis of the two types
      of theories. The analysis should lead to some conclusions. For example, the
      effects on motivation are not predictable and can vary considerably. The effects
      may depend on the culture of the organization, the type of the employees in terms
      of skills, experience, position or any other relevant factors. Accept any relevant
      theory that is applied to the information given in the stimulus material.
      Theorists and theories should be applied not just mentioned.

      Accept any other relevant discussion.


      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 2.
                                                 – 21 –          SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

                                              SECTION C

For questions 6 to 8, marks should be allocated according to the assessment criteria on
pages 3–4. These marking notes are intended to help and standardize examiners’ interpretation of the
assessment criteria and to provide some examples of the kinds of points that merit being awarded higher
marks. The examples are indicative only, and examiners should consider the quality of an answer on a
case-by-case basis; this depends much on the type of organization(s) candidates select and the kinds of
arguments they put forward.

6.   With reference to one or two organization(s) that you have studied, discuss how
     marketing strategies may differ in two cultures that you are familiar with.     [20 marks]

     Criterion A

     In order to demonstrate that they fulfil this assessment criterion, candidates should be
     able to:
      demonstrate an understanding of the concepts given in the question (for example, by
        explaining that strategy in this context is the overall approach chosen by an
        organization in the particular area of marketing and that culture is a set of values
        and behaviours)
      select relevant and sufficient business management content from the syllabus, and
        explain this content in a helpful way, given the demands of the question
        (for example, by selecting the four Ps model as a tool to study the choice of
        marketing strategies in different cultures, and by explaining that the four Ps refer to
        the product, price, promotion and place choices made in marketing).

     Please note that how much business management content it is appropriate to select and
     in what degree of detail it is appropriate to explain this depends on the question and the
     real-world organization(s) candidates choose.

     As the question refers to “marketing strategies”, candidates are expected to refer to
     more than one strategy (such as consideration of the various Ps, or choice of various
     marketing techniques) in order to be awarded the highest mark.

     Criterion B

     In order to demonstrate that they fulfil this assessment criterion, candidates should be
     able to:
      apply the given concepts and the relevant business management content to explain
         the situation and issues of their chosen real-world organization(s) (for example by
         explaining that Starbucks® needs to adjust its product range depending on the food
         preferences, role of coffee drinking and different climate conditions in the
         Malaysian and German markets)
      give appropriate and illustrative examples from the real-world organization(s)
         (for example, by referring to halal products in Malaysia and convenient to-go
         products in Germany).

     Please note that sometimes, candidates’ research allows them to give very specific
     examples, but other times they are only able to apply more generic knowledge of the
     organization to the question. Very specific examples should not be expected for full
     marks, as long as the examples are appropriate and illustrative of the points the
     candidate wants to make.
                                              – 22 –       SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

If a candidate uses a section A or B organization, or the paper 1 pre-seen case study
organization in their response, award [0 marks] for this criterion.

The question asks candidates to refer to one or two organization(s); full marks can be
achieved by referring to one organization only.

Criterion C

In order to demonstrate that they fulfil this assessment criterion, candidates should be
able to:
 make relevant and balanced arguments (for example, by discussing the extent to
   which consumers might have a preference for variability with respect to the four Ps
   on one hand and a preference for standardization on the other hand)
 present reasonable evidence or other support to justify their arguments (for example,
   by explaining that while other forms of social drinks and gatherings have
   traditionally been more prominent in many parts of the world, the penetration of
   Western cultural practices is changing this: there are consumers who want the same
   Starbucks® experience everywhere!).

Please note that evidence from the real-world organization(s) does not need to be very
detailed or perfectly accurate for full marks. Other support may include candidates’
general knowledge of business management, of other organizations or specific contexts
they are familiar with.

Criterion D

For structure, please refer to the assessment criteria.

Criterion E

In order to demonstrate that they fulfil this assessment criterion, candidates should be
able to:
 consider the perspectives of various stakeholders (for example, by discussing
    consumer and leadership/management perspectives on the four Ps)
 for the highest achievement level, consider the relevant stakeholders’ perspectives in
    a balanced way (for example, by discussing that the consumer preference for
    variability on one hand and standardization on the other puts Starbucks®
    leadership/management in a difficult position of balancing these two conflicting
    aims in marketing).

Please note that whether a focus on individuals or groups, or a focus on internal or
external stakeholders is appropriate depends on the question and the organization(s) the
candidate chooses.
                                                        – 23 –            SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

7.   With reference to one organization that you have studied, examine what changes
     globalization brings about in the management of human resources.               [20 marks]

     Criterion A

     In order to demonstrate that they fulfil this assessment criterion, candidates should be
     able to:
      demonstrate an understanding of the concepts given in the question (for example, by
        explaining that globalization is a reduction in economic, technological and cultural
        barriers facilitating companies’ growth beyond their national borders and change is
        the evolution in businesses’ strategies, objectives and processes)
      select relevant and sufficient business management content from the syllabus, and
        explain this content in a helpful way, given the demands of the question
        (for example, by selecting human resource management content such as
        organizational structure, communication and rewards, and by explaining that
        organizational structure is about how responsibilities are set up in a company,
        communication is about how messages are sent and received in a company and
        rewards include financial and non-financial benefits employees get for the job
        they do).

     Please note that how much business management content it is appropriate to select and
     in what degree of detail it is appropriate to explain this depends on the question and the
     real-world organization(s) candidates choose.

     Criterion B

     In order to demonstrate that they fulfil this assessment criterion, candidates should be
     able to:
      apply the given concepts and the relevant business management content to explain
         the situation and issues of their chosen real-world organization (for example, by
         explaining that Unilever needs to address issues such as salary levels, pay structures
         and non-financial rewards offered in its different operating locations)
      give appropriate and illustrative examples from the real-world organization
         (for example, by referring to Unilever’s ability to have different contractual
         relationships with its employees in different locations, as evidenced by the
         temporary contracts it has provided to the majority of its tea plantation workers in
         Pakistan, with the implication that their salaries may be lower and they may not be
         entitled to the same annual and medical leave as permanent employees*).

     Please note that sometimes, candidates’ research allows them to give very specific
     examples, but other times they are only able to apply more generic knowledge of the
     organization to the question. Very specific examples should not be expected for full
     marks, as long as the examples are appropriate and illustrative of the points the
     candidate wants to make.

     If a candidate uses a section A or B organization, or the paper 1 pre-seen case study
     organization in their response, award [0 marks] for this criterion.


     * Source:     International Labour Rights Forum, http://www.laborrights.org/end-violence-against-trade-
        unions/unilever-lipton-workers, accessed on April 11, 2013.
                                              – 24 –       SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

Criterion C

In order to demonstrate that they fulfil this assessment criterion, candidates should be
able to:
 make relevant and balanced arguments (for example, by examining how
   organizational structure and communication are interconnected in the context of a
   large multinational company)
 present reasonable evidence or other support to justify their arguments (for example,
   by explaining that while a narrow span of control and systems of delegation and
   empowerment might be good for more personalized communication, these might not
   be possible in a global company like Unilever, as they would risk different operating
   practices getting established in different parts of the company).

Please note that evidence from the real-world organization(s) does not need to be very
detailed or perfectly accurate for full marks. Other support may include candidates’
general knowledge of business management, of other organizations or specific contexts
they are familiar with.

Criterion D

For structure, please refer to the assessment criteria.

Criterion E

In order to demonstrate that they fulfil this assessment criterion, candidates should be
able to:
 consider the perspectives of various stakeholders (for example, by examining the
    differing perspectives institutional owners and individual employees might have to
    the kinds of human resource management changes global growth brings)
 for the highest achievement level, consider the relevant stakeholders’ perspectives in
    a balanced way (for example, by considering that what institutional owners in a
    multinational business like Unilever see of the company’s practices is numbers, and
    hence their view of human resource matters may not be as personalized as that of
    individual employees, to whom work and work conditions are an important
    constituent of well-being).

Please note that whether a focus on individuals or groups or a focus on internal or
external stakeholders is appropriate depends on the question and the organization the
candidate chooses.
                                                          – 25 –              SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

8.   With reference to one organization that you have studied, compare and contrast
     the importance of innovation and of ethics in product development.             [20 marks]

     Criterion A

     In order to demonstrate that they fulfil this assessment criterion, candidates should be
     able to:
      demonstrate an understanding of the concepts given in the question (for example, by
        explaining that innovation is the ability to think anew and create new products or
        services or improve existing ones and ethics is considerations about different
        stakeholders’ perspectives and well-being)
      select relevant and sufficient business management content from the syllabus, and
        explain this content in a helpful way, given the demands of the question
        (for example, by selecting market research and R&D, and by explaining that market
        research is about researching customer needs and R&D is about developing products
        and services that meet those needs).

     Please note that how much business management content it is appropriate to select and
     in what degree of detail it is appropriate to explain this depends on the question and the
     real-world organization(s) candidates choose.

     Although marks are not awarded for definitions, it is likely to be helpful to provide brief
     but clear explanations of the given concepts and selected business management content
     early on in the response and to formulate these explanations so that they fit the question.

     Criterion B

     In order to demonstrate that they fulfil this assessment criterion, candidates should be
     able to:
      apply the given concepts and the relevant business management content to explain
         the situation and issues of their chosen real-world organization (for example, by
         explaining that McDonald’s® product development consists of primary and
         secondary market research and of continuous trialling which products and services
         fit the concept of a fast food experience, but as one part of the concept is low prices
         and generally unhealthy food, ethical concerns may be raised about sourcing of
         these products and services as well as their impact on health)
      give appropriate and illustrative examples from the real-world organization
         (for example by referring to Happy Meals as a good innovation to attract families
         with children to McDonald’s®, but there having been ethical concerns about use of
         child labour in the production of the toys included in Happy Meals as well as
         concerns about the increasing problem of childhood obesity*).

     Please note that sometimes, candidates’ research allows them to give very specific
     examples, but other times they are only able to apply more generic knowledge of the
     organization to the question. Very specific examples should not be expected for full
     marks, as long as the examples are appropriate and illustrative of the points the
     candidate wants to make.

     If a candidate uses a section A or B organization, or the paper 1 pre-seen case study
     organization in their response, award [0 marks] for this criterion.


     * Source: The Financial Times, http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/36c6170a-0875-11e0-80d9-00144feabdc0.
        html#axzz2Qc4FhIE9 and The Independent, http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/asia /mcdonalds-
        faces-childlabour-furore -699441.html, accessed on April 11, 2013.
                                              – 26 –       SPEC/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion C

In order to demonstrate that they fulfil this assessment criterion, candidates should be
able to:
 make relevant and balanced arguments (for example, by contrasting the integral link
   between innovation and product development with a less close relationship between
   ethics and product development)
 present reasonable evidence or other support to justify their arguments (for example,
   by explaining that innovation is needed both to come up with a tastier variant of an
   existing McDonald’s® meal by slightly adjusting the ingredients and to trial cheap
   toys with children’s meals, but ethical questions are raised more prominently in the
   latter type of product development).

Please note that evidence from the real-world organization(s) does not need to be very
detailed or perfectly accurate for full marks. Other support may include candidates’
general knowledge of business management, of other organizations or specific contexts
they are familiar with.

Criterion D

For structure, please refer to the assessment criteria.

Criterion E

In order to demonstrate that they fulfil this assessment criterion, candidates should be
able to:
 consider the perspectives of various stakeholders (for example, by comparing and
    contrasting the differing perspectives leadership and employees might have on the
    importance of innovation and ethics in product development)
 for the highest achievement level, consider the relevant stakeholders’ perspectives in
    a balanced way (for example, by considering that for McDonald’s® leadership,
    innovation and ethics may be equally important considerations in evaluating the
    success of the company’s product development, as they are responsible for
    McDonald’s® reputation in the public space, while employees in the marketing or
    R&D department may evaluate the success of their work by how innovative
    they are).

Please note that whether a focus on individuals or groups or a focus on internal or
external stakeholders is appropriate depends on the question and the organization the
candidate chooses.
SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




BUSINESS MANAGEMENT
STANDARD LEVEL
PAPER 1

SPECIMEN PAPER

1 hour 15 minutes


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

   Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
   A clean copy of the Business Management case study is required for this examination paper.
   Read the case study carefully.
   A clean copy of the Business Management formulae sheet is required for this examination paper.
   Section A: answer two questions.
   Section B: answer question 4.
   A calculator is required for this examination paper.
   The maximum mark for this examination paper is [40 marks].




                                                                                                     3 pages
                                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2013
                                                 –2–                SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                             SECTION A

Answer two questions from this section.

1.   (a)   With reference to B-Pharma, describe two ways in which corporate social
           responsibility (CSR) could be important.                                           [4 marks]

     (b)   Apply the Boston Consulting Group (BCG) matrix to B-Pharma’s product
           portfolio.                                                                         [6 marks]


2.   (a)   With reference to B-Pharma, outline two key features of operating as a public
           limited company.                                                                   [4 marks]

     (b)   Explain the importance of branding for B-Pharma.                                   [6 marks]


3.   (a)   Describe two benefits for B-Pharma of a cost-plus (mark-up) pricing strategy for
           its drugs.                                                                         [4 marks]

     (b)   Analyse the effectiveness of Susan James’ leadership style at the Canadian
           subsidiary of B-Pharma.                                                            [6 marks]
                                                  –3–               SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                             SECTION B

Answer the following question.

4.   The Board of Directors of B-Pharma are considering two of the strategic options for future growth.

     Option 1: Market development in Europe

     Likely overall cost: $100 million.

     To gain productive capacity and a network of distribution channels in Europe, B-Pharma could enter
     this market through hostile takeover of several European companies. The businesses could be bought
     cheaply.

     However, to achieve synergies, some obstacles must be overcome:
     • the plants available for acquisition need modernizing
     • European workers expect empowerment and are likely to resist any attempts at restructuring
     • European workers are concerned about B-Pharma’s reputation after hearing about the animal
       testing scandal
     • very high competition increases risk of failure.

     Option 2: Market penetration in China

     Likely overall cost: $50 million.

     In China, B-Pharma supplies private clinics, hospitals and a small consumer segment. Option 2 is
     to penetrate further the large Chinese market. Production for this market would be outsourced to
     Chinese manufacturers that use flow production in the most up-to-date facilities. This contrasts with
     batch production used at B-Pharma. There is rapid economic development in the region and increasing
     life expectancy in China. There is also limited competition so low risk of failure. However, some
     directors are concerned that:
     • some local businesses may illegally copy some of B-Pharma’s products
     • quality may be difficult to manage
     • cultural differences between China and Japan could negatively impact on the implementation of
         this option.


     (a)   Define the term takeover.                                                            [2 marks]

     (b)   Explain one advantage and one disadvantage to B-Pharma of using batch
           production in the production of pharmaceuticals.                                     [4 marks]

     (c)   If B-Pharma implements Option 2 (market penetration in China), explain one
           advantage and one disadvantage to B-Pharma of outsourcing.                           [4 marks]

     (d)   Using the additional information above and the case study, recommend either
           strategic option 1 or 2 for B-Pharma to achieve future growth.                     [10 marks]
3
SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                   SPECIMEN PAPER



            BUSINESS MANAGEMENT



                      Standard Level



                            Paper 1




10 pages
                                              –2–            SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

The markbands and assessment criteria on pages 2–3 should be used where indicated in
the markscheme.

       Section A                               Level descriptor
        Part (b)

        Marks

          0        The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

         1–2        Little knowledge and understanding of relevant issues and business
                     management tools (where applicable), techniques and theories.
                    Little use of business management terminology.
                    Little reference to the stimulus material.

         3–4        A description or partial analysis of some relevant issues with some use
                     of business management tools (where applicable), techniques and
                     theories.
                    Some use of appropriate terminology.
                    Some reference to the stimulus material that goes beyond the name of a
                     person(s) and/or the name of the organization.
                    At the lower end of the markband, responses are mainly theoretical.

         5–6        An analysis of the relevant issues with good use of business
                     management tools (where applicable), techniques and theories.
                    Use of appropriate terminology throughout the response.
                    Effective use of the stimulus material.
                                       –3–            SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Section B                               Level descriptor
 Part (d)

 Marks

   0        The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

  1–2        Little understanding of the demands of the question.
             Few business management tools (where applicable), techniques and
              theory are explained or applied and business management terminology
              is lacking.
             Little reference to the stimulus material.

  3–4        Some understanding of the demands of the question.
             Some relevant business management tools (where applicable),
              techniques and theories are explained or applied, and some appropriate
              terminology is used.
             Some reference to the stimulus material but often not going beyond the
              name of a person(s) and/or the name of the organization.

  5–6        Understanding of most of the demands of the question.
             Relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques
              and theories are explained and applied, and appropriate terminology is
              used most of the time.
             Some reference to the stimulus material that goes beyond the name of a
              person(s) and/or the name of the organization.

  7–8        Good understanding of the demands of the question.
             Relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques
              and theories are explained and applied well, and appropriate
              terminology is used.
             Good reference to the stimulus material.
             Good evidence of a balanced response.

  9–10       Good understanding of the demands of the question, including
              implications, where relevant.
             Relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques
              and theories are explained clearly and applied purposefully, and
              appropriate terminology is used throughout the response.
             Effective use of the stimulus material in a way that significantly
              strengthens the response.
                                                 –4–           SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

                                               SECTION A

1.   (a)   With reference to B-Pharma, describe two ways in which corporate social
           responsibility (CSR) could be important.                                [4 marks]

           Customers need confidence in B-Pharma drugs, and image is important for trust.
           Some of B-Pharma’s past unethical behaviour has damaged its image; CSR
           should limit unethical behaviour and could strengthen B-Pharma’s brand image.
            CSR could include banning testing on animals, which would reduce negative
              publicity.
            For some investors and shareholders, B-Pharma’s CSR may be a very
              important factor to decide to invest in B-Pharma, as opposed to other
              companies.
            For some other stakeholders, such as new employees, researchers and
              scientists, it may be very important to work for a company that takes CSR and
              business ethics seriously, especially in the pharmaceutical industry which is
              sometimes seen as controversial.
            As business ethics is increasingly important in society, B-Pharma may want to
              plan for the long-term and consider its image in 2050 as the most ethical
              pharmaceutical company in the industry.

           Accept any other relevant answer.

           Mark as 2+2.

           Award [1 mark] for each way identified and [1 mark] for a description of that
           way in the context of B-Pharma. Award up to a maximum of [2 marks].
                                                         –5–   SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(b)   Apply the Boston Consulting Group (BCG) matrix to B-Pharma’s product
      portfolio.                                                           [6 marks]

      The BCG matrix distinguishes between four types of products according to their
      market share and the growth rate of the market in which they are sold.

                                      Relative market share
                                       High           Low
         Market growth rate

                              High




                                                   Question
                                       Stars        marks
                              Low




                                     Cash cows       Dogs



      B-Pharma’s product portfolio lends itself well to a BCG matrix and the following
      applications are possible:
       Pharmax is a cash cow: it has a well-established, high market share of “around
        one-third of the market [for painkillers] in Japan and the USA” (lines 21–22) in
        a market which is “growing very slowly” (line 23)
       Pharmaflo is a star: launched less than ten years ago, it already has a
        15 % share in a market that is still growing rapidly (lines 26–27)
       Pharmaslim is a question mark: “the market […] is growing rapidly” though
        sales are poor (lines 28–29).

      Accept any other relevant application eg about Pharmatics.

      Award a maximum of [2 marks] if the matrix is only drawn/described with no
      application. Award a maximum of [4 marks] if the matrix is correctly applied but
      with no explanation / justification.

      Award [6 marks] if the matrix is correctly applied and explained in relation to the
      situation facing B-Pharma.

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 2.
                                                    –6–         SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

2.   (a)   With reference to B-Pharma, outline two key features of operating as a public
           limited company.                                                              [4 marks]

           Key features include the following points:
            B-Pharma sells its shares to the general public, so anyone can be an investor
             and have part ownership of the company
            B-Pharma has access to large capital markets and is thereby able to raise more
             funds
            B-Pharma’s accounts must be audited and released to the public (they are
             public information)
            B-Pharma may be vulnerable to takeover bids; its value may also be very
             dependent upon stock exchange fluctuations
            any other relevant feature.

           Mark as 2+2.

           Award [1 mark] for each correct key feature identified, and [1 mark] for the
           development of each of these key features in the context of B-Pharma, up to a
           maximum of [2 marks].

     (b)   Explain the importance of branding for B-Pharma.                                    [6 marks]

           Relevant issues include:
            it is a multinational in a variety of markets
            it has a wide range of branded products
            it has attracted brand loyalty
            the brand is well known for quality and safety – important for pharmaceuticals
            there is competition from cheaper, generic drugs so it is important that
             branding works.
           But:
            B-Pharma operates in many countries for which a pharmaceutical brand may
             not universally appeal
            it seems to contradict the existence of subsidiaries – they may well want to
             develop their own brands
            it may ignore local cultures and languages, for example for the names of drugs.

           Accept any other relevant explanation.

           Award a maximum of [2 marks] if branding issues are explained with no
           application.
           Award a maximum of [4 marks] if the response lacks depth in the explanation.
           Award [6 marks] if the explanation has depth and is applied.

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 2.
                                                 –7–             SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   (a)   Describe two benefits for B-Pharma of a cost-plus (mark-up) pricing strategy
           for its drugs.                                                               [4 marks]

           Benefits of a cost-plus (mark-up) pricing strategy for B-Pharma include the
           following:
            it is a relatively easy method, but costs may be difficult to identify (eg past
              R&D)
            it can help ensure a profit is made (by ensuring break-even)
            it is essential since past R&D costs must be recovered
            it allows for a “desired” profit margin
            it is the standard practice in many industries including pharmaceuticals.

           Accept any other relevant benefit.

           Mark as 2+2.

           Award [1 mark] for each valid benefit identified and [1 mark] for a description of
           each benefit identified up to a maximum of [2 marks].

     (b)   Analyse the effectiveness of Susan James’ leadership style at the Canadian
           subsidiary of B-Pharma.                                                    [6 marks]

           Susan’s leadership style can be defined as autocratic, as she tends to impose her
           decisions without listening to employees’ requests and desires: she has “rejected
           requests for greater empowerment” (line 46), and she seems unable to
           communicate with employees (line 49).

           The style may seem ineffective, as it is exacerbating the tensions between
           employees and management (threats of strike action (line 47)). This is rather the
           view from the employees who are unhappy with Susan’s leadership style.

           The style may be effective, as strict measures must be implemented in order to
           redress the productivity problems (“the Canadian subsidiary has recently suffered
           lower levels of productivity compared to other B-Pharma subsidiaries” (lines 42–
           43)).    Only an autocratic leadership style may result in productivity
           improvements. This is rather the view from Yukio and the directors at the B-
           Pharma headquarters, which is why they appointed Susan.

           Accept any other relevant analysis.

           Award a maximum of [2 marks] if leadership issues are analysed with no
           application.
           Award a maximum of [4 marks] if the response lacks depth in the analysis.
           Award [6 marks] if the analysis has depth and is applied.

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 2.
                                                 –8–             SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

                                             SECTION B

4.   (a)   Define the term takeover.                                                            [2 marks]

           The term takeover simply means that one business acquires the ownership of
           another business, ie buys it. This can happen through the purchase of shares, in
           the case of an incorporated business.

           Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

           Award [2 marks] for a definition that demonstrates clear understanding.
           Award [1 mark] for a definition that only demonstrates partial understanding.

     (b)   Explain one advantage and one disadvantage to B-Pharma of using batch
           production in the production of pharmaceuticals.                                     [4 marks]

           Advantages of using batch production in the production of pharmaceuticals
           include:
            it suits the production of differentiated drugs, for example the size of tablets
            it enables batch sizes to meet the demand for particular drugs
            it is a standard method of production in the industry
            B-Pharma has a wide range of drugs, so flow production may not be
              appropriate
            the quality is easier to manage, which is essential for drugs.

           Disadvantages of using batch production in the production of pharmaceuticals
           include:
            it may miss opportunities for economies of scale
            it is less flexible than other methods
            it may involve higher stock holding costs, which may be a problem for drugs
              which can go out of date.

           Accept any other relevant advantage / disadvantage.

           Mark as 2+2.

           Award [1 mark] for a relevant advantage / disadvantage identified, award an
           additional [1 mark] for a relevant explanation of that advantage / disadvantage in
           the context of B-Pharma. Up to a maximum of [2 marks].
                                             –9–             SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(c)   If B-Pharma implements Option 2 (market penetration in China), explain one
      advantage and one disadvantage to B-Pharma of outsourcing.                 [4 marks]

      Possible advantages of outsourcing include:
       no need for investment in China
       third party may do a better job as they focus on it (specialization)
       there may be lower costs.

      Possible disadvantages of outsourcing include:
       quality control can become an issue
       it may be difficult to prevent illegal copying.

      Accept any other relevant advantage / disadvantage.

      Mark as 2+2.

      Award [1 mark] for a relevant advantage / disadvantage identified, award an
      additional [1 mark] for a relevant explanation of that advantage / disadvantage in
      the context of B-Pharma. Up to a maximum of [2 marks].
                                          – 10 –          SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(d)   Using the additional information above and the case study, recommend
      either strategic option 1 or 2 for B-Pharma to achieve future growth. [10 marks]

      Option 1:
       higher overall cost ($100 million rather than $50 million)
       but is the China market larger than Europe?
       would hostile takeover work?
       businesses could be bought cheaply, may give long term benefit
       businesses would have local market knowledge
       risk spread among several firms
       also markets more similar to their traditional markets.

      However:
       costs of modernizing
       workforce issues.

      Option 2:
       large market
       more efficient production systems, but is flow appropriate?
       rapid growth and aging population – higher demand for drugs
       benefits of outsourcing.

      However:
       copyright issues
       quality
       cultural differences
       do they have experience of markets such as China, seems unlikely
       how would they market, distribute and sell?

      Decision largely depends on B-Pharma’s attitude to risk. There is no market
      research on which to base the decision. B-Pharma has experience in both
      developed and developing markets.

      Purely theoretical answer, or no effective use of case study material, award a
      maximum of [4 marks].
      Only one option considered in context, award a maximum of [5 marks].
      Both options considered, but limited use of data award a maximum of [6 marks].
      Both strategies considered, good use of data but no clear recommendation, award
      a maximum of [8 marks].
      For full marks, both options considered, data used effectively, clear
      recommendation of one option.

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX




BUSINESS MANAGEMENT
STANDARD LEVEL
PAPER 2

SPECIMEN PAPER

1 hour 45 minutes


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

   Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
   A clean copy of the Business Management formulae sheet is required for this examination paper.
   Section A: answer one question.
   Section B: answer one question.
   Section C: answer one question.
   A calculator is required for this examination paper.
   The maximum mark for this examination paper is [50 marks].




                                                                                                     7 pages
                                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2013
                                                   –2–                SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                               SECTION A

Answer one question from this section.

1.   Dan Electro

     Dan Bowen is a sole trader who sells digital cameras directly to consumers. He owns an online
     business and all sales are processed electronically under the business name Dan Electro.

     Financial information for 2012 (all figures in US$)
      Fixed costs per year
      Rent                        20  000
      Marketing                     4000
      Administration                5000
      Interest payments             1000

      Variable costs per camera
      Camera                             135
      Transportation                      45
      Direct labour                       20

      Price per camera                   250

     Dan forecasts selling 700 cameras in 2012.


     (a)   Define the term variable costs.                                                      [2 marks]

     (b)   (i)    Construct a fully labelled break-even chart for Dan Electro for 2012.
                  Calculate and indicate the break-even point and the margin of safety and
                  calculate the forecasted profit from the sale of 700 cameras (show all your
                  working).                                                                     [6 marks]

		         (ii)   Calculate the number of cameras Dan Electro must sell in order to double
                  the forecasted profit (show all your working).                                [2 marks]
                                                  –3–               SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

2.   BBT

     BBT is a well-established small private limited company specializing in online education, based in
     the United States.

     BBT’s accountant has just presented the following financial information for BBT as of
     31 October 2012, which raised some working capital and liquidity issues.

     Extract from the balance sheet for BBT as of 31 October 2012 (all figures in US$)
      Accumulated depreciation          1500
      Accumulated retained profit       8500
      Cash                              2000
      Creditors                             Y
      Debtors                         28  000
      Equity                                X
      Fixed assets                    30  000
      Long-term liabilities (Debt)          0
      Net assets                            Z
      Share capital                     2000
      Short-term loans                      0
      Stock                                 0
      Total current assets            30  000
      Total current liabilities       48  000


     (a)   Identify two disadvantages for BBT of operating as a private limited company.      [2 marks]

     (b)   (i)   Calculate the missing figures X, Y, Z and with those figures and from
                 the financial information provided, construct a complete balance sheet for
                 BBT as of 31 October 2012.                                                   [7 marks]

		(ii)           Calculate BBT’s current ratio.                                                [1 mark]




                                                                                              Turn over
                                                   –4–                SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                              SECTION B

Answer one question from this section.

3.   Changing employment patterns and practices

     Following concerns about the falling level of motivation at work, the government has commissioned
     a report. The main conclusions are:
      employees are experiencing more stress at work and spend more time travelling to and from work
        than in previous years
      a majority of employees feel that job satisfaction is an important part of their life
      women see the number and pattern of hours of work as more important than the level of pay
      employees who are on long-term contracts are more committed to their work
      employees are more likely to leave their jobs if their employers have taken measures that create a
        fear of redundancy
      many office employees would like to make use of recent technological advances in order to work
        from home and to achieve a balance between their work and home life
      some employees, especially those in low paid jobs, seem to resist flexible work practices.

     Some employers have responded positively by introducing flexible work patterns and practices.  
     After overcoming some resistance to change and enduring extra costs of implementing the
     new practices, some employers reported more organizational flexibility, an increase in employee
     commitment and, for some organizations, a higher level of profit.  

     Some employers, however, do not like the idea of flexible work patterns and practices.  


     (a)   Define the term redundancy.                                                            [2 marks]

     (b)   Using two examples, explain how financial rewards can be used to motivate
           employees.                                                                             [4 marks]

     (c)   Suggest two reasons why some employers do not like the idea of flexible work
           patterns and practices.                                                                [4 marks]

     (d)   With reference to two motivation theories, discuss the effects of the trend towards
           offering flexible work patterns and practices on employee motivation.                 [10 marks]
                                                   –5–                 SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

4.   Lominex

     Lominex is a partnership of five young IT professionals.  It recently developed an online travel software
     product called “Roadex” that prepares a personalized itinerary (travel plan) for those travelling by
     car, based on their interests and trip preferences, such as romantic trips, business journeys or family
     holidays. The itinerary includes maps, driving directions, tourist attractions and hotels. Discounts
     are offered if booked using Roadex.

     Roadex software was developed because market research indicated that:
      the majority of leisure travel is done on the road
      the majority of road travellers book mid-range or expensive hotels
      most currently available online tourism search products are mainly focused on air travel, not travel
       in cars
      after years of increasing popularity, online booking for air travel is actually becoming less popular
       because people are tired of spending two or three hours trying to find the airline, hotel, or vacation
       package that meets their needs.

     Lominex will promote Roadex using promotional strategies incorporating new technology
     (viral marketing, social networking, social media marketing) in order to capture new market segments
     and to fill a niche in the online travel business market, which is experiencing growing revenue and
     fewer customers.


     (a)   Outline one primary market research method that Lominex could have used for
           its market research.                                                                    [2 marks]

     (b)   Explain one advantage and one disadvantage for Lominex of being a partnership.          [4 marks]

     (c)   Explain how Lominex can segment its market for Roadex.                                  [4 marks]

     (d)   To what extent can Lominex use promotional strategies incorporating new
           technology (viral marketing, social networking, social media marketing) to
           promote Roadex?                                                                        [10 marks]




                                                                                                  Turn over
                                                  –6–                SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

5.   Fabia

     Fabia is a fashion dress company based in Melbourne, Australia. Using a process of batch production,
     Fabia manufactures dresses for the Australian market. The main target segment is middle-aged
     women with high incomes who prefer high quality, luxurious dresses, for which they are willing to
     pay premium prices. Sometimes Fabia also produces dresses for famous designers and celebrities
     using a job (customized) production process. Fabia’s unique selling point (USP) is based on high
     quality and original design, as well as its ethical business behaviour.

     The global economic recession has resulted in a severe fall in demand for Fabia dresses and
     consequently profit.   Despite some optimism about economic recovery, Fabia’s Finance Manager
     is considering outsourcing to Vietnam the manufacturing of all the dresses made using the batch
     production process. Fabia plans to work with the Vietnamese company Patella, which is well-known
     for its reliability and prompt delivery. Taking advantage of the lack of regulations in Vietnam with
     regard to employment and to the environment, Patella can manufacture Fabia dresses at a very
     low cost, two thirds cheaper than in Australia. Fabia would only retain the design and marketing
     departments in Australia, as well as a very small production team for the customized dresses. Fabia’s
     Marketing Manager believes that all dresses should continue to be sold under the Fabia brand.

     If Fabia outsources the production of the batch produced dresses to Patella, the closure of the main
     manufacturing facility in Australia will save millions on fixed costs, but two thirds of the Australian
     workforce will face redundancy.


     (a)   Define the term unique selling point (USP).                                           [2 marks]

     (b)   Explain the advantages to Fabia of continuing to sell dresses under the
           Fabia brand.                                                                          [4 marks]

     (c)   With reference to Fabia and one other organization that you have studied,
           distinguish between batch production and job (customized) production.                 [4 marks]

     (d)   Discuss the proposal to outsource the production of the batch produced dresses
           to Patella.                                                                          [10 marks]
                                                 –7–                SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                             SECTION C

Answer one question from this section. The organization featured in Sections A and B and in the Paper 1
case study may not be used as a basis to your answer.

6.   With reference to one or two organization(s) that you have studied, evaluate different
     strategies businesses can adopt to respond to issues of globalization.                   [20 marks]

7.   With reference to one organization that you have studied, examine what changes
     globalization brings about in the management of human resources.                         [20 marks]

8.   With reference to one organization that you have studied, discuss the importance of
     innovation and of ethics in marketing.                                                   [20 marks]
SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                   SPECIMEN PAPER



            BUSINESS MANAGEMENT



                      Standard Level



                            Paper 2




26 pages
                                             –2–            SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

The markbands and assessment criteria on pages 2–4 should be used where indicated in
the markscheme.

        Marks     Level descriptor

          0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

         1–2         Little understanding of the demands of the question.
                     Few business management tools (where applicable), techniques and
                      theories are explained or applied, and business management
                      terminology is lacking.
                     Little reference to the stimulus material.

         3–4         Some understanding of the demands of the question.
                     Some relevant business management tools (where applicable),
                      techniques and theories are explained or applied, and some appropriate
                      terminology is used.
                     Some reference to the stimulus material but often not going beyond the
                      name of a person(s) and/or the name of the organization.

         5–6         Understanding of most of the demands of the question.
                     Relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques
                      and theories are explained and applied, and appropriate terminology is
                      used most of the time.
                     Some reference to the stimulus material that goes beyond the name of a
                      person(s) and/or the name of the organization.
                     Some evidence of a balanced response.
                     Some judgments are relevant but not substantiated.

         7–8         Good understanding of the demands of the question.
                     Relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques
                      and theories are explained and applied well, and appropriate
                      terminology is used.
                     Good reference to the stimulus material.
                     Good evidence of a balanced response.
                     The judgments are relevant but not always well substantiated.

         9–10        Good understanding of the demands of the question, including
                      implications, where relevant.
                     Relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques
                      and theories are explained clearly and applied purposefully, and
                      appropriate terminology is used throughout the response.
                     Effective use of the stimulus material in a way that significantly
                      strengthens the response.
                     Evidence of balance is consistent throughout the response.
                     The judgments are relevant and well substantiated.
                                                  –3–            SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

Assessment criteria for Section C

Criterion A: Knowledge and conceptual understanding
This criterion addresses the extent to which the candidate demonstrates knowledge and
understanding of the given concepts and relevant business management content (theories,
techniques or tools, depending on the requirements of the question).

Marks Level descriptor
 0    The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
 1    Superficial knowledge of the given concepts is demonstrated. Business management
      content is not selected or the content selected is irrelevant.
 2    Satisfactory understanding of one or both of the given concepts is demonstrated.
      Some business management content selected is relevant. The relevant content is
      satisfactorily explained.
 3    Good understanding of one or both of the given concepts is demonstrated.
      The business management content selected is relevant, though it may not be
      sufficient. The relevant content is generally well explained, though the explanation
      may lack some depth or breadth.
 4    Good understanding of both of the given concepts is demonstrated. The business
      management content selected is relevant, sufficient and well explained.

Criterion B: Application
This criterion addresses the extent to which the candidate is able to apply the given concepts
and the relevant business management content (theories, techniques or tools, depending on the
requirements of the question) to his or her chosen real-world organization(s). The real-world
organization(s) must not be the organization featured in the prescribed case study for
paper 1.

Marks Level descriptor
 0    The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
 1    The given concepts and/or any relevant business management content are connected
      to the real-world organization(s), but this connection is inappropriate or superficial.
 2    The given concepts and/or relevant business management content are connected
      appropriately to the real-world organization(s), but this connection is not developed.
 3    The given concepts and relevant business management content are generally well
      applied to explain the situation and issues of the real-world organization(s), though
      the explanation may lack some depth or breadth. Examples are provided.
 4    The given concepts and relevant business management content are well applied to
      explain the situation and issues of the real-world organization(s). Examples are
      appropriate and illustrative.
                                                   –4–             SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

Criterion C: Reasoned arguments
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate makes reasoned arguments.
This includes making relevant and balanced arguments by, for example, exploring different
practices, weighing up their strengths and weaknesses, comparing and contrasting them or
considering their implications, depending on the requirements of the question. It also includes
justifying the arguments by presenting reasonable evidence or other support for the
claims made.

Marks     Level descriptor
 0        The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
 1        Statements are made but these are superficial.
 2        Relevant arguments are made but these are mostly unjustified.
 3        Relevant arguments are made and these are mostly justified.
 4        Relevant, balanced arguments are made and these are well justified.


Criterion D: Structure
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate organizes his or her ideas with
clarity, and presents a structured piece of writing comprised of:

   an introduction
   a body
   a conclusion
   fit-for-purpose paragraphs.

Marks Level descriptor
 0    The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
 1    Two or fewer of the structural elements are present, and few ideas are clearly
      organized.
 2    Three of the structural elements are present, or most ideas are clearly organized.
 3    Three or four of the structural elements are present, and most ideas are clearly
      organized.
 4    All of the structural elements are present, and ideas are clearly organized.


Criterion E: Individuals and societies
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate is able to give balanced consideration
to the perspectives of a range of relevant stakeholders, including individuals and groups
internal and external to the organization.

Marks     Level descriptor
 0        The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
 1        One individual or group perspective is considered superficially or inappropriately.
 2        One relevant individual or group perspective is considered appropriately, or two
          relevant individual or group perspectives are considered superficially or
          inappropriately.
    3     At least two relevant individual or group perspectives are considered appropriately.
    4     Balanced consideration is given to relevant individual and group perspectives.
                                                 –5–             SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

                                             SECTION A

1.   (a)   Define the term variable costs.                                                     [2 marks]

           Variable costs are costs that vary in direct proportion to change in output/level
           of production.


           Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

           Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge
           and understanding.

           Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
           understanding similar to the answer above.
                                              –6–            SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(b)   (i)   Construct a fully labelled break-even chart for Dan Electro for 2012.
            Calculate and indicate the break-even point and the margin of safety,
            and calculate the forecasted profit from the sale of 700 cameras (show
            all your working).                                                     [6 marks]

            The break-even point is:

             Fixed cost     US$30 000
                                         600 cameras
            Contribution US$250  US$200


            Cost/revenue                                                         Total revenue
             (US$000s)                                                             Profit
            180                                        Break-even
                                                          point                  Total costs
            160

            140

            120

            100

              80

              60

              40
                                                                                    Fixed costs
                                                                     Margin of
              20
                                                                      safety
               0                                                                 Cameras
                      100      200      300      400      500       600   700

            The margin of safety is:
            700  600  100 units

            The forecasted profit at 700 units is:

            Margin of safety  contribution per unit  100 units  US$50  US$5000
            OR:
            Total revenue – total cost  US$175 000  US$30 000   200  700   US$5000

            Allow Own Figure Rule (OFR). Do not double penalize candidates.
                                         –7–            SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

       Award marks as follows:
       [1 mark] for appropriately labelled axes.
       [1 mark] for an accurately drawn and labelled total revenue curve and total
       costs curve.
       [1 mark] for identification of the break-even point and [1 mark] for
       showing calculation at the correct value of 600.
       [1 mark] for identification of the margin of safety.
       [1 mark] for correct calculation of the projected profit.

       If the candidate produces a table rather than a chart, award [0 marks].

       Award a maximum of [3 marks] if the chart is not neat, not drawn with a
       straight-edge, or is not to scale.

(ii)   Calculate the number of cameras Dan Electro must sell in order to
       double the forecasted profit (show all your working).             [2 marks]

       The doubled level of profit is:

       Target: US$5000  2  US$10 000

       Fixed cost  target profit US$30 000  US$10 000
                                                        800 cameras
            Contribution                 US$50
       OR:
       To double its profit, Dan Electro would need to make another US$5000.
       Each additional unit sold contributes US$50.
       Therefore, 100 more units would need to be sold to make an additional
       US$5000 in profit: US$5000 / US$50  100units .

       To double its profit, Dan Electro would need to sell the original 700 units +
       100 units = 800 cameras.

       Allow Own Figure Rule (OFR). Do not double penalize candidates.

       Award [1 mark] for the correct workings and [1 mark] for the correct
       calculation. Award up to a maximum of [2 marks].
                                                 –8–            SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

2.   (a)   Identify two disadvantages for BBT of operating as a private limited
           company.                                                             [2 marks]

           Some of the disadvantages for BBT may be:
            Private limited companies are not able to raise as much finance as
             public limited companies. BBT is unable to raise share capital from the general
             public to finance the R&D since shares can only be sold to private family
             members and friends with the approval of the board (although currently Mark
             is the only shareholder in the company).
            Despite Mark being the sole shareholder of the company, he does not have
             complete privacy enjoyed by sole traders and partnerships due to the fact that
             some of the financial data and other information have to be published.
            Mark needs to have his company accounts audited by an external accountant,
             which adds to the administrative costs of the business.
            It is usually far more expensive to establish a private limited company
             compared to setting up a sole proprietorship or a partnership.
            Accept any other relevant disadvantage identified.


           Award [1 mark] for each appropriate and relevant disadvantage identified, up to a
           maximum of [2 marks].
                                               –9–             SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(b)   (i)   Calculate the missing figures X, Y, Z and with those figures and from
            the financial information provided, construct a complete balance sheet
            for BBT as of 31 October 2012.                                         [7 marks]

            X = 10 500, Y = 48 000, Z = 10 500

            Balance sheet for BBT Limited as of 31 October 2012

                                                         US$           US$
             Fixed assets
             Fixed assets                              30 000
             Accumulated depreciation                   1500
             Net fixed assets                                        28 500

             Current assets
             Cash                                       2000
             Debtors                                   28 000
             Stock                                        0
             Total current assets                      30 000

             Current liabilities
             Creditors                                 48 000
             Short-term loans                             0
             Total current liabilities                 48 000

             Net current assets (working capital)                   (18 000)

             Total assets less current liabilities     10 500
             Long-term liabilities (Debt)                 0

             Net assets                                              10 500
             Financed by:
             Share capital                              2000
             Accumulated retained profit                8500
             Equity                                                  10 500

            Award [1 mark] each for the calculation of (X) equity, (Y) creditors and
            (Z) net assets. Award a maximum of [3 marks] for calculations.

            In terms of layout, award [4 marks] for a fully accurate and fully labelled
            balance sheet that conforms to the layout in the guide. If the balance sheet
            balances but the order of the assets or liabilities is inaccurate (according to
            the generally accepted method the candidate has chosen), award up to
            [3 marks]. If the balance sheet balances but the order of the assets or
            liabilities is significantly inaccurate, such as placing share capital and
            retained profit as a liability, award [1 mark].

            Do not penalize a response more than once for errors that are
            carried forward.
                                       – 10 –      SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(ii)   Calculate BBT’s current ratio.                                           [1 mark]

                         US$30 000
       Current ratio =              0.625
                         US$48 000


       Award [1 mark] for the correct answer (no working required). Apply Own
       Figure Rule (OFR).
                                                 – 11 –          SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

                                             SECTION B

3.   (a)   Define the term redundancy.                                                        [2 marks]
           The laying off (dismissal) of an employee because of a lack of available
           work, as the employer is unable to afford to employ them anymore or the
           business no longer has a need for an employee to carry out work of a
           particular kind.


           Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

           Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge
           and understanding.

           Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
           understanding similar to the answer above.

     (b)   Using two examples, explain how financial rewards can be used to
           motivate employees.                                              [4 marks]

           The financial rewards could include:
            salary
            wages (time and piece rates)
            commission
            profit-related pay
            performance-related pay (PRP)
            employee share-ownership schemes
            fringe payments (perks).

           Accept any other financial reward with an explanation of how they can be used to
           motivate employees.


           Mark as 2+2.

           Award [1 mark] for each correct financial reward identified and an additional
           [1 mark] for a relevant explanation of the reward with regards to motivation of
           employees up to a maximum of [2 marks].
                                            – 12 –          SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(c)   Suggest two reasons why some employers do not like the idea of flexible work
      patterns and practices.                                                               [4 marks]
      Some employers may not like the idea of flexible work patterns and practices for
      the following reasons:
       they may not be able to control the quality and/or quantity of work done by the
         employees (lack of supervision, quality control, time keeping)
       it may be difficult to organize structurally (as the company may need to be
         staffed at some specific opening hours, for example, a school needs its teachers
         during the day; this is called “core time”)
       in some sectors, there must always be some employees on duty, for example, in
         hospital and in the police force (not only at some “core time”, but 24/7)
       coordinating flexibility may not be practical for some small businesses, where
         there are not enough employees to implement systems of flexible work patterns
         and practices.

      Accept any other relevant reason.


      Mark as 2+2.

      Award [1 mark] for each correct reason identified and an additional [1 mark] for
      a relevant development of the reason up to a maximum of [2 marks].
                                              – 13 –        SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(d)   With reference to two motivation theories, discuss the effects of the trend
      towards offering flexible work patterns and practices on employee
      motivation.                                                                 [10 marks]

      Candidates may refer to the following motivation theories: the works of Taylor,
      Maslow, Herzberg, Adams, Pink.

      Candidates are expected to use two theories in order to discuss the link (if any)
      between (a) the trend towards offering flexible work patterns and practices on the
      one hand, and (b) an increase in employee motivation. It is expected that
      candidates will demonstrate how the trend will positively result in improving
      employee motivation and continue their discussion while presenting opposing
      views of theories or parts of a particular theory. Candidates should be able to
      demonstrate that the link is not obvious. (Most theorists mentioned above wrote
      at a time when flexible work patterns and practices were not so common, and
      consequently did not explicitly refer to them.) Candidates are tested on their
      ability to apply theories with constant use of, and reference to, the information
      from the stimulus.

      Herzberg’s motivation factors, for example, can be widened so as to include job
      satisfaction through flexibility. Maslow’s higher level of needs can be reached
      due to empowerment and trust. Flexible working practices can be perceived as
      either motivating or demotivating (due to uncertainty, short-term contracts, etc).

      However, candidates should demonstrate an understanding that some of the new
      practices also give employers the option of providing employees with
      short-term contracts only, which are subject to the market demand. This can
      cause insecurity and a feeling of injustice. Consequently the employees might be
      unmotivated and hence reduce their efforts. Some employees might not be
      interested in flexible working practices and will appreciate more money.
      Employees might also feel isolated professionally and socially, and some may
      fear change.

      The above are just brief examples of two-sided analysis of the two types
      of theories. The analysis should lead to some conclusions. For example, the
      effects on motivation are not predictable and can vary considerably. The effects
      may depend on the culture of the organization, the type of the employees in terms
      of skills, experience, position or any other relevant factors. Accept any relevant
      theory that is applied to the information given in the stimulus material.
      Theorists and theories should be applied not just mentioned.

      Accept any other relevant discussion.


      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 2.
                                                  – 14 –          SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

4.   (a)   Outline one primary market research method that Lominex could have used
           for its market research.                                                                [2 marks]

           Primary market research methods that could have been used include:
            questionnaires
            surveys
            interviews
            focus groups (panels)
            Accept any other appropriate primary research method or any variation of
              the above (eg telephone interviews).


           Award [1 mark] for each type of relevant and appropriate primary research
           method identified, and [1 mark] for each relevant and appropriate outline of the
           method, up to a maximum of [2 marks].

     (b)   Explain one advantage and one disadvantage for Lominex of being a
           partnership                                                       [4 marks]

           The advantages for Lominex of being a partnership include the following:
            the partners each have a large stake in the business and are likely to work hard
             to make the organization and its projects (such as the development of
             Roadex) succeed
            as each partner injects capital, more finance is available for investments
             (such as the development of Roadex) than in a sole trader set-up
            at the same time, partners have better control over decision-making than in a
             public limited company set-up (eg they can develop Roadex on terms they
             themselves choose)
            the partners can each specialize in different areas of the business (eg in the case
             of Roadex, different individuals can focus on developing the software and
             marketing it)
            there are fewer legal formalities in running the business.

           The disadvantages for Lominex of being a partnership include the following:
            if the business does not succeed, the partners have unlimited liability (eg they
             will be liable for the financial losses if Roadex does not succeed)
            compared to a sole trader, profits need to be shared by all partners
            financing options are more limited than for a public limited company, which
             may prevent some large projects that require much up-front investment from
             getting realized
            potential disagreements between partners may be difficult to solve (eg if the
             partners have very different views of how Roadex should be developed).

           Accept any other relevant advantage/disadvantage with an explanation.


           Mark as 2+2.

           Award [1 mark] for each correct advantage/disadvantage identified and an
           additional [1 mark] for a relevant explanation up to a maximum of [2 marks].
                                            – 15 –          SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(c)   Explain how Lominex can segment its market for Roadex.                                [4 marks]

      The purpose of market segmentation is to allow companies to generate greater
      sales volume or generate higher profits, by targeting specific groups of customers.
      Market segmentation, by providing companies with more knowledge about
      their customers, allows variation in products or the marketing mix to better suit
      customers’ needs. Segmentation also allows companies to target particular
      sub-groups suitable for the marketing mix and, therefore, not waste resources by
      marketing to inappropriate sub-groups. Market segmentation can also allow
      companies to offer differentiated products to different groups.

      Lominex will segment its market by targeting potential customers:
       who like leisure travel (as opposed to those planning itineraries for
        business travel)
       who travel by road (as opposed to airplane)
       who are in a hurry (and do not want to spend “two or three hours trying to find
        the airline, hotel or vacation package that meets their needs”)
       who use the internet (as this is an internet software)
       who tend to be well-off (as they “stay in mid-range or expensive hotels”).

      Without market segmentation, Lominex’s marketing mix might be inappropriately
      shaped for its potential market (promotion might not be via the best media, or the
      software making the itineraries might book the wrong quality of hotels).

      Accept any other relevant explanation.


      Award [1–2 marks] for a basic answer that shows some understanding of
      market segmentation (this can be a theoretical answer).

      Award [3–4 marks] for an answer that shows a good understanding of
      market segmentation applied to Lominex and Roadex.
                                           – 16 –           SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(d)   To what extent can Lominex use promotional strategies incorporating new
      technology (viral marketing, social networking, social media marketing) to
      promote Roadex?                                                            [10 marks]

      Using new technology (viral marketing, social networking, social media
      marketing) presents many advantages:
       as Roadex is a piece of online software, it is logical to use online media to
        promote it, especially as many intended users of Roadex are probably users of
        new technology (eg they are familiar with viral marketing)
       new technology makes it possible to be more creative (eg in the design of
        promotional campaigns); this again may appeal to Roadex’s intended users
       advertising online will enable Lominex to modify its promotion rapidly,
        for example, to respond to some current events, even anecdotally and
        humorously, in its promotion (for example, “if the President had used Roadex,
        he would not have arrived late at the international summit”)
       by using multimedia technology in its promotion, Lominex could add links to
        Roadex directly.

      However, new technology also has disadvantages that Lominex must not ignore:
       some potential users (for example, elderly users) might be more receptive to
        traditional promotional techniques (such as television or radio campaigns)
       online promotional messages can get out of control (for example, Roadex
        might be parodied in a negative way that goes viral on the internet)
       Lominex may not have the human resources knowledge to manage marketing
        on the internet, as this is a highly specialized area where new products and new
        techniques are rapidly launched, updated or become obsolete.

      Candidates may distinguish between viral marketing, social networking and social
      media marketing

      Accept any other relevant substantiated response.


      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 2.
                                                  – 17 –           SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

5.   (a)   Define the term unique selling point (USP).                                            [2 marks]

           Unique selling point refers to the features of a product or service that make it
           different from (and presumably better than) other products in the market.


           Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

           Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge
           and understanding.

           Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
           understanding similar to the answer above.

     (b)   Explain the advantages to Fabia of continuing to sell dresses under the Fabia
           brand.                                                                        [4 marks]

           Fabia already has a strong brand identity. It is known in the market for its
           unique selling point of high quality and original design, as well as for its ethical
           behaviour. Famous designers and celebrities often wear Fabia’s special-order
           dresses (customized production). Were Fabia to start selling dresses not under
           the Fabia name, it would not get any marketing advantage from the long-term
           brand identity it has built. Rather, the dresses now made by Patella and
           marketed under some other name would have no brand awareness in the market.
           Fabia would have to build a new brand identity, which in the competitive
           women’s fashion market is not easy to do.

           Accept any other relevant explanation.


           Award [1–2 marks] for a basic answer that shows some understanding of the
           importance of branding (this can be a theoretical answer).

           Award [3–4 marks] for an answer that shows a good understanding of the
           importance of branding applied to Fabia.
                                               – 18 –        SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(c)   With reference to Fabia and one other organization that you have studied,
      distinguish between batch production and job (customized) production.    [4 marks]

      Batch production occurs when a company produces a group of identical products
      in a group (batch), before moving on to another identical group of products.
      This can occur with dresses, where Fabia makes 100 dresses of one particular
      pattern, material, and size before refitting the production room (modest though
      the changes might be) to make a group of another, different dress
      (perhaps different in size, or material, or pattern, or some combination thereof).
      Batch production can also occur because the patterns of consumption so dictate.
      For example, a bakery will make a batch of bread early in the morning for sale to
      consumers who shop first thing. The bakery may then make another batch late
      morning for those shoppers who want fresh bread (virtually right out of the
      oven) but purchase their bread on their way home for lunch.

      Customized production refers to when a company produces something
      specifically to meet the needs of a particular customer. In the fashion industry,
      often female celebrities will want to wear a dress that they know no one else will
      have. Thus, they get a dress label or designer such as Fabia to make a
      customized product – a unique dress. In the bakery industry this can occur as
      well. Wedding cakes, for example, are often customized.

      Accept any other relevant distinction.


      Award [2 marks] if the candidate clearly distinguishes between batch and job
      (customized) production. Award an additional [1 mark] for the application to
      Fabia and a further [1 mark] for the application to another organization. Up to a
      maximum of [4 marks].

      N.B. Accept as application a reference, as above, to “a bakery” (the candidate
      does not have to specify a specific bakery).
                                              – 19 –       SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

(d)   Discuss the proposal to outsource the production of the batch produced
      dresses to Patella.                                                    [10 marks]

      The decision to outsource to Patella has advantages and disadvantages.

      Advantages/benefits could include:
       Patella is well-known for reliability and promptness
       Patella will allow Fabia to lower significantly the cost of producing dresses
       closure of the Australian factory will lower fixed costs and allow Fabia to be
        more flexible
       accept any other relevant advantage.

      Disadvantages/costs could include:
       many employees will be made redundant, which could generate
        negative publicity
       Vietnamese labour and environmental practices could also generate negative
        publicity and compromise an aspect of Fabia’s USP
       Fabia would be losing control of the production processes, which could harm
        them in the event of changing circumstances at Patella (change in ownership,
        deterioration of quality, etc)
       accept any other relevant disadvantage.

      Accept any other relevant discussion.


      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 2.
                                                  – 20 –           SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

                                              SECTION C

For questions 6 to 8, marks should be allocated according to the assessment criteria on
pages 3–4. These marking notes are intended to help and standardize examiners’ interpretation of the
assessment criteria and to provide some examples of the kinds of points that merit being awarded higher
marks. The examples are indicative only, and examiners should consider the quality of an answer on a
case-by-case basis; this depends much on the type of organization(s) candidates select and the kinds of
arguments they put forward.

6.   With reference to one or two organization(s) that you have studied, evaluate
     different strategies businesses can adopt to respond to issues of globalization. [20 marks]

     Criterion A

     In order to demonstrate that they fulfil this assessment criterion, candidates should be
     able to:
      demonstrate an understanding of the concepts given in the question (for example, by
        explaining that strategy is a company’s activity of long-term planning and
        globalization is the increasing competition and connectivity of countries, people
        and economies)
      select relevant and sufficient business management content from the syllabus, and
        explain this content in a helpful way, given the demands of the question
        (for example, by selecting the Ansoff matrix as a tool to analyze a company’s
        strategy options, and by explaining, most likely with the help of drawing the Ansoff
        matrix, how companies can develop through market penetration, market
        development, product development and diversification).

     Please note that how much business management content it is appropriate to select and
     in what degree of detail it is appropriate to explain this depends on the question and the
     real-world organization(s) candidates choose.

     As the question refers to “different strategies”, and “issues of globalization”, candidates
     are expected to refer to more than one strategy (such as market development and
     product development) and more than one issue of globalization (such as the creation of
     a multinational and multicultural workforce) in order to be awarded the highest mark.
                                              – 21 –       SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

Criterion B

In order to demonstrate that they fulfil this assessment criterion, candidates should be
able to:
 apply the given concepts and the relevant business management content to explain
    the situation and issues of their chosen real-world organization(s) (for example, by
    explaining Easyjet’s strategy of market development and British Airways’ strategy
    of market penetration)
 give appropriate and illustrative examples from the real-world organization(s)
    (for example, by referring to Easyjet’s introduction of flights to new countries in
    Eastern Europe with a population who now can afford to travel more and British
    Airways’ use of the idea of customer loyalty in advertising campaigns in existing
    markets).

Please note that sometimes, candidates’ research allows them to give very specific
examples, but other times they are only able to apply more generic knowledge of the
organization to the question. Very specific examples should not be expected for full
marks, as long as the examples are appropriate and illustrative of the points the
candidate wants to make.

If a candidate uses a section A or B organization, or the paper 1 pre-seen case study
organization in their response, award [0 marks] for this criterion.

The question asks candidates to refer to one or two organization(s); full marks can be
achieved by referring to one organization only.

Criterion C

In order to demonstrate that they fulfil this assessment criterion, candidates should be
able to:
 make relevant and balanced arguments (for example, by evaluating the effectiveness
   of British Airways’ strategies with respect to altogether new service categories)
 present reasonable evidence or other support to justify their arguments (for example,
   by explaining that while British Airways could do market research on new service
   categories, these remain challenging as the company’s knowledge is of the
   aviation market).

Please note that evidence from the real-world organization(s) does not need to be very
detailed or perfectly accurate for full marks. Other support may include candidates’
general knowledge of business management, of other organizations or specific contexts
they are familiar with.

Criterion D

For structure, please refer to the assessment criteria.
                                            – 22 –           SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

Criterion E

In order to demonstrate that they fulfil this assessment criterion, candidates should be
able to:
 consider the perspectives of various stakeholders (for example, by evaluating the
    impact of British Airways and Easyjet globalization strategies on customers
    and societies)
 for the highest achievement level, consider the relevant stakeholders’ perspectives in
    a balanced way (for example, by considering that while individuals and societies
    benefit from global travel as this increases people’s awareness of different cultures,
    global travel also has a potential harmful long term impact on societies due to the
    high environmental costs of air travel).

Please note that whether a focus on individuals or groups, or a focus on internal or
external stakeholders is appropriate depends on the question and the organization(s) the
candidate chooses.
                                                             – 23 –              SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

7.   With reference to one organization that you have studied, examine what changes
     globalization brings about in the management of human resources.               [20 marks]

     Criterion A

     In order to demonstrate that they fulfil this assessment criterion, candidates should be
     able to:
      demonstrate an understanding of the concepts given in the question (for example, by
        explaining that globalization is a reduction in economic, technological and cultural
        barriers facilitating companies’ growth beyond their national borders and change is
        the evolution in businesses’ strategies, objectives and processes)
      select relevant and sufficient business management content from the syllabus, and
        explain this content in a helpful way, given the demands of the question
        (for example, by selecting human resource management content such as
        organizational structure, communication and rewards, and by explaining that
        organizational structure is about how responsibilities are set up in a company,
        communication is about how messages are sent and received in a company and
        rewards include financial and non-financial benefits employees get for the job
        they do).

     Please note that how much business management content it is appropriate to select and
     in what degree of detail it is appropriate to explain this depends on the question and the
     real-world organization(s) candidates choose.

     Criterion B

     In order to demonstrate that they fulfil this assessment criterion, candidates should be
     able to:
      apply the given concepts and the relevant business management content to explain
         the situation and issues of their chosen real-world organization (for example, by
         explaining that Unilever needs to address issues such as salary levels, pay structures
         and non-financial rewards offered in its different operating locations)
      give appropriate and illustrative examples from the real-world organization
         (for example, by referring to Unilever’s ability to have different contractual
         relationships with its employees in different locations, as evidenced by the
         temporary contracts it has provided to the majority of its tea plantation workers in
         Pakistan, with the implication that their salaries may be lower and they may not be
         entitled to the same annual and medical leave as permanent employees*).

     Please note that sometimes, candidates’ research allows them to give very specific
     examples, but other times they are only able to apply more generic knowledge of the
     organization to the question. Very specific examples should not be expected for full
     marks, as long as the examples are appropriate and illustrative of the points the
     candidate wants to make.

     If a candidate uses a section A or B organization, or the paper 1 pre-seen case study
     organization in their response, award [0 marks] for this criterion.


     * Source: International Labour Rights Forum, http://www.laborrights.org/end-violence-against-trade-
        unions/unilever-lipton-workers, accessed on April 11, 2013.
                                              – 24 –       SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

Criterion C

In order to demonstrate that they fulfil this assessment criterion, candidates should be
able to:
 make relevant and balanced arguments (for example, by examining how
   organizational structure and communication are interconnected in the context of a
   large multinational company)
 present reasonable evidence or other support to justify their arguments (for example,
   by explaining that while a narrow span of control and systems of delegation and
   empowerment might be good for more personalized communication, these might not
   be possible in a global company like Unilever, as they would risk different operating
   practices getting established in different parts of the company).

Please note that evidence from the real-world organization(s) does not need to be very
detailed or perfectly accurate for full marks. Other support may include candidates’
general knowledge of business management, of other organizations or specific contexts
they are familiar with.

Criterion D

For structure, please refer to the assessment criteria.

Criterion E

In order to demonstrate that they fulfil this assessment criterion, candidates should be
able to:
 consider the perspectives of various stakeholders (for example, by examining the
    differing perspectives institutional owners and individual employees might have to
    the kinds of human resource management changes global growth brings)
 for the highest achievement level, consider the relevant stakeholders’ perspectives in
    a balanced way (for example, by considering that what institutional owners in a
    multinational business like Unilever see of the company’s practices is numbers, and
    hence their view of human resource matters may not be as personalized as that of
    individual employees, to whom work and work conditions are an important
    constituent of well-being).

Please note that whether a focus on individuals or groups or a focus on internal or
external stakeholders is appropriate depends on the question and the organization the
candidate chooses.
                                                  – 25 –           SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

8.   With reference to one organization that you have studied, discuss the importance
     of innovation and of ethics in marketing.                                                     [20 marks]

     Criterion A

     In order to demonstrate that they fulfil this assessment criterion, candidates should be
     able to:
      demonstrate an understanding of the concepts given in the question (for example, by
        explaining that innovation is the ability to think anew and develop new services and
        ethics is considerations about different stakeholders’ perspectives and well-being)
      select relevant and sufficient business management content from the syllabus, and
        explain this content in a helpful way, given the demands of the question
        (for example, by selecting aspects of marketing such as ethical considerations in
        marketing, branding and differentiation from competitors, and by explaining that
        ethical considerations in marketing involve how a company approaches its
        customers, branding is the kind of image a company portrays of itself and its
        services, and differentiation from competitors can happen, for example, through
        developing a service that allows altogether new customer behaviours).

     Please note that how much business management content it is appropriate to select and
     in what degree of detail it is appropriate to explain this depends on the question and the
     real-world organization(s) candidates choose.

     Although marks are not awarded for definitions, it is likely to be helpful to provide brief
     but clear explanations of the given concepts and selected business management content
     early on in the response and to formulate these explanations so that they fit the question.

     Criterion B

     In order to demonstrate that they fulfil this assessment criterion, candidates should be
     able to:
      apply the given concepts and the relevant business management content to explain
         the situation and issues of their chosen real-world organization (for example, by
         explaining that Safaricom, a Kenyan mobile network operator, has re-invented the
         idea of banking in Kenya and followed this up with some innovative marketing
         initiatives that raise interesting ethical considerations)
      give appropriate and illustrative examples from the real-world organization
         (for example, by referring to Safaricom’s service M-PESA, whereby its customers
         can transfer money by mobile phone, which has differentiated Safaricom from
         competitors, allowed the company to develop a brand closely associated with
         development and provided in many cases a life-changing service to its customers).

     Please note that sometimes, candidates’ research allows them to give very specific
     examples, but other times they are only able to apply more generic knowledge of the
     organization to the question. Very specific examples should not be expected for full
     marks, as long as the examples are appropriate and illustrative of the points the
     candidate wants to make.

     If a candidate uses a section A or B organization, or the paper 1 pre-seen case study
     organization in their response, award [0 marks] for this criterion.
                                              – 26 –       SPEC/3/BUSMT/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

Criterion C

In order to demonstrate that they fulfil this assessment criterion, candidates should be
able to:
 make relevant and balanced arguments (for example, by discussing how having such
   a positive impact on people’s lives through a radical innovation like M-PESA
   increases expectations on a company’s ethical standards)
 present reasonable evidence or other support to justify their arguments (for example,
   by explaining that while e-learning projects fit well with Safaricom’s brand, the
   company needs to be careful in their planning of such projects).

Please note that evidence from the real-world organization(s) does not need to be very
detailed or perfectly accurate for full marks. Other support may include candidates’
general knowledge of business management, of other organizations or specific contexts
they are familiar with.

Criterion D

For structure, please refer to the assessment criteria.

Criterion E

In order to demonstrate that they fulfil this assessment criterion, candidates should be
able to:
 consider the perspectives of various stakeholders (for example, by discussing that
    younger and older consumers may have differing views of what is appropriate use of
    language in advertising campaigns).
 for the highest achievement level, consider the relevant stakeholders’ perspectives in
    a balanced way (for example, by considering that older consumers may consider the
    penetration of English into the Swahili language as weakening Kenyan identity
    whereas youth may not worry about this to the same degree).

Please note that whether a focus on individuals or groups, or a focus on internal or
external stakeholders is appropriate depends on the question and the organization the
candidate chooses.
SPEC/3/BUSMT/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS




BUSINESS MANAGEMENT
CASE STUDY: B-PHARMA


For use with specimen examination papers


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

 Case study booklet required for Higher Level Paper 1 and Standard Level Paper 1 Business
  Management examinations.




                                                                                                5 pages
                                                        © International Baccalaureate Organization 2013
                                                –2–            SPEC/3/BUSMT/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

                                            B-PHARMA

     B-Pharma, a public limited company, is one of the biggest multinational companies (MNC) in the
     pharmaceutical industry. It employs over 30 000 people globally. The corporate headquarters are in
     Tsukuba Science City, Japan.

     B-Pharma was founded in 1973 by Yukio Nakamura. Strong demand in the mid 1980s and a period
 5   of economic boom in Japan enabled B-Pharma to grow and expand within the Pacific Rim. In
     1986, a first subsidiary was established in Seattle, United States (USA). B-Pharma has also opened
     smaller subsidiaries in other countries such as Canada, Chile, Mexico, New Zealand, South Korea
     and Vietnam. Subsidiaries are responsible for both production and distribution of B-Pharma drugs
     in their national markets, as well as research and development (R&D).


     Marketing

10   In the pharmaceutical industry, R&D departments have a critical role in ensuring successful
     innovation. New product development can lead to competitive advantage, business growth, higher
     profits and therefore shareholder satisfaction. However, R&D is a long and expensive process, and
     strategically challenging: it could take more than 17 years from the discovery of a new drug to its
     launch into the market. The process of approval involves significant testing to ensure the safety of
15   the drugs. This is why all new drugs, once commercialized, tend to be expensive.

     When B-Pharma sets the prices of its drugs, it must cover not only the costs of production and
     distribution, but also the costs of past R&D. Pricing is usually cost-plus, although some other
     factors may be taken into account, for example the price of competitors’ drugs. Pharmaceutical
     companies do not normally use pricing strategies of penetration or skimming.

20   B-Pharma has a portfolio of drugs at different stages of their product life cycle, for example:
      Pharmax, a painkiller and B-Pharma’s bestselling drug. It has a share of around one-third of
       the market in Japan and the USA. That figure has been stable for the last 10 years. Although
       the market is saturated and growing very slowly, this painkiller is a well-established product.
       Following the expiration of the original patent, competitors are now starting to produce cheaper
25     substitutes.
      Pharmaflo, a drug that prevents heart attacks. Launched in 2006, it has a 15 % market share in a
       rapidly growing market.
      Pharmaslim, a drug for weight control. It is selling poorly even though the market for anti-
       obesity drugs is growing rapidly.
30    Pharmatics, a new anti-aging drug, launched in 2014. Its first sales results were satisfactory due
       to significant introductory marketing efforts. Whether sales will continue to grow is unclear.
                                                                   –3–                SPEC/3/BUSMT/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

          Although launching a new drug is a complex marketing activity, B-Pharma has a key strength: its
          well-established brand name has been maintained by aggressive advertising in specialist magazines.
          B-Pharma’s logo is present on all its products. B-Pharma has considerable brand loyalty. Market
    35    research shows that most adults across East Asia recognize B-Pharma labels and regard them as a
          mark of quality and safety. B-Pharma drugs are trusted but are expensive. In periods of economic
          difficulties, many people prefer to buy generic drugs1, which are cheaper.


          Managing human resources in a multinational company

          B-Pharma has attempted to introduce the same tall organizational structure in all its subsidiaries.
          However, this uniform approach to hierarchical organization has not proved appropriate as it ignores
    40    cultural differences between some of the countries where B-Pharma operates.

          In Canada, employees have repeatedly stated that they want more delegation and a wider span of
          control. The Canadian subsidiary has recently suffered lower levels of productivity compared to other
          B-Pharma subsidiaries. In this current financial year, it has even traded at a loss. Several managers
          have been unable to improve productivity, so Yukio has appointed Susan James as chief executive
    45    officer (CEO) in Canada to return the subsidiary to profitability in the coming financial year. Susan
          has rejected requests for greater empowerment.

          Although morale has deteriorated and strike action has been threatened, she refuses to change her
          leadership style. She has the support of the rest of her management team. The problems have been
          exacerbated by her inability to communicate and by the tall hierarchical structure. With collective
    50    bargaining now in process, Susan understands that employees may be left demotivated and that
          productivity might suffer. She knows that Canadian employees respond well to financial motivation,
          so her solution to the problems is to redirect some of her R&D budget to her human resources (HR)
          department in order to implement performance-related pay (PRP).


          Current issues: B-Pharma in the media

          B-Pharma’s public image has recently been tarnished by some events and problems.

    55    In 2012, one of B-Pharma’s laboratories found itself at the centre of a controversy reported by
          international media. Its scientists were conducting research on the effects of a new drug and as part of
          the testing, they carried out experiments on animals. Many of these animals suffered a painful death.
          A “whistleblower”2 alerted the authorities because the standard regulations and benchmarks that were
          supposed to ensure the care of animals were not followed. Unannounced, veterinary inspectors visited
    60    the premises and wrote a damaging report. The document was leaked to journalists and this started
          a “media frenzy” with headlines such as “Animals tortured at B-Pharma lab” and “B-Pharma lab of
          shame”. Animal rights activists vandalized several laboratories as well as the Tsukuba headquarters;
          Yukio Nakamura himself received letters threatening him and his family. The weight of public opinion
          worldwide was against B-Pharma, even though a costly public relations exercise reduced the impact
    65    to a certain extent.



1
     generic drugs: as opposed to branded drugs, generic drugs are produced and sold without patent protection
2
     “whistleblower”: an employee who reveals wrongdoing within an organization


                                                                                                                 Turn over
                                                    –4–            SPEC/3/BUSMT/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

       Following the negative publicity, B-Pharma tightened its procedures and created a new post of
       “Director of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)”. The person appointed to the position was
       Tadashi Agi, a Professor of Business Ethics at the National University of Tsukuba. Tadashi is now
       writing a corporate social responsibility manual for the company. He plans to introduce corporate
 70    social responsibility objectives, measures and actions across all departments and is making extensive
       use of new technology to communicate this ethical vision to all internal and external stakeholders.


       Accounts and finance

       Although B-Pharma has large financial reserves and could theoretically withstand any financial
       instability including an economic recession, the Board of Directors is aware that financial markets are
       volatile.

 75    The USA subsidiary of B-Pharma recently had a liquidity problem and as a form of crisis management
       the Tsukuba headquarters had to intervene to provide some extra short-term capital. The Board of
       Directors of B-Pharma sent Suzuko Tanaka, one of the Japanese financial auditors, to Seattle to
       enquire about the problem. Although Suzuko found that the financial information was not up-to-date
       she managed to collect some data (Appendix 1).


       The future: external growth and strategic options

 80    In October 2015, the value of B-Pharma shares dropped by 25 %. Although the market recovered,
       B-Pharma remains vulnerable to takeover. The Board of Directors of B-Pharma is considering several
       strategic options for the future growth of B-Pharma:
        Strategic option 1: Market development
        Strategic option 2: Market penetration
 85     Strategic option 3: Diversification.



Additional terms not in the Guide

Diversification
Patent
                                                   –5–            SPEC/3/BUSMT/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

Appendix 1: Data collected by Suzuko Tanaka at the USA subsidiary of B-Pharma

                                                      2011                2012
                      Cash                           $150m                $60m
                      Creditors                      $200m               $500m
                      Debtors                        $200m               $330m
                      Short term loans               $150m               $150m
                      Stock                          $175m               $325m

                      Ratios:
                      Current ratio                   1.50                1.10
                      Acid test (quick) ratio         1.00                0.60


Companies, products, or individuals named in this case study are fictitious and any similarities with actual
entities are purely coincidental.
