M21/2/ABARA/SP1/ARA/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                  May / Mai / Mayo de 2021


                   Arabic / Arabe / Árabe B


                         Standard level
                         Niveau moyen
                          Nivel Medio


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




9 pages/páginas
                                            –2–               M21/2/ABARA/SP1/ARA/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2021

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2021

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2021

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                        –3–                 M21/2/ABARA/SP1/ARA/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion A: Language

How successfully does the candidate command written language?
• To what extent is the vocabulary appropriate and varied?
• To what extent are the grammatical structures varied?
• To what extent does the accuracy of the language contribute to effective communication?

  Marks                                                 Level descriptor
     0        The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
              Command of the language is limited.
              Vocabulary is sometimes appropriate to the task.
    1–3
              Basic grammatical structures are used.
              Language contains errors in basic structures. Errors interfere with communication.
              Command of the language is partially effective.
              Vocabulary is appropriate to the task.
              Some basic grammatical structures are used, with some attempts to use more
    4–6
              complex structures.
              Language is mostly accurate for basic structures, but errors occur in more complex
              structures. Errors at times interfere with communication.
              Command of the language is effective and mostly accurate.
              Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied.
    7–9       A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used.
              Language is mostly accurate. Occasional errors in basic and in complex grammatical
              structures do not interfere with communication.
              Command of the language is mostly accurate and very effective.
              Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied, including the use of idiomatic
              expressions.
  10–12
              A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used effectively.
              Language is mostly accurate. Minor errors in more complex grammatical structures
              do not interfere with communication.

                                                                                                                   ‫اﻟﻠﻐﺔ‬
    ‫ ﺑﻌض‬.‫ وھذا اﻷﻣر ﯾﺟب أن ﯾﺄﺧذه اﻟﻣﺻﺣﺣون ﺑﻌﯾن اﻻﻋﺗﺑﺎر‬،‫ﻟﯾﺳت ﻟﺟﻣﯾﻊ اﻷﺧطﺎء اﻟﻠﻐوﯾﺔ اﻟﺗﻲ ﯾﻘﻊ ﻓﯾﮭﺎ اﻟﻣﻣﺗﺣن ذات أھﻣﯾﺔ‬
‫ وھﻧﺎك أﺧطﺎء ﺑﺳﯾطﺔ ﻻ ﺗﺄﺛﯾر ﻟﮭﺎ ﻋﻠﻰ ﻓﮭم‬،ً‫اﻷﺧطﺎء ﺗﻛون ذا ﺗﺄﺛﯾر واﺿﺢ ﻋﻠﻰ اﻟﻣﻌﻧﻰ وﻣؤﺷراﺗﮫ ﻣﻣﺎ ﯾﺟﻌل ﻓﮭم اﻟﻣﻘﺻود ﻣﺗﻌذرا‬
     ‫ ﻓﻲ ﺣﯾن أن أﺧطﺎء أﺧرى ﻗد‬،‫ ﺑﺎﻹﺿﺎﻓﺔ إﻟﻰ أﺧطﺎء ﺗﻌﻛس ﺿﻌﻔﺎ ﺟوھرﯾﺎ ﻓﻲ اﻟﺗﻌﺎﻣل ﻣﻊ اﻟﻠﻐﺔ وﻗواﻋدھﺎ‬.‫اﻟﻣﻌﺎﻧﻲ وﻣؤﺷراﺗﮭﺎ‬
                                                                                      .‫ﺗﻛون ﻧﺎﺟﻣﺔ ﻋن إﻏﻔﺎل اﻟﻣﻣﺗﺣن ﻟﮭﺎ‬
                                                                                                                ‫اﻟﻌﺛرات‬
 ‫ ﻓﻌﻠﻰ ﺳﺑﯾل اﻟﻣﺛﺎل ﯾﻌﻣد اﻟﻛﺛﯾر ﻣن اﻟﻣﻣﺗﺣﻧﯾن ﻋﻧد اﻟﻛﺗﺎﺑﺔ إﻟﻰ ﻋدم ﺗﺻرﯾف اﻟﻔﻌل‬،‫ﺗﻛون اﻷﺧطﺎء ﻋﻠﻰ ﻣﺳﺗوﯾﺎت ﻣﺧﺗﻠﻔﺔ اﻟﺻﻌوﺑﺔ‬
 ‫ أو ﯾﻐﻔﻠون ﻋن ﺣذف ﺣرف اﻟﻌﻠﺔّ ﻣن آﺧر اﻟﻔﻌل اﻟﻣﻌﺗل اﻵﺧرأو اﻟﻧون ﻣن آواﺧر اﻷﻓﻌﺎل اﻟﺧﻣﺳﺔ اﻟﻣﺿﺎرﻋﺔ‬،‫ﺑﺻورﺗﮫ اﻟﺻﺣﯾﺣﺔ‬
                              .‫ رﻏم أﻧﮭم ﯾﻌرﻓون ﻣﺗﻰ ﯾﺳﺗﺧدم اﻟﻧﻔﻲ أو ﺻﯾﻐﺔ اﻷﻓﻌﺎل اﻟﺧﻣﺳﺔ ﻓﻲ اﻟﻛﺗﺎﺑﺔ‬،‫اﻟﻣﺟزوم واﻟﻣﻧﺻوﺑﺔ‬
                                                                                                       ‫اﻷﺧطﺎء اﻟﻣﺗﻛررة‬
     ‫ ﻛﺎﻟﺟﻣﻊ ﺑﯾن ﻓﺎﻋﻠﯾن ﻓﻲ اﻟﺟﻣﻠﺔ ﻣﺛل "درﺳوا اﻟطﻼب" أو اﺳﺗﺧدام ﻓﻌل‬،‫ھﻧﺎك ﺑﻌض اﻷﺧطﺎء ﻓﻲ اﻟﺑُﻧﻰ ﺗﺗﻛرر ﺑﺻورة ﻣﻧﺗظﻣﺔ‬
                                                     ."‫ ﻣﺛل "اﻟﺿﯾﻔﺎن وﺻﻠوا ﺻﺑﺎﺣﺎ‬،‫ﻣﺗﺻل ﺑواو اﻟﺟﻣﺎﻋﺔ ﻣﻊ ﺻﯾﻐﺔ اﻟﻣﺛﻧﻰ‬
                                                                                                                  ‫ﺛﻐرات‬
       ‫ ﻓﻌﻠﻰ ﺳﺑﯾل اﻟﻣﺛﺎل ﯾﻐﻔل اﻟﻣﻣﺗﺣن ﻋن‬.‫ أو أﻧﮭﺎ ﻻ ﺗظﮭر رﻏم ﺿرورة اﺳﺗﺧداﻣﮭﺎ‬،‫ﺑﻌض اﻟﺑُﻧﻰ اﻟﻠﻐوﯾﺔ ﻧﺎدرا ﻣﺎ ﺗﺄﺗﻲ ﺻﺣﯾﺣﺔ‬
                                                                              .‫اﺳﺗﺧدام اﻟﻔﻌل رﻏم ﻛَون اﻟﺟﻣﻠﺔ ﺑﺣﺎﺟﺔ ﻟذﻟك‬
                                                  –4–                M21/2/ABARA/SP1/ARA/TZ0/XX/M



Criterion B: Message
To what extent does the candidate fulfil the task?
     • How relevant are the ideas to the task?
     • To what extent are ideas developed?
     • To what extent do the clarity and organization of ideas contribute to the successful delivery of
       the message?

The “descriptor unpacked” explain the assessment criteria in greater detail. Where a candidate’s
response does not correspond exactly to a single mark band, the statements in bold should be
used as a guide for the ‘best fit’ approach.

 Marks              Level descriptor                             Descriptor unpacked
 0          The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
            The task is partially fulfilled. The link between the response and task tends to be
                                                unclear; the reader has difficulty understanding the
            Few ideas are relevant to the       message.
            task.
                                                The response touches upon some aspects of the task but
            Ideas are stated, but with no       there is also much unrelated information.
     1–3    development.
                                                The response addresses the task in a simple manner, and
            Ideas are not clearly presented     supporting details and/or examples barely feature, if at all.
            and do not follow a logical         The ideas do not link well together; inadequate or
            structure, making the message       inappropriate use of cohesive devices confuse the
            difficult to determine.             message.
            The task is generally fulfilled.    The link between the response and the task is mostly
                                                detectable; the reader’s general understanding of the
            Some ideas are relevant to the      message is not impeded, despite some ambiguity.
            task.
                                                The response covers some aspects of the task, or
            Ideas are outlined, but are not     touches upon all aspects but superficially.
            fully developed.
     4–6                                        The response includes some supporting details and
            Ideas are generally clearly         examples.
            presented and the response is       The ideas are organized in a logical way; some cohesive
            generally structured in a logical   devices are used appropriately to aid the delivery of the
            manner, leading to a mostly         message, although there may be areas of confusion at
            successful delivery of the          times.
            message.
            The task is fulfilled.              The link between the response and the task is clear;
                                                the reader has a good understanding of the message
            Most ideas are relevant to the      conveyed.
            task.
                                                The response covers all aspects of the task, despite
            Ideas are developed well, with      losing focus at times.
     7–9    some detail and examples.
                                                The response uses supporting details and examples to
            Ideas are clearly presented and     clarify the message.
            the response is structured in a     The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive devices
            logical manner, supporting the      are used appropriately to deliver the message with little or
            delivery of the message.            no ambiguity.
            The task is fulfilled effectively. The link between the response and the task is precise
                                                and consistently evident; the reader has a clear
            Ideas are relevant to the task.     understanding of the message conveyed.
 10–12
                                                The response covers all aspects of the task fully, and
                                                maintains focus throughout.
                                                   –5–               M21/2/ABARA/SP1/ARA/TZ0/XX/M


             Ideas are fully developed,          The response uses well-chosen supporting details and
             providing details and relevant      examples to illustrate and explain ideas persuasively.
             examples.                           The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive devices
             Ideas are clearly presented and     are used appropriately to deliver the message with clarity
                                                 and ease.
             the response is structured in a
             logical and coherent manner
             that supports the delivery of the
             message.

Note: When marking candidate responses, keep in mind that neither the factual accuracy of the
information presented, nor the validity of the candidates’ personal opinions, are being assessed.
Therefore, scripts that are factually inaccurate should not be marked down, provided the ideas
presented have coherence and are sufficiently developed.



Criterion C: Conceptual understanding

To what extent does the candidate demonstrate conceptual understanding?
   •       To what extent is the choice of text type appropriate to the task?
   •       To what extent are register and tone appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
           task?
   •       To what extent does the response incorporate the conventions of the chosen text type?

  Marks                                           Level descriptor
       0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
              Conceptual understanding is limited.
              The choice of text type is generally inappropriate to the context, purpose or audience.
   1–2        The register and tone are inappropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response incorporates limited recognizable conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is mostly demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is generally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   3–4        The register and tone, while occasionally appropriate to the context, purpose and
              audience of the task, fluctuate throughout the response.
              The response incorporates some conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is fully demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   5–6        The register and tone are appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response fully incorporates the conventions of the chosen text type.



Note: Examiners must balance all three elements in criterion C (choice of text type,
appropriateness of tone and register, and use of text type conventions) to arrive at the final mark.
                                                       ‫–‪–6‬‬                    ‫‪M21/2/ABARA/SP1/ARA/TZ0/XX/M‬‬


‫)‪Question specific guidance (Criterion B and C‬‬


                                                                                                          ‫اﻟﺴﺆال اﻷول‬


      ‫ﺿﻤﻦ ﻓﻌﺎﻟﯿﺎت اﻟﻨﺎدي اﻟﺼﯿﻔﻲ ﻓﻲ اﻟﻤﺪرﺳﺔ وﻓﻲ أﺳﺒﻮع اﻟﻘﺮاءة ﻟﻠﺠﻤﯿﻊ‪ ،‬اﻛﺘﺒﻮا ﻣﻮﺿﻮﻋﺎ ً ﻋﻦ ﻛﺘﺎﺑﻜﻢ اﻟﻤﻔﻀﻞ ﻋﺎرﺿﯿﻦ أھﻢ‬
                               ‫اﻷﻓﻜﺎر ‪ /‬اﻷﺣﺪاث اﻟﺘﻲ وردت ﻓﻲ اﻟﻜﺘﺎب‪ .‬واﺷﺮﺣﻮا أﺳﺒﺎب ﺗﻔﻀﯿﻠﻜﻢ ﻟﮭﺬا اﻟﻜﺘﺎب ﻋﻦ ﻏﯿﺮه‪.‬‬

                              ‫ﻣﻘﺎﺑﻠﺔ‬                       ‫ﻣدوﻧﺔ إﻟﻛﺗروﻧﯾّﺔ‬                                ‫ﻋﻣود رأي‬

‫‪Criterion B:‬‬

                                          ‫ﻣﻘدﻣﺔ ﻋن أھﻣﯾﺔ اﻟﻘراءة ودور اﻟﻧوادي اﻟﺻﯾﻔﯾﺔ ﻓﻲ ﺗﺷﺟﯾﻊ اﻟطﻼب ﻋﻠﻰ اﻟﻘراءة ‪.‬‬    ‫•‬

                               ‫اﺳم اﻟﻛﺗﺎب اﻟﻣﻔﺿل وذﻛر اﻟﻣوﺿوع اﻟذي ﯾﻌﺎﻟﺟﮫ ﻣﻊ ﻋرض اﻷﻓﻛﺎر واﻷﺣداث اﻟﺗﻲ وردت ﻓﯾﮫ‪.‬‬        ‫•‬

                                                                                 ‫ﺷرح أﺳﺑﺎب ﺗﻔﺿﯾل اﻟﻛﺗﺎب ﻋن ﻏﯾره‪.‬‬      ‫•‬




‫‪Criterion C:‬‬

‫‪Choice of text type:‬‬

                              ‫‪Text type‬‬             ‫‪Rationale‬‬
‫‪Appropriate‬‬                    ‫ﻣدوﻧﺔ إﻟﻛﺗروﻧﯾّﺔ‬        ‫ﯾﻧﺎﺳب ﻧوع اﻟﻧص اﻟﻐرض ﻣن اﻟﻛﺗﺎﺑﺔ ﻋن وﺟﮭﺔ ﻧظر ﺷﺧﺻﯾﺔ ﻟﺟﻣﮭور‬
                                                                           ‫ﻣﺣدد وھم رواد اﻟﻧﺎدي اﻟﺻﯾﻔﻲ ﻣن اﻟطﻼب‪.‬‬

‫‪Generally appropriate‬‬                  ‫ﻋﻣود رأي‬     ‫ﯾﻧﺎﺳب ﻧوع اﻟﻧص اﻟﻐرض ﻣن اﻟﻛﺗﺎﺑﺔ ﻋن وﺟﮭﺔ ﻧظر ﺷﺧﺻﯾﺔ ﻟﺟﻣﮭور ﻛﺑﯾر‬
                                                                                                        ‫ﻏﯾر ﻣﺣدد‪.‬‬

‫‪Generally inappropriate‬‬                    ‫ﻣﻘﺎﺑﻠﺔ‬        ‫ﻧوع اﻟﻧص ﻣﻧﺎﺳب ﻹﺟراء ﻣﻧﺎﻗﺷﺔ وﺟﮭﺎ ﻟوﺟﮫ ﻣﻊ اﻷﺷﺧﺎص اﻟﻣﻌﻧﯾﯾن‬
                                                                            ‫ﻟﺗﺣﻘﯾﻖ اﻟﻐرض ﻣن اﻟﻣوﺿوع ﻟﺟﻣﮭور ﻣﺣدد‪.‬‬


‫‪Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these‬‬
‫‪conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the‬‬
‫‪“generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.‬‬


‫‪Register and tone:‬‬
                                                                                                   ‫• ﻧﻐﻣﺔ ﺷﺑﮫ رﺳﻣﯾﺔ‬
                                                                                                   ‫• ﻧﺑرة ﺟﺎذﺑﺔ ﻣﻘﻧﻌﺔ‬

‫‪Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.‬‬
                                                          ‫–‪–7‬‬                 ‫‪M21/2/ABARA/SP1/ARA/TZ0/XX/M‬‬


                                                                                                             ‫اﻟﺴﺆال اﻟﺜﺎﻧﻲ‬


      ‫أﺛﻨﺎء ﻛﺘﺎﺑﺔ طﻠﺐ اﻟﺤﺼﻮل ﻋﻠﻰ ﻣﻨﺤﺔ ﺟﺎﻣﻌﯿﺔ‪ ،‬وﺟﺪﺗﻢ أﻧﮫ ﻣﻦ ﺿﻤﻦ ﺷﺮوط اﻟﺤﺼﻮل ﻋﻠﻰ اﻟﻤﻨﺤﺔ اﻟﻘﯿﺎم ﺑﻌﻤﻞ ﺗﻄﻮﻋﻲ ﯾﮭﺪف‬
  ‫ﻟﻠﻨﮭﻮض ﺑﺎﻟﻤﺴﺘﻮى اﻟﺘﻌﻠﯿﻤﻲ ﻓﻲ اﻟﻤﺠﺘﻤﻊ ﻣﻦ ﺣﻮﻟﻜﻢ‪ .‬اﻛﺘﺒﻮا ﻋﻦ ﺗﺠﺮﺑﺔ ﻋﻤﻞ ﺗﻄﻮﻋﻲ ﻣﺠﺘﻤﻌﻲ ﯾﺴﺘﮭﺪف اﻟﺘﻌﻠﯿﻢ ﻗﻤﺘﻢ ﺑﮭﺎ ﻓﻲ اﻟﺴﻨﺔ‬
                                                  ‫اﻷﺧﯿﺮة‪ ،‬وﻗﺎرﻧﻮا ﺑﯿﻦ ﺷﻌﻮرﻛﻢ إزاء اﻟﻌﻤﻞ اﻟﺘﻄﻮﻋﻲ ﻗﺒﻞ اﻟﺒﺪء ﻓﯿﮫ وﺑﻌﺪه‪.‬‬

                       ‫ﻣدوﻧﺔ إﻟﻛﺗروﻧﯾﺔ‬                               ‫ﺧطﺎب‬                                   ‫ﺑرﯾد إﻟﻛﺗروﻧﻲ‬

‫‪Criterion B:‬‬
                                                                                          ‫• ﺗﻌرﯾف اﻟﻌﻣل اﻟﺗطوﻋﻲ وأھﻣﯾﺗﮫ‪.‬‬
                                                      ‫• ﺷرح ﺗﺟرﺑﺔ اﻟطﺎﻟب ﻓﻲ اﻟﻌﻣل اﻟﺗطوﻋﻲ ﻓﻲ ﻣﺟﺎل اﻟﺗﻌﻠﯾم وﺧطوات اﻟﺗﻧﻔﯾذ‪.‬‬
                                                                         ‫• ﻣﻘﺎرﻧﺔ ﺑﯾن ﺷﻌور اﻟطﺎﻟب ﻗﺑل اﻟﻌﻣل اﻟﺗطوﻋﻲ وﺑﻌده‪.‬‬
                                                                                                                        ‫•‬
                                                                                                                        ‫•‬

‫‪Criterion C:‬‬

‫‪Choice of text type:‬‬

                                ‫‪Text type‬‬        ‫‪Rationale‬‬
‫‪Appropriate‬‬                        ‫ﺑرﯾد إﻟﻛﺗروﻧﻲ‬  ‫ﻧوع اﻟﻧص ﻣﻧﺎﺳب ﻟﻠﺗواﺻل ﻣﻊ ﺟﮭﺔ رﺳﻣﯾﺔ و ﯾﺳﺗﺧدم ﻋﺎدةً ﻟﻠﺗواﺻل ﻣﻊ‬
                                                     ‫اﻷﻓراد أو اﻟﻣﺟﻣوﻋﺎت اﻟﺻﻐﯾرة وﯾواﻓﻖ روح اﻟﻌﺻر وﺳرﻋﺔ اﻟﺗواﺻل‪.‬‬

‫‪Generally appropriate‬‬                       ‫ﺧطﺎب‬      ‫ﻧوع اﻟﻧص ﻣﻧﺎﺳب ﻟﻠﺗواﺻل ﻣﻊ ﺟﮭﺔ رﺳﻣﯾﺔ وﻟﻛن ﻻ ﯾﺗﻧﺎﺳب ﻣﻊ اﻟﻌﺻر وﻣﺎ‬
                                                                                ‫ﯾﺳوده اﻵن ﻓﻲ ﻋﺻر اﻻﺗﺻﺎﻻت اﻹﻟﻛﺗروﻧﯾﺔ ‪.‬‬

‫‪Generally inappropriate‬‬             ‫ﻣدوﻧﺔ إﻟﻛﺗروﻧﯾﺔ‬   ‫ﯾﺗم ﻗراءة ﻧوع اﻟﻧص ﺑﺷﻛل أﺳﺎﺳﻲ ﻣن ﻗﺑل ﻗراء ﻏﯾر ﻣﺣددﯾن ‪ ،‬وھو ﯾﻌﺗﻣد‬
                                                           ‫ﻋﻠﻰ اﻟﻘﺎرئ ﻟﻠﺑﺣث ﻋن اﻟﻣﻌﻠوﻣﺎت وﻏﯾر ﻣﻧﺎﺳب ﻟﻣﺧﺎطﺑﺔ ﺟﮭﺔ رﺳﻣﯾﺔ‬
                                                                                         ‫ﻣﺣددة وﺗﺣﻘﯾﻖ اﻟﮭدف ﻣن اﻟﻛﺗﺎﺑﺔ‪.‬‬

‫‪Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these‬‬
‫‪conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the‬‬
‫‪“generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.‬‬


‫‪Register and tone:‬‬
                                                                                             ‫• ﻧﻐﻣﺔ رﺳﻣﯾﺔ أو ﺷﺑﮫ رﺳﻣﯾﺔ‬
                                                                                                     ‫• ﻧﺑرة ﺟﺎدة وﻣﻘﻧﻌﺔ‬

‫‪Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.‬‬
                                                             ‫–‪–8‬‬                  ‫‪M21/2/ABARA/SP1/ARA/TZ0/XX/M‬‬


                                                                                                                   ‫اﻟﺴﺆال اﻟﺜﺎﻟﺚ‬


  ‫أﻧﺗم أﻋﺿﺎء ﺑﻔرﯾﻖ اﻟﺻﺣﺎﻓﺔ ﻓﻲ ﻣدرﺳﺗﻛم‪ ،‬وﻗد ﻓﺎز زﻣﻼؤﻛم ﺑﻔرﯾﻖ ﻋﻠوم اﻟﺑﺣﺎر ﻓﻲ اﻟﻣدرﺳﺔ ﺑﺟﺎﺋزة أﻓﺿل ﺧطﺔ ﻟﻠﺣد ﻣن اﻟﺗﻠوث اﻟﺑﺣري‬
  ‫ﻓﻲ ﻣﺳﺎﺑﻘﺔ أﺟرﯾت ھذا اﻟﻌﺎم‪ .‬اﻛﺗﺑوا ﻧﺻﺎ ً ﺗﻧﺎﻗﺷون ﻓﯾﮫ زﻣﻼءﻛم اﻟﻔﺎﺋزﯾن‪ ،‬ﺗﺗطرﻗون ﻓﯾﮫ إﻟﻰ أﺳﺑﺎب ﻣﺷﻛﻠﺔ اﻟﺗﻠوث اﻟﺑﺣري‪ ،‬وﻣﺎھﯾﺔ ﺧطﺗﮭم‬
                                                                                                                 ‫وﻛﯾﻔﯾﺔ ﺗﻧﻔﯾذھﺎ‪.‬‬

                                   ‫ﻣﻘﺎﺑﻠﺔ‬                                ‫ﺧطﺎب‬                                     ‫ﺑرﯾد إﻟﻛﺗروﻧﻲ‬

‫‪Criterion B:‬‬

                              ‫• اﻧﺗﺷﺎر ظﺎھرة اﻟﺗﻠوث اﻟﺑﺣري وﺗﺄﺛﯾرھﺎ ﻋﻠﻰ اﻟﺣﯾﺎة اﻟﺑﺣرﯾﺔ ﺑﺷﻛل ﺧﺎص وﻋﻠﻰ اﻟﻣﺟﺗﻣﻌﺎت ﺑﺷﻛل ﻋﺎم‪.‬‬
                                                                           ‫• أﺳﺑﺎب ﻣﺷﻛﻠﺔ اﻟﺗﻠوث اﻟﺑﺣري ﻣﻊ ﺿرب اﻷﻣﺛﻠﺔ‪.‬‬
                                                                                   ‫• ﺧطﺔ اﻟﺗﻧظﯾف وﻛﯾﻔﯾﺔ ﺗﻧﻔﯾذھﺎ وﻧﺗﺎﺋﺟﮭﺎ‪.‬‬

‫‪Criterion C:‬‬

‫‪Choice of text type:‬‬

                                   ‫‪Text type‬‬       ‫‪Rationale‬‬
‫‪Appropriate‬‬                                 ‫ﻣﻘﺎﺑﻠﺔ‬    ‫ﻧوع اﻟﻧص ﻣﻧﺎﺳب ﻹﺟراء اﻟﻣﻧﺎﻗﺷﺔ وﺟﮭﺎ ﻟوﺟﮫ ﻣﻊ اﻷﺷﺧﺎص اﻟﻣﻌﻧﯾﯾن‬
                                                                  ‫ﻟﺗﺣﻘﯾﻖ اﻟﻐرض ﻣن اﻟﻣوﺿوع واﻟوﻗوف ﻋﻠﻰ اﻟﺗﻔﺎﺻﯾل ‪.‬‬

‫‪Generally appropriate‬‬                          ‫ﺧطﺎب‬        ‫ﻧوع اﻟﻧص ﻣﻧﺎﺳب ﻹﺟراء اﻟﻣﻧﺎﻗﺷﺔ ﻣن ﺧﻼل اﻟرﺳﺎﺋل اﻟﺷﺧﺻﯾﺔ اﻟﻣﺗﺑﺎدﻟﺔ‬
                                                           ‫ﺑﯾن اﻟزﻣﻼء ﺑطرح اﻷﺳﺋﻠﺔ وﺗﻠﻘﻲ اﻟردود ﺑﺷﻛل ﻏﯾر ﻣﺑﺎﺷر وﻏﯾر رﺳﻣﻲ‪.‬‬

‫‪Generally inappropriate‬‬                 ‫ﺑرﯾد إﻟﻛﺗروﻧﻲ‬         ‫ﻧوع اﻟﻧص ﻣﻧﺎﺳب ﻹﺟراء اﻟﻣﻧﺎﻗﺷﺔ ﻣن ﺧﻼل اﻟرﺳﺎﺋل اﻟﻣﺗﺑﺎدﻟﺔ ﺑطرح‬
                                                                             ‫اﻷﺳﺋﻠﺔ وﺗﻠﻘﻲ ااﻟردود ﻏﯾر اﻟﻣﺑﺎﺷرة ﺑطرﯾﻘﺔ رﺳﻣﯾﺔ‪.‬‬


‫‪Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these‬‬
‫‪conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the‬‬
‫‪“generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.‬‬


‫‪Register and tone:‬‬
                                                                                                             ‫• ﻧﻐﻣﺔ ﺷﺑﮫ رﺳﻣﯾﺔ‬
                                                                                                       ‫• ﻧﺑرة ﺟﺎدة ﻣﻘﻧﻌﺔ ﺟﺎذﺑﺔ‬
‫‪Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.‬‬
                                                       ‫–‪–9‬‬                 ‫‪M21/2/ABARA/SP1/ARA/TZ0/XX/M‬‬


‫)‪Appendix: Text type conventions (Criterion C‬‬

‫‪The most common and recognisable conventions of the text types are given below:‬‬

                                                                                                                       ‫اﻟﻤﺪوﻧﺔ‪:‬‬
                                                                                                                          ‫ّ‬
                                                             ‫ﻣﺸﻮﻗﺎ ً ﯾﺜﯿﺮ اھﺘﻤﺎم وﻓﻀﻮل ّ‬
                                                           ‫اﻟﻘﺮاء‬                    ‫اﻟﻤﺪوﻧﺔ ﻋﻨﻮاﻧﺎ ً ّ‬
                                                                                                  ‫ّ‬     ‫ﺗﺘﻀ ّﻤﻦ‬          ‫•‬

  ‫ﯾﮭﺘ ّﻢ ﺑﺎﻟﺠﻤﮭﻮر اﻟﻤﺴﺘﮭﺪَف‪ ،‬وﯾﺘﺤﻘّﻖ ذﻟﻚ ﻣﻦ ﺧﻼل اﻟﺘﻔﺎﻋﻞ اﻟﻤﺒﺎﺷﺮ ﺑﺄﺳﻠﻮب ﯾﺜﯿﺮ اھﺘﻤﺎم اﻟﻘﺎرئ )ﻛﻤﺎ ﯾﻤﻜﻦ اﺿﺎﻓﺔ ﻣﻜﺎن‬           ‫•‬
                                                                                   ‫ﺼﺺ ﻹﻣﻜﺎﻧﯿﺔ اﻟﺘﻌﻠﯿﻖ(‬‫ﻣﺨ ّ‬

                                                                           ‫ﯾﻀﯿﻒ ﺧﺎﺗﻤﺔ ﻣﻨﺎﺳﺒﺔ ﺗﻤ ّﮭﺪ ﻹﻧﮭﺎء اﻟﻨّ ّ‬
                                                                           ‫ﺺ‬                                             ‫•‬



                                                                                                  ‫ﻋﻤﻮد رأي ‪ /‬ﻋﻤﻮد ﺻﺤﻔﻲ‪:‬‬
                                                                  ‫اﻟﻘﺮاء‬
                                                                    ‫ّ‬    ‫وﻓﻀﻮل‬ ‫اھﺘﻤﺎم‬ ‫ﯾﺜﯿﺮ‬ ‫ً‬ ‫ﺎ‬ ‫ﻗ‬ ‫• ﯾﺘﻀ ّﻤﻦ ﻋﻨﻮاﻧﺎ ً ّ‬
                                                                                                 ‫ﻣﺸﻮ‬


                                                                                                 ‫ﯾﻘﺴّﻢ اﻟﻌﻤﻞ اﻟﻰ‪:‬‬        ‫•‬
                                                                        ‫‪ -‬ﻣﻘﺪّﻣﺔ ﺗﻤ ّﮭﺪ ﻟﻠﻤﻮﺿﻮع أو اﻟﻘﻀﯿﺔ‬
                                                                                           ‫اﻟﻤﺴﺘﮭﺪﻓﺔ‬

                                                                   ‫‪ -‬ﻋﺮض اﻟﻤﻮﺿﻮع ﯾﻌﻜﺲ رأي اﻟﻜﺎﺗﺐ‬
                                                                               ‫ﺣﻮل اﻟﻘﻀﯿﺔ اﻟﻤﺴﺘﮭﺪﻓﺔ‬
                                                                    ‫‪ -‬اﻟﺨﺎﺗﻤﺔ‪ :‬ﯾﺬﻛﺮ ﺧﻼﺻﺔ اﻟﻘﻮل وﻣﻠ ّﺨﺺ‬
                                                                                                ‫اﻷﻓﻜﺎر‬
                                                                                            ‫ﯾﻀﻊ ﺗﻮﻗﯿﻊ اﻟﻜﺎﺗﺐ‬             ‫•‬
                                                                        ‫ﺗﻀﻤﯿﻦ ﺑﻌﺾ اﻻﻗﺘﺒﺎﺳﺎت واﻷﻣﺜﺎل واﻟﺤﻜﻢ‬               ‫•‬



                                                                                                                       ‫اﻟﻤﻘﺎﺑﻠﺔ‪:‬‬
                                                                  ‫ﯾﻀﻊ ﻋﻨﻮاﻧﺎ وﻣﻘﺪﻣﺔ ﺗﻤ ّﮭﺪ ﻟﻤﻮﺿﻮع اﻟﻤﻘﺎﺑﻠﺔ‬               ‫•‬
                              ‫ﻣﺘﺪرج وﻣﻨﻄﻘﻲ‬
                                      ‫ّ‬    ‫ﻧﺺ اﻟﻤﻘﺎﺑﻠﺔ ﺑﺸﻜﻞ‬
                                                         ‫ﯾﻀ ّﻤﻦ اﻟﻤﻘﺎﺑﻠﺔ أﺳﺌﻠﺔ وإﺟﺎﺑﺎت ﻣﺘﺮاﺑﻄﺔ ﺗﻮﺿّﺢ ﺑﻨﺎء ّ‬              ‫•‬
                                                                                       ‫ﯾﻠ ّﺨﺺ اﻟﻤﻘﺎﺑﻠﺔ ﺑﺨﺎﺗﻤﺔ‬            ‫•‬

                                                                                                       ‫اﻟﺒﺮﯾﺪ اﻻﻟﻜﺘﺮوﻧﻲ‪:‬‬
                                                                  ‫ّ‬
                                                     ‫• ﻓﻲ ﺑﺪاﯾﺔ اﻟﺮﺳﺎﻟﺔ‪ ،‬ﯾﺤﺪّد اﻟﺒﺮﯾﺪ اﻻﻟﻜﺘﺮوﻧﻲ ﻟﻠﻤﺘﻠﻘﻲ ﺑﺸﻜﻞ واﺿﺢ‬
                                                                    ‫• ﯾﺤﺪّد ﻣﻮﺿﻮع اﻟﺮﺳﺎﻟﺔ ﺑﺸﻜﻞ واﺿﺢ وﻣﺨﺘﺼﺮ‬
                                                            ‫• ﯾﻀ ّﻤﻦ اﻟﺮﺳﺎﻟﺔ ﺟﻤﻠﺔ اﻓﺘﺘﺎﺣﯿّﺔ أو ﺗﺤﯿّﺔ وﺟﻤﻠﺔ ﺧﺘﺎﻣﯿّﺔ‬

                                                                                                                        ‫ﺧﻄﺎب‪:‬‬
                                                         ‫ﯾﻠﺘﺰم ﺑﺎﻟﻌﻨﺎﺻﺮ اﻟﻔﻨّﯿﺔ ﻟﻠﺨﻄﺎب )اﻟﺠﮭﺔ‪/‬اﻟﺘﺎرﯾﺦ ‪/‬اﺳﻢ اﻟﻤﺮ َ‬
     ‫ﺳﻞ اﻟﯿﮫ وﺻﻔﺘﮫ ‪/‬ﻋﺒﺎرة اﻟﺘﺤﯿﺔ ‪/‬اﻟﻤﻮﺿﻮع‪ /‬اﻟﺨﺎﺗﻤﺔ ‪/‬اﻟﺘﺤﯿﺔ‬                                                               ‫•‬
                                                                                       ‫اﻟﺨﺘﺎﻣﯿﺔ ‪/‬اﻻﺳﻢ واﻟﺘﻮﻗﯿﻊ(‬

                                                                                      ‫ﯾﺨﺘﺎر ﻋﻨﻮاﻧﺎ ً ﻣﻨﺎﺳﺒﺎ ً ﻟﻠﺨﻄﺎب‬     ‫•‬
