M21/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                   May / Mai / Mayo de 2021

        English / Anglais / Inglés ab initio


                         Standard level
                         Niveau moyen
                          Nivel Medio


               Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




13 pages/páginas
                                            –2–              M21/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2021

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2021

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2021

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                –3–              M21/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Criterion A: Language

How successfully does the candidate command written language?
• To what extent is the vocabulary appropriate and varied?
• To what extent are the grammatical structures varied?
• To what extent does the accuracy of the language contribute to effective communication?

  Marks    Level descriptor
    0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
           Command of the language is limited
           Vocabulary is sometimes appropriate to the task.
    1-2    Basic grammatical structures are used.
           Language contains errors in basic structures. Abundant repetition and inaccuracies
           interfere with meaning.
           Command of the language is generally effective.
           Vocabulary is generally appropriate to the task, and varied.
           Some basic grammatical structures are used, with some attempts to use more complex
    3-4
           structures.
           Language is generally accurate for basic structures, but errors occur in more complex
           structures. Errors at times interfere with communication.
           Command of the language is effective and mostly accurate.
           Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied.
    5-6
           A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used effectively.
           Language is mostly accurate. Occasional errors do not interfere with communication.


Language
Not all errors have the same importance, and examiners should bear this in mind. Some errors
affect the communication of meaning significantly, and others do not. Also, some errors indicate a
fundamental lack of command of the language, while others may simply indicate a moment of
forgetfulness.

SLIPS – mistakes at all levels of difficulty, but erratic and occasional – eg the candidate normally
forms past tenses well, but occasionally forgets “-ed”.

FLAWS – errors occur more regularly, particularly in certain structures – eg past tenses are formed
correctly quite often, but are not really reliable, and there may be basic confusions (eg past simple
versus present perfect).

GAPS – some structures are rarely correct, or simply don’t appear – eg the past tenses are
needed, but do not appear.
                                                 –4–              M21/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B: Message

To what extent does the candidate fulfil the task?
   • How relevant are the ideas to the task?
   • To what extent are ideas developed?
   • To what extent do the clarity and organization of ideas contribute to the successful delivery
      of the message?

The “descriptor unpacked” explain the assessment criteria in greater detail. Where a candidate’s
response does not correspond exactly to a single mark band, the statements in bold should be
used as a guide for the ‘best fit’ approach.

 Marks   Level descriptor                    Descriptor unpacked
 0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
 1–2     The task is partially fulfilled. The link between the response and task is unclear at
                                          times; the reader has difficulty in understanding the
         Some ideas are relevant.
                                          message.
         Ideas are stated, but with no
                                          The response covers only some points in the task, and
         development.
                                          not all the points expressed are relevant.
         Ideas are not clearly presented
                                          Supporting details and/or examples barely feature, if at
         and do not follow a logical
                                          all.
         structure, making the message
         difficult to determine.          The ideas do not link well together; inadequate or
                                          inappropriate use of cohesive devices confuse the
                                          message.
 3–4     The task is generally fulfilled.    The link between the response and the task is mostly
                                             clear; the reader’s overall understanding is not
         Most ideas are relevant to the
                                             impeded, despite some ambiguity.
         task.
                                             The response covers most of the points in the task, and
         Some ideas are developed with
                                             most of the points expressed are relevant.
         some detail and examples.
                                             The response includes some supporting details and
         Ideas are generally clearly
                                             examples.
         presented and the response is
         generally structured in a logical   The ideas are organized in a logical way; basic cohesive
         manner, leading to a mostly         devices are used correctly to aid the delivery of the
         successful delivery of the          message, although they may be areas of slight confusion
         message.                            at times.
 5–6     The task is fulfilled               The link between the response and the task is clear;
         effectively.                        the reader has a good understanding of the message
                                             conveyed.
         Ideas are relevant to the task.
                                             The response covers all the points in the task, and the
         Ideas are developed well,
                                             points expressed are relevant.
         providing details and relevant
         examples.                           The response uses supporting details and examples to
                                             clarify the message.
         Ideas are clearly presented and
         the response is structured in a     The ideas are organized well; a range of basic cohesive
         logical manner, supporting the      devices are used correctly to deliver the message with
         delivery of the message.            little or no ambiguity.


Note: When marking candidate responses, keep in mind that neither the factual accuracy of the
information presented, nor the validity of the candidates’ personal opinions, are being assessed.
Therefore, scripts that are factually inaccurate should not be marked down, provided the ideas
presented have coherence and are sufficiently developed.
                                                    –5–              M21/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion C: Conceptual understanding

To what extent does the candidate demonstrate conceptual understanding?
   •       To what extent is the choice of text type appropriate to the task?
   •       To what extent are register and tone appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of
           the task?
   •       To what extent does the response incorporate the conventions of the chosen text type?

  Marks       Level descriptor
    0         The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
              Conceptual understanding is limited.
              The choice of text type is generally inappropriate to the context, purpose or audience.
       1
              The register and tone are inappropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the task.
              The response incorporates limited recognizable conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is mostly demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is generally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
       2      The register and tone, while occasionally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience
              of the task, fluctuate throughout the response.
              The response incorporates some conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is fully demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
       3
              The register and tone are appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the task.
              The response fully incorporates the conventions of the chosen text type.


Note: Examiners must balance all three elements in criterion C (choice of text type,
appropriateness of tone and register, and use of text type conventions) to arrive at the final mark.
                                                  –6–               M21/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Question specific guidance (Criterion B and C)


Task 1

    You are the president of the school drama club. The club is going to put on a performance of a
    play next week. Write a text to remind the students in the club about the next practice. Include
    information about the time and place of the practice, what they should bring to it, and what they
    can do at home to prepare.

    Invitation                       Message                           Social media posting


Criterion B:

Points to be covered:
•     Time and place of the next drama practice, e.g. Monday at 2pm in the gym… (both pieces of
      information are required)
•     What the students should bring, e.g. snack, costume… (at least one example)
•     What the students can do are home to prepare, e.g. practise the part, get enough sleep… (at
      least one example)


Criterion C:

Choice of text type:
                              Text type            Rationale
Appropriate                   Social media         The text type is suitable for communicating various
                              posting              messages quickly to a group of people known to
                                                   the writer.

Generally appropriate         Message              The text type is suitable for communicating various
                                                   messages but it is not necessarily used for group
                                                   communication. The choice may be considered
                                                   “appropriate” if the response makes clear
                                                   throughout that they are addressing the students
                                                   at the club.
Generally inappropriate       Invitation           The text type is typically used to invite people to an
                                                   event. It is not usually used to communicate
                                                   information quickly to a group of people.


Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”, and the
“generally inappropriate” text type can considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• Semi-formal to formal register
• Friendly and encouraging tone

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                 –7–                M21/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Task 2

 You planned to visit your grandparents next month, but unfortunately you can’t go. Write a text
 for your grandparents about the situation. Explain what you wanted to do on the visit, why you
 can’t go, and how you feel about this.

 Email                              Message                            Social media posting


Criterion B:

Points to be covered:
   •     Information relevant to the context, e.g. visit to grandparents, you cannot go
   •     Describe what you wanted to do on the visit, e.g. eat special food, share an activity with
         your grandparents… (at least one example)
   •     Explain why you cannot go, e.g. exams, you have to work to earn some money… (at least
         one reason)
   •     Reflexions on how you feel about the situation, e.g. disappointed, sad…



Criterion C:

Choice of text type:
                             Text type            Rationale
Appropriate                  Email                The text type is suitable for communicating with
                                                  individuals known to the writer about a personal
                                                  situation.

Generally appropriate        Message              The text type is suitable for communicating various
                                                  messages but it is not necessarily used for
                                                  communicating with individuals known well to the
                                                  writer. The choice may be considered
                                                  “appropriate” if the response makes the context
                                                  and audience of the message clear.
Generally inappropriate      Social media         The text type is typically used to communicate with
                             posting              a wide group of people. It is not usually used to
                                                  communicate with individuals.


Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”, and the
“generally inappropriate” text type can considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• Informal register
• Sad, apologetic tone

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                  –8–               M21/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Task 3

    You want to celebrate a special occasion with your friends at a theme park. Write a text to ask
    them to come. Give details about what you are celebrating. Explain why you want to go to a
    theme park and what you are looking forward to doing there.

    Blog                             Invitation                         Social media posting


Criterion B:

Points to be covered:
•     Specify what you are celebrating, e.g. the end of the school year, a birthday…
•     Explain why you want to go to a theme park, e.g. to have fun, to mark the end of the school
      year… (at least one reason)
•     Describe what you are looking forward to doing at the theme park, e.g. going on rides, eating
      ice-cream… (at least one example)
      Note: information may not be repeated; for example, “to have fun” or “to celebrate the end of
      the school year” can only be awarded marks once.


Criterion C:

Choice of text type:
                              Text type            Rationale
Appropriate                   Invitation           The text type is suitable for inviting a specific group
                                                   of people known to the writer to an event.


Generally appropriate         Social media         The text type is suitable for communicating a wide
                              posting              range of messages, but it is not necessarily used
                                                   to communicate with a specific group of people.
                                                   The choice may be considered “appropriate” if the
                                                   response makes clear throughout that they are
                                                   addressing their friends.
Generally inappropriate       Blog                 The text type is typically used to communicate with
                                                   a general audience. It is not usually used to
                                                   communicate with a specific group of people, nor
                                                   for the specific purpose of inviting them to an
                                                   event.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”, and the
“generally inappropriate” text type can considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• Informal register
• Enthusiastic tone

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                     –9–             M21/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Task 4

    You would like to become the student representative for your class. Write a text to tell students
    about the improvements you will make to the school if they vote for you. Explain the changes
    you propose for homework, the daily schedule and school lunch.

    Article                             Guidelines                        Speech


Criterion B:

Points to be covered:
•     Information relevant to the context, e.g. that you want to be the student representative for your
      class and you will make improvements to the school…
•     Explain the changes you suggest in homework, e.g. not at the weekends, not more than one
      hour per day… (at least one example)
•     Explain the changes you suggest in the daily schedule, e.g. start later in the day, have a longer
      lunch… (at least one example)
•     Explain the suggested changes for school lunch, e.g. vegetarian, more fruit (at least one
      example)


Criterion C:

Choice of text type:
                              Text type              Rationale
Appropriate                   Speech                 The text type is suitable for communicating with a
                                                     group of people on a specific topic. It is suitable for
                                                     the purpose of informing and persuading.

Generally appropriate         Article                The text type is suitable for communicating a wide
                                                     range of messages. The choice may be
                                                     considered “appropriate” if the response makes
                                                     the context clear: persuasive text to school peers.
Generally inappropriate       Guidelines             The text type is used to communicate with a
                                                     general or specific audience. It is suitable for the
                                                     purpose of giving practical advice in an objective
                                                     way. It is not usually used to persuade or suggest.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”, and the
“generally inappropriate” text type can considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• Semi-formal register
• Enthusiastic tone

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                 – 10 –             M21/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Task 5

    A new student has started at your school after recently moving to your country. The student
    would like everyone at the school to get to know him/her better. Write a text about where the
    student came from, why he/she came to your country and what he/she is looking forward to the
    most.

    Interview                        Report                            Speech


Criterion B:

Points to be covered:
•     Information relevant to the context, e.g. student from another country starting at the school and
      who wants students to know him/her… (introductory paragraph)
•     Information: where the student comes from
•     Information: why he/she came to this country, e.g. a better education, join family… (at least one
      reason)
•     Information: what he/she is looking forward to the most, e.g. improving his/ her English, making
      new friends… (at least one example)


Criterion C:

Choice of text type:
                              Text type            Rationale
Appropriate                   Interview            The text type is suitable for communicating with a
                                                   group of people who may share a common
                                                   interest. It is used to inform the reader.
Generally appropriate         Speech               The text type is suitable for communicating with a
                                                   specific group of people. The choice may be
                                                   considered “appropriate” if the context is explained
                                                   in the introduction.
Generally inappropriate       Report               This text type is formal and usually addressed to a
                                                   specific person or group in a position of authority.
                                                   It is not usually used to communicate information
                                                   about an individual’s situation to a general
                                                   audience.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”, and the
“generally inappropriate” text type can considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• Informal register
• Friendly tone

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                 – 11 –             M21/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Task 6

    Many people in your town cycle to work, so you want to write a text about road safety. Give
    advice on what cyclists should wear to be safe and on how to keep their bike in good condition.
    Explain which rules of the road must always be followed.

    Guidelines                       Interview                         Report


Criterion B:

Points to be covered:
•     Information relevant to the context, e.g. that many people cycle, road safety is important
•     Give advice about what to wear to be safe, e.g. helmet, bright coloured clothes… (at least one
      example)
•     Give advice about how to keep a bike in good condition, e.g. test brakes, clean and oil bike…
      (at least one example)
•     Give advice about which rules of the road must be followed, e.g. obey traffic lights, use cycle
      lanes… (at least one piece of advice)


Criterion C:

Choice of text type:
                              Text type            Rationale
Appropriate                   Guidelines           The text type is suitable for giving practical advice
                                                   on a specific topic to a group of people. The
                                                   information is given in an objective way.

Generally appropriate         Report               This text type is usually addressed to a specific
                                                   person in a position of authority. The register and
                                                   tone are generally objective but the text may
                                                   include an opinion, judgement or recommendation.
                                                   This text type could be “appropriate” if it includes
                                                   advice or suggestions to improve road safety.
Generally inappropriate       Interview            The text type is suitable for informing and
                                                   communicating the views or experiences of one
                                                   person with a group of people. It is not usually
                                                   used to give instructions or advice.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”, and the
“generally inappropriate” text type can considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• Semi-formal register
• Informative tone

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                – 12 –            M21/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Appendix: Text type conventions (Criterion C)

The most common and recognisable conventions of the text types are given below:


Invitation
• Relevant title / heading / greeting
• Name of the recipient(s)
• Name of sender
• Request for a response (if appropriate)

   NOTE: The invitation may be presented within the framework of an email, provided the main
   features of the invitation are also present.


Message
• Identify the recipient (unless the audience is the self)
• Opening or closing comment
• Writer’s name


Social media posting
• General greeting / opening salutation
• First person narration/statement
• Closing comment


Email
• Form of address (“Dear…”, “To…”)
• Opening and closing greeting
• Sender’s name


Blog
• Title
• Date (and time)
• Writer’s name / username
• Reference to audience (directly, or through use of “we” and “you” etc)


Article
• Headline
• Writer’s name
• Date of publication
• Brief introduction and conclusion


Guidelines
• Title
• Brief introduction
• Other format features, e.g. subtitles / bullet points / numbering
• Practical elements, e.g. name of distributor / contact info / links
                                              – 13 –          M21/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Speech
• Opening address / greeting / statement
• Reference to audience (directly, or through use of “we” and “you” etc)
• Concluding remarks / closing statement


Report
• Date
• Title / reference
• Author of report
• Brief introduction and conclusion
