M21/2/ABHIN/SP1/HIN/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                   May / Mai / Mayo de 2021


                    Hindi / Hindi / Hindi B


                          Standard level
                          Niveau moyen
                           Nivel Medio


               Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




11 pages/páginas
                                            –2–                M21/2/ABHIN/SP1/HIN/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2021

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2021

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2021

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                    –3–               M21/2/ABHIN/SP1/HIN/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion A: Language

How successfully does the candidate command written language?
• To what extent is the vocabulary appropriate and varied?
• To what extent are the grammatical structures varied?
• To what extent does the accuracy of the language contribute to effective communication?

  Marks                                            Level descriptor
       0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
              Command of the language is limited.
              Vocabulary is sometimes appropriate to the task.
    1–3
              Basic grammatical structures are used.
              Language contains errors in basic structures. Errors interfere with communication.
              Command of the language is partially effective.
              Vocabulary is appropriate to the task.
              Some basic grammatical structures are used, with some attempts to use more
    4–6
              complex structures.
              Language is mostly accurate for basic structures, but errors occur in more complex
              structures. Errors at times interfere with communication.
              Command of the language is effective and mostly accurate.
              Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied.
    7–9       A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used.
              Language is mostly accurate. Occasional errors in basic and in complex grammatical
              structures do not interfere with communication.
              Command of the language is mostly accurate and very effective.
              Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied, including the use of idiomatic
              expressions.
   10–12
              A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used effectively.
              Language is mostly accurate. Minor errors in more complex grammatical structures
              do not interfere with communication.

भाषा
परीक्षकों को ध्यान में रखना चाहिए कक सभी ग़लतियों का मित्व एक समान निीीं िै ।       कुछ गलतियााँ अर्थ ग्रिण
को प्रभाववि करिी िैं और कुछ निीीं।    कई ग़लतियााँ भाषा के मूल ज्ञान न िोने का सींकेि प्रदान करिी िै जबकक
अन्य केवल असावधानी बरिने के कारण िो सकिी िैं।

परीक्षार्थी द्वारा हुई चक
                        ू – कहिनाई के दृष्टिकोण से प्रत्येक स्िर पर िोने वाली विथनी की अशद्
                                                                                         ु धिा जो अतनयममि
व यदा-कदा िों।

त्रटु ि– वि अशद्
              ु धधयााँ जो तनयममि रूप से उभर कर आएाँ ववशेषकर वाक्य सींरचना सींबींधी      ग़लतियााँ।   उदािरण-
वाक्य रचना में पद-क्रम और पदों में पारस्पररक अन्वय (समन्वय) का ध्यान िो रखा जा रिा िो परन्िु वाक्य में
मलींग, वचन, कारक, काल इत्याहद की शद्
                                  ु धिा में भ्राष्न्ि बनी रिे।

कमी– वाक्य सींरचना कभी कभार िी शुद्ध िै, अर्वा पूणि
                                                  थ ः अनप
                                                        ु ष्स्र्ि िै। उदािरण- काल, मलींग, वचन, कारक सींबध
                                                                                                        ीं ी
भेद की अज्ञानिा।
                                                 –4–               M21/2/ABHIN/SP1/HIN/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B: Message
To what extent does the candidate fulfil the task?
  • How relevant are the ideas to the task?
  • To what extent are ideas developed?
  • To what extent do the clarity and organization of ideas contribute to the successful delivery of
    the message?

The “descriptor unpacked” explain the assessment criteria in greater detail. Where a candidate’s
response does not correspond exactly to a single mark band, the statements in bold should be
used as a guide for the ‘best fit’ approach.

 Marks            Level descriptor                              Descriptor unpacked
   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
         The task is partially fulfilled.    The link between the response and task tends to
                                                 be unclear; the reader has difficulty understanding
         Few ideas are relevant to the task.     the message.
         Ideas are stated, but with no           The response touches upon some aspects of the task
         development.                            but there is also much unrelated information.
  1–3    Ideas are not clearly presented and     The response addresses the task in a simple manner,
         do not follow a logical structure,      and supporting details and/or examples barely feature,
         making the message difficult to         if at all.
         determine.                              The ideas do not link well together; inadequate or
                                                 inappropriate use of cohesive devices confuse the
                                                 message.
         The task is generally fulfilled.        The link between the response and the task is
                                                 mostly detectable; the reader’s general
         Some ideas are relevant to the          understanding of the message is not impeded,
         task.                                   despite some ambiguity.
         Ideas are outlined, but are not fully   The response covers some aspects of the task, or
         developed.                              touches upon all aspects but superficially.
  4–6
         Ideas are generally clearly             The response includes some supporting details and
         presented and the response is           examples.
         generally structured in a logical       The ideas are organized in a logical way; some
         manner, leading to a mostly             cohesive devices are used appropriately to aid the
         successful delivery of the              delivery of the message, although there may be areas
         message.                                of confusion at times.

         The task is fulfilled.                  The link between the response and the task is
                                                 clear; the reader has a good understanding of the
         Most ideas are relevant to the task.    message conveyed.
         Ideas are developed well, with          The response covers all aspects of the task, despite
         some detail and examples.               losing focus at times.
  7–9
         Ideas are clearly presented and the     The response uses supporting details and examples to
         response is structured in a logical     clarify the message.
         manner, supporting the delivery of      The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive
         the message.                            devices are used appropriately to deliver the message
                                                 with little or no ambiguity.
         The task is fulfilled effectively.      The link between the response and the task is
                                                 precise and consistently evident; the reader has a
         Ideas are relevant to the task.         clear understanding of the message conveyed.
 10–12
         Ideas are fully developed, providing The response covers all aspects of the task fully, and
         details and relevant examples.       maintains focus throughout.
                                                    –5–               M21/2/ABHIN/SP1/HIN/TZ0/XX/M


             Ideas are clearly presented and the    The response uses well-chosen supporting details and
             response is structured in a logical    examples to illustrate and explain ideas persuasively.
             and coherent manner that               The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive
             supports the delivery of the           devices are used appropriately to deliver the message
             message.                               with clarity and ease.


Note: When marking candidate responses, keep in mind that neither the factual accuracy of the
information presented, nor the validity of the candidates’ personal opinions, are being assessed.
Therefore, scripts that are factually inaccurate should not be marked down, provided the ideas
presented have coherence and are sufficiently developed.



Criterion C: Conceptual understanding

To what extent does the candidate demonstrate conceptual understanding?
   •       To what extent is the choice of text type appropriate to the task?
   •       To what extent are register and tone appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of
           the task?
   •       To what extent does the response incorporate the conventions of the chosen text type?

  Marks                                            Level descriptor
       0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
              Conceptual understanding is limited.
              The choice of text type is generally inappropriate to the context, purpose or audience.
   1–2        The register and tone are inappropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response incorporates limited recognizable conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is mostly demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is generally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   3–4        The register and tone, while occasionally appropriate to the context, purpose and
              audience of the task, fluctuate throughout the response.
              The response incorporates some conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is fully demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   5–6        The register and tone are appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response fully incorporates the conventions of the chosen text type.



Note: Examiners must balance all three elements in criterion C (choice of text type, appropriateness
of tone and register, and use of text type conventions) to arrive at the final mark.
                                                 –6–                 M21/2/ABHIN/SP1/HIN/TZ0/XX/M


Question specific guidance (Criterion B and C)

Task 1

 आप अपने स्थानीय समद
                   ु ाय में हर उम्र के लोगों के ललए बाह्य(ऑउटडोर) गतिविधियााँ आयोजिि करना
 चाहिे हैं। इन गतिविधियों का िर्णन करिे हुए एक आलेख ललखें और बिाएाँ कक लोगों के ललए बाहर समय
 बबिाना क्यों आिश्यक है ।

  प्रचार पुजस्िका                    भाषर्                           साक्षात्कार


Criterion B:

• ववमभन्न आयु वगथ को लक्षक्षि करिे िुए बाह्य गतिववधधयों का वणथन अपेक्षक्षि िै । ककसी एक आयु वगथ
   को लक्षक्षि करिे िुए गतिववधधयों का ववस्िि
                                           ृ वणथन भी स्वीकायथ िै ।
• गतिववधधयों का आयोजन कैसे, कब िर्ा ककनके द्वारा ककया जाएगा इसका वववरण अतनवायथ िै
• बाह्य गतिववधधयों के माध्यम से बािर समय बबिाने के लाभों पर उदािरण सहिि चचाथ अपेक्षक्षि िै ।


Criterion C:

Choice of text type:

                            Text type        Rationale
                                             स्र्ानीय समद
                                                        ु ाय को सींबोधधि करने का सबसे अच्छा िरीका
                                             िै ,प्रचार पुष्स्िका का वविरण। इसमें     गतिववधधयों से िोने
                            प्रचार
 Appropriate                                 वाले लाभों को इसमें सूधचबद्ध ककया जा सकिा िै । यि न
                            पष्ु स्िका
                                             केवल बेििर ढीं ग से समझाने में सिायक िोगा, बष्कक उन्िें
                                             समय-समय पर याद हदलािा रिे गा।
                                             भाषण ववधा के द्वारा व्यष्क्िगि ववचारों को एक तनष्चचि
                                             वगथ के समक्ष प्रस्िि
                                                                ु करना उपयक्
                                                                          ु ि िै । परू े स्र्ानीय समद
                                                                                                    ु ाय
                                             को समझाना िै या उनको शाममल करना िै िो इसके मलए
 Generally appropriate      भाषण
                                             भाषण एक सीममि ववधा िै अिः यिााँ पर सींदभथ स्पटि करना
                                             आवचयक िै कक ककस आयु वगथ को सम्बोधधि ककया गया िै
                                             िर्ा क्यों।
                                             यि ववधा व्यष्क्िगि ववचारों को         जानने के मलए उपयुक्ि
                                             िै । स्र्ानीय समुदाय के ववमभन्न आयु वगथ को लक्ष्य करिे
 Generally inappropriate    साक्षात्कार
                                             िुए अपनी योजना बिाना इस ववधा के माध्यम से कहिन िै ।



Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the
“generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.
                                                 –7–                M21/2/ABHIN/SP1/HIN/TZ0/XX/M


Register and tone:
• पािकों से सीधा सम्बोधन साधिे िुए अधथ औपचाररक शैली
• प्रेरक स्वर का प्रयोग

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                       –8–                 M21/2/ABHIN/SP1/HIN/TZ0/XX/M


Task 2

 आप विदे शी सहायिाथणदान (चैररटी) करने के ललए एक स्ियंसेिक समूह बनाना चाहिे हैं। स्ियंसेिकों की
 मांग करिे हुए अपने विद्यालयके ललए एक आलेख ललखें। इसमें दान के उद्दे श्यों और आयोजििकी िाने
 िाली गतिविधियों के बारे में बिाएाँ।

  प्रचार पुजस्िका                       प्रस्िाि                          लेख


Criterion B:

• ववदे शी सिायिार्थ स्वयींसेवक समूि के गिन का उकलेख अपेक्षक्षि िै , िालााँकक ये ककसी भी आपदा/उद्दे चय
   िे िु िो सकिा िै ।
• अपने ववद्यालय के छात्रों/सिपाहियों को इसमें शाममल करने की मींशा स्पटि िोनी चाहिए।
• स्वयींसेवकों द्वारा की जाने वाली ववमभन्न गतिववधधयों िर्ा दान के उद्दे चय का उकलेख अपेक्षक्षि िै

Criterion C:

Choice of text type:

                             Text type             Rationale
                                                   इस ववधा के द्वारा कायथ का मसौदा िर्ा उसके कायाथन्वयन
                                                   की जानकारी सिज प्रस्िुि की जा सकिी िै । प्रस्िाव के
                                                   द्वारा अपने ववद्यालय के पदाधधकाररयों को स्वयींसेवक
                                                   समूि के गिन का उद्दे चय बिािे िुए स्वयींसेवकों की माींग
Appropriate                  प्रस्िाव              सिज सम्भव िै । इसमें क्रमबद्ध िरीके से उन सारे कायों
                                                   का उकलेख ककया जा सकिा िै जो प्रचन की माींग िै ।
                                                       प्रस्िाव एक पत्र या ई-मेल के प्रारूप में स्वीकायथ िै
                                                       िालााँकक प्रस्िाव की सभी ववमशटििाओीं का समावेश
                                                       अपेक्षक्षि िै ।*
                                                   प्रचार पुष्स्िका के द्वारा स्वयींसेवक समूि के गिन का
                                                   उद्दे चय बिािे िुए छात्रों को सिभाधगिा के मलए आमींबत्रत्त
Generally appropriate        प्रचार पुष्स्िका      ककया जाना सम्भव िै । दान के उद्दे चयों और आयोष्जि की
                                                   जाने वाली गतिववधधयों को क्रमबद्ध िरीके से मलखना भी
                                                   सम्भव िै
                                                   लेख के द्वारा प्रचन के उद्दे चय की पूतिथ कहिन िै । लेख के
Generally inappropriate      लेख                   माध्यम से स्वयींसेवकों की माींग सिज सम्भव निीीं िै । लक्षक्षि
                                                   पािक वगथ िक बाि पिुाँचाना तनष्चचि निीीं िै ।

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the
“generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.
                                                –9–                 M21/2/ABHIN/SP1/HIN/TZ0/XX/M


Register and tone:

• प्रेरक स्वर का प्रयोग
• अधथ औपचाररक से औपचाररक रष्जस्िर
• प्रस्िाव एक पत्र या ई-मेल के प्रारूप में स्वीकायथ िै िालााँकक प्रस्िाव की सभी ववमशटििाओीं का समावेश
   अपेक्षक्षि िै ।*

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                      – 10 –          M21/2/ABHIN/SP1/HIN/TZ0/XX/M


Task 3

 आपका लमत्र सामाजिक माध्यम (सोशल मीडडया) को नापसंदकरिा है । किर भी, उसने वपछले सप्िाह
 अपना ‘प्रोिाइल’ बनाने का तनर्णय ललया और पूरे सप्िाह इसका इस्िेमाल भी ककया है । आप अपने
 विद्यालय के अन्य छात्रों के साथ उसकी कहानी साझा करना चाहिे हैं। उसके अनभ
                                                                        ु ि का िर्णन करिे हुए
 एक आलेख ललखें और बिाएाँ कक उसके ललए सबसे अधिक आश्चयणिनक क्या था।

  प्रचार पुजस्िका                    भाषर्                           साक्षात्कार


Criterion B:

• ममत्र द्वारा सामाष्जक माध्यम को नापसींद करने के कारणों का उकलेख अपेक्षक्षि िै
• प्रोफाइल बनाने का कारण ( ककसी भी िरि का जैसे - फेसबक
                                                     ु , ट्ववट्िर, इन्स्िाग्राम . वाट्सअप ) िर्ा
   सप्िाि भर इस्िेमाल करने का अनुभव।
• सामाष्जक माध्यम के प्रयोग से प्राप्ि अनुभवों को (सकारात्मक या नकारात्मक ) छात्रों के सार् साझा
   करना अतनवायथ िै । अपने ममत्र की उस किानी को साझा करना भी अतनवायथ िै ष्जसने उसे सबसे अधधक
   आचचयथचककि ककया।

Criterion C:

Choice of text type:

                            Text type          Rationale
                                               भाषण ववधा के द्वारा अपने ववचारों को सीधे अपने
Appropriate                 भाषण               ववद्यालय के छात्रों के समक्ष प्रस्िि
                                                                                  ु करना उपयक्
                                                                                            ु ि िर्ा
                                               सिज सम्भव िै ।
                                               साक्षात्कार ववधा के द्वारा भी इस कायथ की उद्दे चय पतू िथ की
Generally appropriate       साक्षात्कार        जा सकिी िै , बशिे वो साक्षात्कार ववद्यालय के अन्य छात्रों
                                               के मलए प्रकामशि या प्रसाररि िो।
                                               परीक्षार्ी को अपने ममत्र के अनुभवों को साझा करना िै जो
                                               कक एक प्रचार पष्ु स्िका के माध्यम से सम्भव निीीं िै। यि
Generally inappropriate     प्रचार पुष्स्िका
                                               तनजी अनुभवों को अमभव्यक्ि करने समुधचि माध्यम निीीं
                                               िैं।

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the
“generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.

Register and tone:
• सींबोधन शैली िर्ा अधथ औपचाररक स्वर
• प्रेरक स्वर

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                    – 11 –               M21/2/ABHIN/SP1/HIN/TZ0/XX/M


Appendix: Text type conventions (Criterion C)

The most common and recognisable conventions of the text types are given below:

 लेख
       •   सींगि िर्ा समधु चि शीषथक
       •   रोचक प्रस्िावना, समुधचि ववस्िार िर्ा तनटकषथ
       •   लेखक का नाम
       •   यर्ोधचि साहिष्त्यक प्रववधधयों के प्रयोग के सार् केंद्रीय ववचार को आरम्भ से अींि िक बनाए
           रखें

 प्रचार पुस्तिका
       •   आकषथक शीषथक
       •   सींक्षक्षप्ि प्रस्िावना िर्ा तनटकषथ
       •   उप शीषथक के अींिगथि सच
                                ू ीबद्ध जानकारी
       •   सम्पकथ सूत्र - जैसे पिा, दरू भाष नम्बर, ईमेल आहद की जानकारी दे िे िुए प्रचार पबत्रका के
           व्याविाररक पिलुओीं को शाममल करें
 ववशेष: धचत्रात्मक अमभव्यष्क्ि का आकलन निीीं ककया

 साक्षात्कार
       •   समुधचि शीषथक/शीषथ पींष्क्ि
       •   मौखखक वािाथलाप की वास्िववकिा िर्ा सिजिा को प्रतिबबष्म्बि करिा िुआ कायथ – जैस-े
           प्रचनोत्तर शैली, वािाथलाप का सिज अींदाज़, प्रतिलेख
       •   साक्षात्कारकिाथ द्वारा समधु चि पररचय िर्ा तनटकषथ

 प्रतिाव
       •   समग्र विषय का संक्षक्षप्िीकरर् करिा हुआ शीषणक
       •   स्पष्ट प्रस्िािना िथा तनष्कषण
       •   स्पष्ट प्रारूप (उदाहरर्: शीषथक, संक्षक्षप्ि एवीं स्पटि अनच्
                                                                    ु छे द, सच
                                                                             ू ीबद्ध जानकारी

 भाषण
       •   आरम्भ में श्रोिाओं का ध्यानाकषणर् िथा अंि में स्पष्ट प्रभाि
       •   श्रोिाओीं से तनरीं िर सम्बोधन शैली को बनाए रखें: (‘हम’ और ‘आप’ इत्यादद का प्रयोग)
       •   िाक्पटुिा का समािेश -उदाहरर्: आलंकाररक प्रश्न, शाष्ददक पन
                                                                   ु राितृ ि इत्यादद
