M21/2/ABSWA/SP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                   May / Mai / Mayo de 2021


              Swahili / Swahili / Swahili B


                         Standard level
                         Niveau moyen
                          Nivel Medio


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




9 pages/páginas
                                            –2–              M21/2/ABSWA/SP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2021

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2021

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2021

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                             –3–            M21/2/ABSWA/SP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion A: Language

How successfully does the candidate command written language?
• To what extent is the vocabulary appropriate and varied?
• To what extent are the grammatical structures varied?
• To what extent does the accuracy of the language contribute to effective communication?

  Marks                                      Level descriptor
     0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
            Command of the language is limited.
            Vocabulary is sometimes appropriate to the task.
   1–3
            Basic grammatical structures are used.
            Language contains errors in basic structures. Errors interfere with communication.
            Command of the language is partially effective.
            Vocabulary is appropriate to the task.
            Some basic grammatical structures are used, with some attempts to use more
   4–6
            complex structures.
            Language is mostly accurate for basic structures, but errors occur in more complex
            structures. Errors at times interfere with communication.
            Command of the language is effective and mostly accurate.
            Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied.
   7–9      A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used.
            Language is mostly accurate. Occasional errors in basic and in complex grammatical
            structures do not interfere with communication.
            Command of the language is mostly accurate and very effective.
            Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied, including the use of idiomatic
            expressions.
  10–12
            A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used effectively.
            Language is mostly accurate. Minor errors in more complex grammatical structures
            do not interfere with communication.


Lugha
Si makosa yote yana umuhimu sawa na watahini wanafaa kukumbuka haya. Baadhi ya makosa
huathiri mawasiliano ya maana kwa kiasi kikubwa, na mengine hayaathiri. Pia, baadhi ya makosa
huonyesha ukosefu wa kimsingi wa lugha, wakati makosa mengine huweza kuashiria usahaulifu.

KUTELEZA – Makosa hutokea katika ngazi zote za ugumu, lakini hayatokei mara kwa mara – kwa
mfano, mtahiniwa kwa kawaida anatunga sentensi vyema wakati uliopita, lakini mara chache
anasahau kiambishi “-li-”.

DOSARI – Makosa hutokea mara kwa mara, hasa katika miundo fulani – kwa mfano, wakati
uliopita unaundwa kwa usahihi mara nyingi, lakini si wa kuaminika, na kunaweza kuwa na
mikanganyiko ya kimsingi (kwa mfano, wakati uliopita dhidi ya wakati timilifu).

MAPENGO – Baadhi ya miundo huwa sahihi kwa nadra au haijitokezi – kwa mfano, wakati uliopita
unahitajika, lakini haujitokezi.
                                                 –4–             M21/2/ABSWA/SP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B: Message
To what extent does the candidate fulfil the task?
  • How relevant are the ideas to the task?
  • To what extent are ideas developed?
  • To what extent do the clarity and organization of ideas contribute to the successful delivery of
    the message?

The “descriptor unpacked” explain the assessment criteria in greater detail. Where a candidate’s
response does not correspond exactly to a single mark band, the statements in bold should be
used as a guide for the ‘best fit’ approach.

 Marks            Level descriptor                              Descriptor unpacked
   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
         The task is partially fulfilled.    The link between the response and task tends to
                                                 be unclear; the reader has difficulty understanding
         Few ideas are relevant to the task.     the message.
         Ideas are stated, but with no           The response touches upon some aspects of the task
         development.                            but there is also much unrelated information.
  1–3    Ideas are not clearly presented and     The response addresses the task in a simple manner,
         do not follow a logical structure,      and supporting details and/or examples barely feature,
         making the message difficult to         if at all.
         determine.                              The ideas do not link well together; inadequate or
                                                 inappropriate use of cohesive devices confuse the
                                                 message.
         The task is generally fulfilled.        The link between the response and the task is
                                                 mostly detectable; the reader’s general
         Some ideas are relevant to the          understanding of the message is not impeded,
         task.                                   despite some ambiguity.
         Ideas are outlined, but are not fully   The response covers some aspects of the task, or
         developed.                              touches upon all aspects but superficially.
  4–6
         Ideas are generally clearly             The response includes some supporting details and
         presented and the response is           examples.
         generally structured in a logical       The ideas are organized in a logical way; some
         manner, leading to a mostly             cohesive devices are used appropriately to aid the
         successful delivery of the              delivery of the message, although there may be areas
         message.                                of confusion at times.

         The task is fulfilled.                  The link between the response and the task is
                                                 clear; the reader has a good understanding of the
         Most ideas are relevant to the task.    message conveyed.
         Ideas are developed well, with          The response covers all aspects of the task, despite
         some detail and examples.               losing focus at times.
  7–9
         Ideas are clearly presented and the     The response uses supporting details and examples to
         response is structured in a logical     clarify the message.
         manner, supporting the delivery of      The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive
         the message.                            devices are used appropriately to deliver the message
                                                 with little or no ambiguity.
         The task is fulfilled effectively.      The link between the response and the task is
                                                 precise and consistently evident; the reader has a
         Ideas are relevant to the task.         clear understanding of the message conveyed.
 10–12
         Ideas are fully developed, providing The response covers all aspects of the task fully, and
         details and relevant examples.       maintains focus throughout.
                                                    –5–             M21/2/ABSWA/SP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


             Ideas are clearly presented and the    The response uses well-chosen supporting details and
             response is structured in a logical    examples to illustrate and explain ideas persuasively.
             and coherent manner that               The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive
             supports the delivery of the           devices are used appropriately to deliver the message
             message.                               with clarity and ease.


Note: When marking candidate responses, keep in mind that neither the factual accuracy of the
information presented, nor the validity of the candidates’ personal opinions, are being assessed.
Therefore, scripts that are factually inaccurate should not be marked down, provided the ideas
presented have coherence and are sufficiently developed.



Criterion C: Conceptual understanding

To what extent does the candidate demonstrate conceptual understanding?
   •       To what extent is the choice of text type appropriate to the task?
   •       To what extent are register and tone appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of
           the task?
   •       To what extent does the response incorporate the conventions of the chosen text type?

  Marks                                            Level descriptor
       0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
              Conceptual understanding is limited.
              The choice of text type is generally inappropriate to the context, purpose or audience.
   1–2        The register and tone are inappropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response incorporates limited recognizable conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is mostly demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is generally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   3–4        The register and tone, while occasionally appropriate to the context, purpose and
              audience of the task, fluctuate throughout the response.
              The response incorporates some conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is fully demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   5–6        The register and tone are appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response fully incorporates the conventions of the chosen text type.



Note: Examiners must balance all three elements in criterion C (choice of text type, appropriateness
of tone and register, and use of text type conventions) to arrive at the final mark.
                                                 –6–                M21/2/ABSWA/SP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


Question specific guidance (Criterion B and C)

Swali 1

 Utawala wa shule yako una mpango wa kujenga ukumbi wa kufanyia mazoezi na kununua vifaa
 muhimu na vya kisasa. Kama mwakilishi wa wanafunzi, andika matini kwa bodi ya shule ambapo
 unaelezea vifaa na huduma unazofikiria zitakuwa na manufaa kwa masilahi ya wanafunzi na
 uelezee sababu zake.

 Barua pepe                       Mjadala                           Pendekezo

Criterion B:

• Muhimu kutaja vifaa na huduma ambazo mwanafunzi anafikiri itakuwa na masilahi
• Mwanafunzi aeleze sababu za umuhimu
• Si lazima kutaja sababu chanya na hasi za kuwa na ukumbi

Criterion C:

Choice of text type:

                            Text type        Rationale
Appropriate                 Pendekezo        Aina ya matini hutumiwa mahsusi kwa madhumuni ya
                                             kuwasilisha mawazo au ufumbuzi; muktadha mdogo
                                             sana au maneno kumwelekea mtu huhitajika.
Generally appropriate       Barua pepe       Aina ya matini inafaa kwa madhumuni ya kutoa habari,
                                             lakini kwa kawaida hutumiwa kuwasiliana. Baadhi ya
                                             taarifa za kimuktadha zinahitajika kumwelezea pokeaji
                                             madhumuni ya barua pepe ni kutoa pendekezo.
Generally inappropriate     Mjadala          Aina hii ya maandishi inafaa kwa madhumuni ya kutoa
                                             taarifa kwa kundi kubwa la wanafunzi katika muktadha
                                             wa shule.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or
the “generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.

Register and tone:
• Lugha ya kushawishi itumike
• Lugha rasmi na kawaida zitakubalika

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                –7–             M21/2/ABSWA/SP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


Swali 2

 Wewe pamoja na familia yako mlitembelea sehemu mbalimbali wakati wa likizo ili kufurahia
 mandhari tofauti ya nchi. Andika matini ambapo unaelezea jinsi matukio mbalimbali
 yalivyoendelea na uonyeshe ni kwa nini unafikiri kusafiri ni muhimu kwa vijana.

 Blogu                              Pendekezo                       Shajara

Criterion B:

• Inatakiwa kutaja umuhimu wa kusafiri
• Kutaja sehemu mwanafunzi aliposafiri tu haitoshi
• Sababu ziguse vijana

Criterion C:

Choice of text type:

                            Text type        Rationale
Appropriate                 Shajara          Kimsingi aina hii ya maandishi husomwa na
                                             mwandishi mwenyewe. Hizi ni kumbukumbu za
                                             binafsi.
Generally appropriate       Blogu            Kimsingi aina hii ya maandishi inasomwa na wasomaji
                                             ambao hawajabainishwa, na hutegemea msomaji
                                             kuitafuta habari.
Generally inappropriate     Pendekezo        Aina ya matini hutumiwa mahsusi kwa madhumuni ya
                                             kuwasilisha mawazo au ufumbuzi; muktadha mdogo
                                             sana au maneno kumwelekea mtu huhitajika.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or
the “generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:


• Lugha ya kawaida itumike


Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                –8–                M21/2/ABSWA/SP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


Swali 3

 Bodi ya shule yako ya sekondari ina mpango wa kubadilisha shule kutoka shule ya kutwa hadi
 shule ya bweni kwa wanafunzi wote. Andika matini kwa kamati ya shule ambapo unaelezea
 manufaa na madhara ya hatua hii.

 Barua pepe                       Mjadala                          Shajara

Criterion B:

• Muhimu kuonyesha manufaa na madhara
• Mwanafunzi aonyeshe wazo / pendeleo lake yeye binafsi

Criterion C:

Choice of text type:

                            Text type       Rationale
Appropriate                 Mjadala         Aina hii ya maandishi inafaa kwa madhumuni ya kutoa
                                            taarifa kwa kundi kubwa la wanafunzi katika muktadha
                                            wa shule. Taarifa za kimuktadha zinahitajika kuelezea
                                            madhumuni ya mjadala ni kutoa maoni.

Generally appropriate       Barua pepe      Aina ya matini inafaa kwa madhumuni ya kutoa
                                            habari, lakini kwa kawaida hutumiwa kuwasiliana.
                                            Baadhi ya taarifa za kimuktadha zinahitajika
                                            kumwelezea pokeaji madhumuni ya barua pepe ni
                                            kutoa maoni.
Generally inappropriate     Shajara         Kimsingi aina hii ya maandishi husomwa na
                                            mwandishi mwenyewe.


Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or
the “generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• Lugha ya kushawishi itumike
• Lugha rasmi na kawaida zitakubalika

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions
                                             –9–             M21/2/ABSWA/SP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


Appendix: Text type conventions (Criterion C)

The most common and recognisable conventions of the text types are given below:

Blogu
•     Itakuwa na mada inayoshirikisha
•     Itatumia usimulizi wa nafsi ya kwanza
•     Itadhihirisha ufahamu wa wasomaji, kama vile kutumia lugha inayowalenga moja kwa moja,
      mtindo unaovutia na kusisimua, kuwakaribisha kutoa maoni, na kadhalika
•     Itakuwa na kauli ya kutamatisha


Shajara
• Itakuwa na tarehe
• Itatumia usimulizi wa nafsi ya kwanza
• Itakuwa na kauli ya kutamatisha, kama vile “imetosha kwa leo”
• Haitatumia vifungu vya maneno au sentensi zinazotoa maelezo yaliyo dhahiri, (kwa mfano,
   itatumia “Nilimwona Juma”, lakini sio, “Nilimwona Juma, rafiki yangu wa dhati”
*Kumbuka: Shajara inaweza kuanza kwa “Mpendwa May”, lakini hili halitarajiwi.

Pendekezo
•    Itakuwa na mada inayofupisha yaliyomo
•    Itakuwa na utangulizi na hitimisho
•    Itaandikwa kwa muundo maalum kwa kuwa na mada, aya fupi zinazoeleweka, sehemu tofauti
      zinazotambulika kwa herufi/ nambari /vitone, na kadhalika

Barua Pepe
•    Itakuwa na mstari wa mada husika
•    Itadumisha mazungumzo yaliyo wazi kwa mtu mmoja mahsusi
•    Itakuwa na salamu za kufungua na kufunga
*Kumbuka: ‘Kwa:’ /’Kutoka’: na tarehe zinaweza kuwekwa lakini hazihitajiki.


Mjadala
•   Itaanza kwa kuteka makini ya hadhira na kutamatisha bila kuonesha mkanganyiko mwishoni
•   Itahutubia hadhira na kuwa nao kutoka mwanzo hadi mwisho; kwa mfano, kutumia maneno
     kama “sisi” na “ninyi” na kadhalika
•   Itajumuisha balagha kama vile maswali ya balagha, takriri, na kadhalika
