M21/2/ABSWA/HP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                   May / Mai / Mayo de 2021



                  Swahili / Swahili / Swahili B


                         Higher level
                       Niveau supérieur
                        Nivel Superior


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




9 pages/páginas
                                            –2–              M21/2/ABSWA/HP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2021

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2021

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2021

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                             –3–            M21/2/ABSWA/HP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion A: Language

How successfully does the candidate command written language?
• To what extent is the vocabulary appropriate and varied?
• To what extent are the grammatical structures varied?
• To what extent does the accuracy of the language contribute to effective communication?

  Marks                                      Level descriptor
     0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
            Command of the language is limited.
            Vocabulary is sometimes appropriate to the task.
   1–3      Some basic grammatical structures are used, with some attempts to use more
            complex structures.
            Language contains errors in both basic and more complex structures. Errors interfere
            with communication.
            Command of the language is partially effective.
            Vocabulary is generally appropriate to the task and varied.
   4–6      A variety of basic and some more complex grammatical structures is used.
            Language is mostly accurate for basic structures, but errors occur in more complex
            structures. Errors at times interfere with communication.
            Command of the language is effective and mostly accurate.
            Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied, including the use of idiomatic
            expressions.
   7–9
            A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used effectively.
            Language is mostly accurate. Occasional errors in basic and in complex grammatical
            structures do not interfere with communication.
            Command of the language is mostly accurate and very effective.
            Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and nuanced and varied in a manner that
            enhances the message, including the purposeful use of idiomatic expressions.
  10–12     A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used selectively in
            order to enhance communication.
            Language is mostly accurate. Minor errors in more complex grammatical structures
            do not interfere with communication.

Lugha
Si makosa yote yana umuhimu sawa na watahini wanafaa kukumbuka haya. Baadhi ya makosa
huathiri mawasiliano ya maana kwa kiasi kikubwa, na mengine hayaathiri. Pia, baadhi ya makosa
huonyesha ukosefu wa kimsingi wa lugha, wakati makosa mengine huweza kuashiria usahaulifu.

KUTELEZA – Makosa hutokea katika ngazi zote za ugumu, lakini hayatokei mara kwa mara – kwa
mfano, mtahiniwa kwa kawaida anatunga sentensi vyema wakati uliopita, lakini mara chache
anasahau kiambishi “-li-”.

DOSARI – Makosa hutokea mara kwa mara, hasa katika miundo fulani – kwa mfano, wakati
uliopita unaundwa kwa usahihi mara nyingi, lakini si wa kuaminika, na kunaweza kuwa na
mikanganyiko ya kimsingi (kwa mfano, wakati uliopita dhidi ya wakati timilifu).

MAPENGO – Baadhi ya miundo huwa sahihi kwa nadra au haijitokezi – kwa mfano, wakati uliopita
unahitajika, lakini haujitokezi.
                                                  –4–               M21/2/ABSWA/HP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B: Message
To what extent does the candidate fulfil the task?
     • How relevant are the ideas to the task?
     • To what extent are ideas developed?
     • To what extent do the clarity and organization of ideas contribute to the successful delivery of
       the message?

The “descriptor unpacked” explain the assessment criteria in greater detail. Where a candidate’s
response does not correspond exactly to a single mark band, the statements in bold should be
used as a guide for the ‘best fit’ approach.

 Marks              Level descriptor                             Descriptor unpacked
 0          The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
            The task is partially fulfilled. The link between the response and task tends to be
                                                unclear; the reader has difficulty understanding the
            Few ideas are relevant to the       message.
            task.
                                                The response touches upon some aspects of the task but
            Ideas are stated, but with no       there is also much unrelated information.
     1–3    development.
                                                The response addresses the task in a simple manner, and
            Ideas are not clearly presented     supporting details and/or examples barely feature, if at all.
            and do not follow a logical         The ideas do not link well together; inadequate or
            structure, making the message       inappropriate use of cohesive devices confuse the
            difficult to determine.             message.
            The task is generally fulfilled.    The link between the response and the task is mostly
                                                detectable; the reader’s general understanding of the
            Some ideas are relevant to the      message is not impeded, despite some ambiguity.
            task.
                                                The response covers some aspects of the task, or
            Ideas are outlined, but are not     touches upon all aspects but superficially.
            fully developed.
     4–6                                        The response includes some supporting details and
            Ideas are generally clearly         examples.
            presented and the response is       The ideas are organized in a logical way; some cohesive
            generally structured in a logical   devices are used appropriately to aid the delivery of the
            manner, leading to a mostly         message, although there may be areas of confusion at
            successful delivery of the          times.
            message.
            The task is fulfilled.              The link between the response and the task is clear;
                                                the reader has a good understanding of the message
            Most ideas are relevant to the      conveyed.
            task.
                                                The response covers all aspects of the task, despite
            Ideas are developed well, with      losing focus at times.
     7–9    some detail and examples.
                                                The response uses supporting details and examples to
            Ideas are clearly presented and     clarify the message.
            the response is structured in a     The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive devices
            logical manner, supporting the      are used appropriately to deliver the message with little or
            delivery of the message.            no ambiguity.
            The task is fulfilled effectively. The link between the response and the task is precise
                                                and consistently evident; the reader has a clear
            Ideas are relevant to the task.     understanding of the message conveyed.
 10–12
            Ideas are fully developed,          The response covers all aspects of the task fully, and
            providing details and relevant      maintains focus throughout.
            examples.
                                                   –5–              M21/2/ABSWA/HP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


             Ideas are clearly presented and     The response uses well-chosen supporting details and
             the response is structured in a     examples to illustrate and explain ideas persuasively.
             logical and coherent manner         The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive devices
             that supports the delivery of the   are used appropriately to deliver the message with clarity
             message.                            and ease.


Note: When marking candidate responses, keep in mind that neither the factual accuracy of the
information presented, nor the validity of the candidates’ personal opinions, are being assessed.
Therefore, scripts that are factually inaccurate should not be marked down, provided the ideas
presented have coherence and are sufficiently developed.



Criterion C: Conceptual understanding

To what extent does the candidate demonstrate conceptual understanding?
   •       To what extent is the choice of text type appropriate to the task?
   •       To what extent are register and tone appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
           task?
   •       To what extent does the response incorporate the conventions of the chosen text type?

  Marks                                           Level descriptor
       0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
              Conceptual understanding is limited.
              The choice of text type is generally inappropriate to the context, purpose or audience.
   1–2        The register and tone are inappropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response incorporates limited recognizable conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is mostly demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is generally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   3–4        The register and tone, while occasionally appropriate to the context, purpose and
              audience of the task, fluctuate throughout the response.
              The response incorporates some conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is fully demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   5–6        The register and tone are appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response fully incorporates the conventions of the chosen text type.



Note: Examiners must balance all three elements in criterion C (choice of text type,
appropriateness of tone and register, and use of text type conventions) to arrive at the final mark.
                                                 –6–                M21/2/ABSWA/HP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


Question specific guidance (Criterion B and C)

Swali 1

 Shule yako ina mpango wa kubadilisha mfumo wa mchanganyiko wa wasichana na wavulana na
 kuanza kuwakubali wanafunzi wasichana pekee katika siku zijazo. Kwa sababu unapingana na
 mabadiliko haya, mwandikie mwenyekiti wa bodi ya shule ambapo unaelezea upinzani wako kwa
 hatua hiyo, upendekeze hatua zinazofaa kuchukuliwa kabla ya kuutekeleza mpango huo, na
 uonyeshe jinsi mpango huo unavyoweza kuwa na athari hasi kwa jamii ya shule.

 Barua Pepe                         Pendekezo                       Blogu

Criterion B:

• Jibu linapaswa kuzingatia juu ya mabadiliko ya mfumo wa mchanganyiko kwenda mfumo wa
  wasichana pekee. Katika kuelezea, jibu linapaswa kuonesha athari hasi za mabadiliko hayo.
• Mjadala wa jibu hilo uoneshe kutokukubaliana na pendekezo hilo, kisha utoe mapendekezo juu
  ya hatua zinazofaa kuchukuliwa kabla ya utekelezaji wa mpango huo.
• Pia mjadala uoneshe athari chanya zinazoweza kutokea kama mpango huo utafuata hatua
  zilizopendekezwa.

Criterion C:

Choice of text type:

                            Text type        Rationale
Appropriate                 Barua pepe       Aina ya matini hii inafaa kabisa kwa lengo la kutoa
                                             mapendekezo yanayopaswa kuzingatiwa kabla ya
                                             utekelezaji wa mabadiliko hayo. Matini hii ni mahususi
                                             kwa mtu mmoja, na iwe na salamu za kufungua na
                                             kufunga


Generally appropriate       Pendekezo        Aina hii ya matini inaweza kufaa pia kutoa
                                             mapendekezo yanayopaswa kuzingatiwa kabla ya
                                             utekelezaji wa mabadiliko hayo, ingawa matini hii
                                             inaweza kuwa mahususi kwa mtu mmoja au kwa zaidi
                                             ya mtu mmoja.

Generally inappropriate     Blogu            Kimsingi msomaji au wasomaji wa matini hii hajulikani,
                                             na wao ndiyo hujibidiisha ili kutafuta habari hiyo, hivyo
                                             haitafaa ikitumika katika kazi hii.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these conform
to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the “generally
inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• Itumie sajiri isiyo rasmi
• Itumie mtindo unaoshawishi ili kumvutia mlengwa akubaliane na mapendekezo hayo

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                 –7–                M21/2/ABSWA/HP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


Swali 2

 Kumekuwepo na ongezeko la ulaji wa vyakula vilivyotengenezewa viwandani ambavyo vinaweza
 kuwa hatari kwa afya. Unataka kuwashawishi vijana wengine waache kula vyakula hivi. Andika
 matini ambapo unaelezea hatari za vyakula hivi, upendekeze jinsi ya kukabiliana na hatari hizi, na
 utoe wito kwa umma na watu mashuhuri kuchukua hatua na kuungana nawe katika vita dhidi ya
 viwanda hivi.

 Blogu                        Chapisho la mtandao wa kijamii               Mapitio

Criterion B:

• Jibu litolee maelezo yanayohusu ‘vyakula vilivyotengenezewa viwandani’.
• Maelezo yaoneshe hatari za vyakula hivyo kwa afya za walaji
• Jibu liwe na mapendekezo yanayojitosheleza ya namna ya kukabiliana na hatari hizo

Criterion C:

Choice of text type:

                            Text type        Rationale
Appropriate                 Blogu            Aina hii ya matini inafaa kabisa kuwashawishi
                                             walengwa kuhusu athari hizo na kutoa mapendekezo
                                             yanayofaa kuchukuliwa ili kukabiliana na hizo athari.

Generally appropriate       Chapisho la Aina hii pia inafaa kuielezea jamii, hasa vijana na watu
                            mtandao wa wengine mashuhuru kuhusu athari hizo na kutoa
                            kijamii     mapendekezo yanayofaa kuchukuliwa ili kukabiliana
                                        na hizo athari. Matini hii inaweza kuwafikia watu wengi
                                        zaidi

Generally inappropriate                      Aina hii ya matini hujikita zaidi katika kutoa maoni juu
                            Mapitio          ya kazi au matini nyingine, hivyo haitafaa kutumiwa
                                             hapa

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these conform
to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the “generally
inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• Matini iliyotumika ichanganye sajiri iliyo nusu rasmi na isiyo rasmi
• Itumie lugha inayowalenga moja kwa moja wasomaji, ivutie na kusisimua.

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                 –8–                M21/2/ABSWA/HP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


Swali 3

 Wakati wa likizo iliyopita, ulijiunga na shule ya msimu wa kiangazi ambayo madarasa yake yote
 yalifundishiwa mtandaoni, na taasisi hiyo inakuomba utoe maoni yako. Andika matini ambapo
 unaelezea uzoefu wako katika masomo hayo, utathmini ufanisi wa kutolewa kwa masomo hayo
 mtandaoni, na upendekeze jinsi ufundishaji huo unavyoweza kuboreshwa kwa wanafunzi wa siku
 zijazo.

 Barua pepe                   Chapisho la mtandao wa kijamii               Mapitio

Criterion B:

• Jibu lihusiane na maelezo kuhusu ufundishwaji kwa njia ya mtandao/masomo kwa njia ya
  mtandao.
• Maoni yanayohusu ufundishwaji kwa njia ya mtandao/masomo kwa njia ya mtandao. Maoni hayo
  yanaweza kutathmini ufanisi wa utolewaji wa masomo hayo mtandaoni
• Mapendekezo yanayoonesha namna ufundishaji huo unavyoweza kuboreshwa kwa wanafunzi
  wa siku zijazo


Criterion C:

Choice of text type:

                            Text type        Rationale
Appropriate                 Mapitio          Aina hii ya matini inafaa zaidi katika kutolea maoni
                                             yanayohusiana na ufundishwaji wa masomo kwa njia
                                             ya mtandao.
Generally appropriate       Barua pepe
                                             Matini hii pia inafaa kutolea maoni yanayohusiana na
                                             ufundishwaji wa masomo kwa njia ya mtandao, ingawa
                                             matini hii huwa ni mahususi kwa mtu mmoja au kikundi
                                             cha watu wachache.

Generally inappropriate     Chapisho la Matini hii huwahusisha wasomaji wa mtandaoni, na
                            mtandao wa hutumia lugha inayowalenga moja kwa moja, yenye
                            kijamii     mtindo wenye kuhuisha, kuvutia na kusisimua. Pia
                                        hutumia mbinu faafu za mtandaoni, kama vile marejeo
                                        ya machapisho mengine, na hashitagi za wanachama
                                        wengine, hivyo haitafaa kutumiwa hapa.



Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these conform
to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the “generally
inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• Itumie sajiri iliyo nusu rasmi
• Itumie lugha yenye kusisimua na kumvutia msomaji

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                             –9–             M21/2/ABSWA/HP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


Appendix: Text type conventions (Criterion C)

The most common and recognisable conventions of the text types are given below:

Blogu
•    Itakuwa na mada inayoshirikisha
•    Itatumia usimulizi wa nafsi ya kwanza
•    Itadhihirisha ufahamu wa wasomaji, kama vile kutumia lugha inayowalenga moja kwa moja,
     mtindo unaovutia na kusisimua, kuwakaribisha kutoa maoni, na kadhalika
•    Itakuwa na kauli ya kutamatisha



Pendekezo
• Itakuwa na mada inayofupisha yaliyomo
• Itakuwa na utangulizi na hitimisho
• Itaandikwa kwa muundo maalum kwa kuwa na mada, aya fupi zinazoeleweka, sehemu tofauti
   zinazotambulika kwa herufi/ nambari /vitone, na kadhalika

Mapitio
• Itakuwa na mada inayofaa
• Itakuwa na jina la mwandishi husika
• Itakuwa na utangulizi mfupi na hitimisho linaloeleweka



Barua Pepe
• Itakuwa na mstari wa mada husika
• Itadumisha mazungumzo yaliyo wazi kwa mtu mmoja mahsusi
• Itakuwa na salamu za kufungua na kufunga


*Kumbuka: ‘Kwa:’ /’Kutoka’: na tarehe zinaweza kuwekwa lakini hazihitajiki.


Chapisho la mtandao wa kijamii/ chapisho la majukwaa ya mitandaoni
•   Itatumia usimulizi wa nafsi ya kwanza/kauli ya nafsi ya kwanza
•   Itawahusisha wasomaji; kwa mfano, kwa kutumia lugha inayowalenga moja kwa moja, mtindo
     wenye kuhuisha, kuvutia na kusisimua
•   Itajumuisha mbinu faafu za mtandaoni; kwa mfano, marejeo ya machapisho mengine, na
    hashitagi za wanachama wengine
