© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Mathematics: applications and interpretation
Higher level
Paper 3

9 May 2023

Zone A afternoon   Zone B morning   Zone C afternoon


1 hour

Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y A graphic display calculator is required for this paper.
y Answer all the questions in the answer booklet provided.
y Unless otherwise stated in the question, all numerical answers should be given exactly or
  correct to three significant figures.
y A clean copy of the mathematics: applications and interpretation formula booklet is
  required for this paper.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [55 marks].




                                                                                              2223 – 7208
      7 pages                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
  –2–        2223 – 7208




Blank page
                                                     –3–                                           2223 – 7208


Answer both questions in the answer booklet provided. Please start each question on a new page.
Full marks are not necessarily awarded for a correct answer with no working. Answers must be
supported by working and/or explanations. Solutions found from a graphic display calculator should be
supported by suitable working. For example, if graphs are used to find a solution, you should sketch
these as part of your answer. Where an answer is incorrect, some marks may be given for a correct
method, provided this is shown by written working. You are therefore advised to show all working.

1.   [Maximum mark: 26]

     In this question you will use a historic method of calculating the cost of a barrel of
     wine to determine which shape of barrel gives the best value for money.

     In Austria in the 17th century, one method for measuring the volume of a barrel of wine, and
     hence determining its cost, was by inserting a straight stick into a hole in the side, as shown
     in the following diagram, and measuring the length SD. The longer the length, the greater the
     cost to the customer.

                                                     S




                                  D


     Let SD be d metres and the cost be C gulden (the local currency at the time). When the
     length of SD was 0.5 metres, the cost was 0.80 gulden.

     (a)   Given that C was directly proportional to d , find an equation for C in terms of d .           [3]

     A particular barrel of wine cost 0.96 gulden.

     (b)   Show that d = 0.6 .                                                                            [1]

(This question continues on the following page)




                                                                                                   Turn over
                                                   –4–                                            2223 – 7208


(Question 1 continued)

     This method of determining the cost was noticed by a mathematician, Kepler, who decided to
     try to calculate the dimensions of a barrel which would give the maximum volume of wine for
     a given length SD.

     Initially he modelled the barrel as a cylinder, with S at the midpoint of one side. He took the
     length of the cylinder as 2h metres and its radius as r metres, as shown in the following
     diagram of the cross-section.

                                                                               diagram not to scale
                                                     S

                                                                         r
                                               d


                                  D
                                                    2h

     (c)   Find an expression for r 2 in terms of d and h .                                              [3]

     Let the volume of this barrel be V m3 .

                             2
     (d)   Show that V        d h  h3  .
                            2               [2]

     The remainder of this question considers the shape of barrel that gives the best value
     when d = 0.6 .

     (e)   (i)	Use the formula from part (d) to find the volume of this barrel when h = 0.4 .           [2]

                                                                     dV
           (ii)    Use differentiation to show that h = 0.12 when       = 0 .[3]
                                                                     dh

           (iii)   Given that this value of h maximizes the volume, find the largest possible volume
                   of this barrel.                                                                       [2]

(This question continues on the following page)
                                                  –5–                                             2223 – 7208


(Question 1 continued)

     Kepler then considered a non-cylindrical barrel whose base and lid are circles with radius
     0.2 m and whose length is 0.8 m.

     He modelled the curved surface of this barrel by rotating a quadratic curve, ASB, with
     equation y = ax2 + bx + c , 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.8 , about the x-axis. The origin of the coordinate
     system is at the centre of one of the circular faces as shown in the following diagram.
     S is at the vertex of the quadratic curve and SD = 0.6 .

                    y

                 0.3
                                                  S
                        A                                                        B
                 0.2

                 0.1                  0.6


                    0       0.1    0.2      0.3   0.4    0.5    0.6     0.7    0.8    x

                −0.1

                −0.2
                        D


     Kepler wished to find out if his barrel would give him more wine than any cylindrical barrel
     with d = 0.6 .

     The coordinates of A and B are (0 , 0.2) and (0.8 , 0.2) respectively.

     (f)   Find the equation of the quadratic curve, ASB.[6]

     (g)   Show that the volume of this barrel is greater than the maximum volume of any
           cylindrical barrel with d = 0.6 .                                                             [3]

     (h)   State one assumption, not already given, that has been made in using these models
           to find the shape of the barrel that gives the best value.                                    [1]




                                                                                                Turn over
                                                     –6–                                               2223 – 7208


2.   [Maximum mark: 29]

     In this question you will use vector methods to determine whether aircraft are obeying
     air traffic regulations.

     The base of an air traffic control tower at an airport is taken as the origin of a coordinate
     system. An aircraft’s position is given by the coordinates ( x , y , z ), where x and y are
     respectively the aircraft’s displacement east and north of the tower, and z is the vertical
     displacement of the aircraft above the base of the tower. All displacements are measured
     in kilometres.

     At 12:00 two aircraft, A and B, are at the points P (100 , −82 ,   10.7) and Q (215 , −197 , 10.7)
     respectively.

     (a)   Find the distance between the two aircraft at 12:00.[2]

     The two aircraft are flying along the same straight line (flight path), with B behind A.

                                                   640 
                                                        
     They both have the same constant velocity of  640  kilometres per hour.
                                                   0 
                                                        

     (b)   Find the speed of both aircraft.                                                                   [2]

     Air traffic regulations state that if two aircraft are on the same flight path then they must
     always maintain at least a 10 minute gap between them. If at any time two aircraft are
     too close they are said to be “in conflict”.

     (c)   Find the length of time it takes B to reach point P from point Q, and hence state
           whether the two aircraft are in conflict.                                                          [3]

     (d)   Write down, rA , the position vector of A, t hours after 12:00.[1]

     If two aircraft are not on the same flight path, air traffic regulations state:

     When the vertical distance between the two aircraft is less than 300 m the aircraft must be
     more than 10 km apart.

     When the vertical distance between the two aircraft is at least 300 m there are no restrictions.

     The air traffic controller notices an aircraft, C, flying on a different flight path but close to A.
     The position of C, t hours after 12:00, is given by

                                                 400   140 
                                                               
                                           rC   41   t  604  .
                                                 9.1   2 
                                                               

(This question continues on the following page)
                                                        –7–                                               2223 – 7208


(Question 2 continued)

      (e)     (i)	Find the two values of t at which the distance between A and C is 10 km.                       [5]

              It is given that the distance between A and C is less than 10 km, only between these
              two values of t .

              (ii)    Determine whether the two aircraft, A and C, will break the air traffic regulations
                      if they continue with their current velocities. Justify your answer.                        [5]

      A new coordinate system, ( x , y ), is defined with an origin R at a point 2 km directly above
      the air traffic control tower. When an aircraft is flying in the horizontal plane containing R, the
      values of x and y represent its displacement, in km, east and north of point R respectively.

      A fourth aircraft, D, is flying at a constant height of 2 km near the airport while waiting for
      permission to land. Its position at time t is given by

                                                     6.4 cos (38t ) 
                                                RD                  .
                                                      6.4 sin (38t ) 

      (f)     Describe the path followed by D.                                                                    [3]

      Around the same time a small aircraft, E, is flying at the same height as D and along the line
      with vector equation

                                                     20    1
                                                RE        .
                                                      10   1

                         1
      (g)     Let b       .
                        1

                            
              (i)     Find RE i b in terms of l .                                                                [2]

              (ii)    Hence find the value of l for which the distance from R to the line is minimum.             [2]

              (iii)   Find this minimum distance.                                                                 [2]

              (iv)    Show that D and E will not break the air traffic regulations for any value of t .           [2]




References:

© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
