No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
http://www.ibo.org/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-
publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat
ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur,
des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des
gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs
d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit préalable de
l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre
pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse http://www.ibo.org/fr/contact-the-
ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-
to-apply-for-a-license.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de
apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de
aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan
recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido y estará
sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este enlace
encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia: http://www.ibo.org/es/
contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-
providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.
N19/3/GLPOL/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX




Global politics
Standard level
Paper 2


Friday 15 November 2019 (morning)


1 hour 45 minutes


Instructions to candidates
yyDo not turn over this examination paper until instructed to do so.
yyAnswer two questions, each from a different unit of study. Each question is worth [25 marks].
yyThe maximum mark for this examination paper is [50 marks].




                                                                                              8819 – 5953
     2 pages                                              © International Baccalaureate Organization 2019
                                                   –2–                   N19/3/GLPOL/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Answer two questions, each from a different unit of study. Each question is worth [25 marks].

Power, sovereignty and international relations

1.   Discuss the effectiveness of two types of power and their impact on global politics.


2.   Justify the statement that “the sovereign state is the most significant protector as well as the
     biggest threat to human rights”.



Human Rights

3.   “People who are forced to move from their homes due to circumstances beyond their control
      remain vulnerable, despite developments in human rights laws and treaties.” Examine this view.


4.   To what extent is the effective enforcement of human rights tied to the level of development in
     a state?



Development

5.   Discuss the limitations of measuring development with reference to one method you have studied.


6.   Discuss the view that successful development depends on full participation at the
     international level.



Peace and conflict

7.   Compare and contrast the causes of two conflicts you have studied.


8.   To what extent do you agree with the claim that positive peace requires sustainable development?




