No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
http://www.ibo.org/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-
publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat
ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur,
des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des
gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs
d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit préalable de
l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre
pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse http://www.ibo.org/fr/contact-the-
ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-
to-apply-for-a-license.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de
apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de
aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan
recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido y estará
sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este enlace
encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia: http://www.ibo.org/es/
contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-
providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.
N19/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/T




Information technology in a global society
Higher level and standard level
Paper 2 – article


Monday 18 November 2019 (morning)


1 hour 15 minutes


Instructions to candidates
y Do not turn over this sheet until instructed to do so.
y This sheet contains the article required for information technology in a global society higher
  level and standard level paper 2.




                                                                                                8819 – 5514
     2 pages                                                © International Baccalaureate Organization 2019
                                                      –2–                     N19/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

                                              Theme: Health

IT system: Virtual reality simulators

     Students at the Medical University of Mokopane, South Africa who wish to become surgeons* must
     currently undergo training that involves:
     • observing experienced surgeons operating on real patients
     • practising basic surgical techniques on dummies
 5   • carrying out simple parts of the surgery on real-life patients under the very close
        supervision of experienced surgeons.

     Dr Elisa Gerber, the principal surgeon at the university, is working with Virtual Surgery Solutions
     (VSS) to develop a virtual reality (VR) simulator that would recreate the experience of carrying
     out surgery. Dr Gerber and her team are performing the final tests on the six different surgery
10   simulations that will initially be available at the university. These simulations will use a variety of
     hand controls designed by VSS.

     The VR simulator includes a headset with a screen that displays a single, 360 degree computer-
     generated image in three dimensions (3D), and has hand controls for the trainee surgeon to use
     (see Figure 1). Audio instructions are provided for the trainee surgeon to follow, and the system
15   also has sensors that gather data from the trainee’s head and hand movements. Senior surgeons
     can watch the progress of the trainee on a monitor in real time.

                          Figure 1: Trainee surgeon using the VR simulator




                                     [Source: image courtesy of 3D Systems]


     During the training, screen capturing software is used to record the virtual surgery performed by
     the trainee surgeon so it can be analysed later by the trainee or a senior surgeon. Dr Gerber can
     see great potential for improving the quality of the surgical training in her hospital with the VR
20   training system. She also believes that sharing the video recordings generated during the training
     sessions could benefit other hospitals in southern Africa.

                             [Source: © International Baccalaureate Organization 2019]



* surgeons: doctors who specialize in performing medical operations
