N19/3/PSYCH/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                        November 2019


                           Psychology


                         Standard level


                               Paper 1




12 pages
                                           –2–                 N19/3/PSYCH/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
http://www.ibo.org/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-
publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat
ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur,
des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des
gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs
d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit préalable de
l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre
pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse http://www.ibo.org/fr/contact-the-
ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-
to-apply-for-a-license.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de
apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de
aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan
recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido y estará
sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este enlace
encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia: http://www.ibo.org/es/
contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-
providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.
                                               –3–                N19/3/PSYCH/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Section A markbands

 Marks                                       Level descriptor

   0       The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

          The response is of limited relevance to or only rephrases the question.
          Knowledge and understanding is mostly inaccurate or not relevant to the question.
  1–3
          The research supporting the response is mostly not relevant to the question and if
           relevant only listed.

          The response is relevant to the question, but does not meet the command
           term requirements.
  4–6
          Knowledge and understanding is accurate but limited.
          The response is supported by appropriate research which is described.

          The response is fully focused on the question and meets the command term
           requirements.
          Knowledge and understanding is accurate and addresses the main topics/problems
  7–9
           identified in the question.
          The response is supported by appropriate research which is described and explicitly
           linked to the question.
                                                  –4–                  N19/3/PSYCH/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                          Section A
Biological approach to understanding behaviour

1.   Describe neuroplasticity, with reference to one relevant study.                              [9]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands when awarding marks.

     The command term “describe” requires candidates to give a detailed account of
     neuroplasticity with reference to one relevant study. Descriptions of neuroplasticity may
     show conceptual understanding of long-term potentiation, neurogenesis and/or synaptic
     pruning.

     Responses should describe neuroplasticity indicating how the neural connections in the
     brain change with regard to a specific behaviour or cognitive process. Animal research is
     acceptable.

     Relevant studies could include but are not limited to:

     • Rosenzweig, Bennett and Diamond’s (1972) study on the role of environmental factors
       on neuroplasticity
     • Bremner et al.’s (2008) study on plasticity of the human brain in post-traumatic stress
       disorder
     • Dragansky’s (2004) study of neuroplasticity in jugglers
     • Maguire et al.’s (2000) study on navigation (related structural change in the hippocampi
       of taxi drivers)
     • Tierney et al.’s (2001) study using PET scans to investigate language development.

     If a candidate describes more than one study related to neuroplasticity, credit should be
     given only to the first study.

     If a candidate describes a relevant study, but neuroplasticity is not addressed, apply the
     markbands up to a maximum of [4].

     If a candidate describes neuroplasticity but does not describe an appropriate study, apply
     the markbands up to a maximum of [5].
                                                  –5–                N19/3/PSYCH/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Cognitive approach to understanding behaviour

2.   Describe one study related to one model of memory.                                         [9]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands when awarding marks.

     The command term “describe” requires candidates to give a detailed account of one study
     related to one model of memory. The description of the study should include the aim,
     procedure and findings of the chosen study.

     Appropriate models of memory may include, but are not limited to:
      • Flashbulb memory
      • Levels of Processing Model.
      • Multi-Store Model of Memory
      • Schema theory
      • Working Memory Model

     Relevant studies could include but are not limited to:

     •   Baddely and Hitch’s (1974) study on the Working Memory Model
     •   Bartlett’s (1924) study of the effect of schema on memory storage
     •   Craik and Lockhart’s (1972) study on the Levels of Processing Model.
     •   Glanzer and Cunitz’s (1966) study on the primacy and recency effects in free recall
     •   Milner’s (1966) case study of HM.

     If a candidate describes more than one study, credit should be awarded only to the first
     study.

     If a candidate describes an appropriate model of memory but does not refer to a relevant
     study, apply the markbands up to a maximum of [4].
                                                   –6–                  N19/3/PSYCH/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Sociocultural approach to understanding behaviour

3.   Outline social cognitive theory with reference to one relevant study.                            [9]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands when awarding marks.

     The learning outcome “outline” requires candidates to give a brief account of social cognitive
     theory in relation to one relevant study.

     The main aspects of social cognitive theory include:
     • imitation of role models
     • the role of attention, retention, motivation and reproduction.
     • self-efficacy
     • vicarious learning

     Responses may refer to studies such as, but not limited to:
     • Bandura et al.’s studies on aggression
     • Joy, Kimball and Zabrack (1986) on aggression from television viewing
     • Totten’s (2003) study on modelling of violent behaviour towards girlfriends
     • Sprafkin et al.’s (1975) study on children’s prosocial behaviour and television model
     • Fagot et al.’s (1992) study on parental influences on gender development.

     If a candidate refers to more than one study, credit should be given only to the first study.

     If a candidate outlines social cognitive theory without making reference to a relevant study,
     up to a maximum of [5] should be awarded.

     If a candidate describes a relevant study without outlining social cognitive theory, up to a
     maximum of [4] should be awarded.
                                                  –7–               N19/3/PSYCH/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Section B assessment criteria

A — Focus on the question

To understand the requirements of the question students must identify the problem or issue
being raised by the question. Students may simply identify the problem by restating the
question or breaking down the question. Students who go beyond this by explaining the
problem are showing that they understand the issues or problems.

 Marks    Level descriptor


    0     Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.


    1     Identifies the problem/issue raised in the question.


    2     Explains the problem/issue raised in the question.


B — Knowledge and understanding

This criterion rewards students for demonstrating their knowledge and understanding of
specific areas of psychology. It is important to credit relevant knowledge and understanding
that is targeted at addressing the question and explained in sufficient detail.

 Marks                                          Level descriptor


    0    Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.


  1–2    The response demonstrates limited relevant knowledge and understanding.
         Psychological terminology is used but with errors that hamper understanding.

  3–4    The response demonstrates relevant knowledge and understanding but lacks detail.
         Psychological terminology is used but with errors that do not hamper understanding.

  5–6    The response demonstrates relevant, detailed knowledge and understanding.
         Psychological terminology is used appropriately
                                                  –8–                 N19/3/PSYCH/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


C — Use of research to support answer

Psychology is evidence based so it is expected that students will use their knowledge of research to
support their argument. There is no prescription as to which or how many pieces of research are
appropriate for their response. As such it becomes important that the research selected is relevant and
useful in supporting the response. One piece of research that makes the points relevant to the answer
is better than several pieces that repeat the same point over and over.

 Marks Level descriptor


    0     Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.


   1–2    Limited relevant psychological research is used in the response. Research selected serves to
          repeat points already made.

   3–4    Relevant psychological research is used in support of the response, and is partly explained.
          Research selected partially develops the argument.

   5–6    Relevant psychological research is used in support of the response and is thoroughly
          explained. Research selected is effectively used to develop the argument.

D — Critical thinking

This criterion credits students who demonstrate an inquiring and reflective attitude to their
understanding of psychology. There are a number of areas where students may demonstrate critical
thinking about the knowledge and understanding used in their responses and the research used to
support that knowledge and understanding.

The areas of critical thinking are:
• research design and methodologies
• triangulation
• assumptions and biases
• contradictory evidence or alternative theories or explanations
• areas of uncertainty.

These areas are not hierarchical and not all areas will be relevant in a response. In addition, students
could demonstrate a very limited critique of methodologies, for example, and a well-developed
evaluation of areas of uncertainty in the same response. As a result, a holistic judgement of their
achievement in this criterion should be made when awarding marks.
                                                –9–                 N19/3/PSYCH/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



 Marks Level descriptor


    0    Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.


   1–2   There is limited critical thinking and the response is mainly descriptive. Evaluation or
         discussion, if present, is superficial.

   3–4   The response contains critical thinking, but lacks development. Evaluation or discussion of
         most relevant areas is attempted but is not developed.

   5–6   The response consistently demonstrates well developed critical thinking. Evaluation
         and/or discussion of relevant areas is consistently well developed.

E — Clarity and organisation

This criterion credits students for presenting their response in a clear and organized manner. A good
response would require no re-reading to understand the points made or the train of thought
underpinning the argument.

 Marks Level descriptor


    0    Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.


    1    The answer demonstrates some organization and clarity, but this is not sustained throughout
         the response.

    2    The answer demonstrates organization and clarity throughout the response.
                                                – 10 –              N19/3/PSYCH/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                               Section B

4.   Discuss one evolutionary explanation of one behaviour.                                        [22]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered review of one
     evolutionary explanation of one behaviour.

     Relevant behaviour that could be discussed includes, but is not limited to:
     • human mating behaviours (Buss, 1990)
     • emotions (for example, disgust, Fessler, 2006; universality of emotional expressions,
       Ekman and Frieson, 1971)
     • abnormal behaviour (for example, depression, Andrews and Thompson, 2009; phobias,
       Seligman, 1971)
     • prosocial behaviour (Dawkins, 1976).

     Discussion points may include, but are not limited to:
     • examining the underlying assumptions
     • the validity of evidence in support of the explanation
     • discussion of its strengths and limitations
     • the difficulties of carrying out empirical research
     • the debate of generalizing from animals to human behaviour
     • the role of culture in behaviour
     • limitations of a reductionist argument

     Candidates may discuss a specific emotional or dysfunctional behaviour such as disgust or
     depression or may discuss emotional or dysfunctional behaviour in general. Both
     approaches are equally acceptable.

     If a candidate addresses more than one specific behaviour, credit should be given only to
     the first behaviour addressed.

     If a candidate addresses more than one evolutionary explanation of behaviour, credit should
     be given only to the first discussion. However, candidates may address other explanations
     of the same behaviour and be awarded marks for these as long as they are clearly used to
     discuss the evolutionary explanation addressed in the response.
                                                 – 11 –               N19/3/PSYCH/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


5.   Discuss two or more ethical considerations related to one study investigating the
     reliability of one cognitive process.                                         [22]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” requires candidates to give a considered review of ethical
     considerations related to one study investigating the reliability of one cognitive process.

     Cognitive processes may include, but are not limited to, memory, thinking and decision-
     making.

     Ethical considerations may include, but are not limited to:
     • anonymity
     • debriefing
     • deception
     • informed consent
     • right to withdraw
     • undue stress or harm

     The reliability of a cognitive process is the extent to which it is open to distortion. Some
     schema studies are appropriate (eg Bartlett’s (1932) War of the Ghosts), whereas others
     do not address distortion (eg Bransford and Johnson, 1972).

     Relevant studies may include but are not limited to:
     • Brown and Kulik’s (1977) study on flashbulb memory
     • Loftus and Palmer’s (1974) study on reconstructive memory in relation to eyewitness
       testimony
     • Tversky and Kahneman’s (1974) study on heuristics and biases.
     • Yuille and Cutshall’s (1986) study on stress and eyewitness testimony

     Discussions may include, but are not limited to:
     • The justification of how ethical considerations were resolved – for example, why was deception
        used?
     • How ethical considerations may limit the ability to carry out research
     • Why ethical considerations are important – for example, with regard to a specific study, why is
        the anonymity of the participants important?
     • Using a cost/benefit analysis when undertaking research
     • How ethical considerations/guidelines have changed over time.

     If a candidate only discusses one ethical consideration, the response should be awarded
     up to a maximum of [3] for criterion B: knowledge and understanding. All remaining criteria
     should be awarded marks according to the best fit approach.

     If a candidate uses a study that is not relevant to the reliability of one cognitive process,
     then [0] should be awarded for criterion C. All remaining criteria should be awarded marks
     according to the best fit approach.

     If a candidate addresses more than one study, credit should be given to the first study
     addressed.

     If a candidate addresses more than one cognitive process, credit should be given to the first
     cognitive process addressed.
                                                 – 12 –              N19/3/PSYCH/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


6.   Discuss the use of one research method to investigate individuals and groups.                 [22]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered review of one
     particular research method linked to the study of individuals and groups.

     Research methods may include, but are not limited to, experiments (laboratory, field or
     natural/quasi), observations and interviews. The focus of the response should be on the
     nature of the research method itself.

     The discussion should centre around social and not cultural aspects of behaviour.

     Examples of research studies may include, but are not limited to:

     • Asch’s (1951) experiment on conformity
     • Zimbardo’s (1973) observation of conformity to social roles
     • Tajfel’s (1971) experiment on minimal group paradigm
     • Sherif’s (1954) “Robbers Cave” field experiment investigating the realistic conflict
       theory
     • Howarth’s (2002) focus-group interviews investigating social identity based on group
       belonging.

     Discussion may include, but is not limited to:
     • an evaluation of the type of data received (qualitative versus quantitative)
     • the appropriateness of the method for the aim
     • issues of validity and reliability
     • the importance of replication
     • cause and effect versus correlation
     • reductionist vs holistic approach to understanding behaviour
     • the importance of internal versus ecological validity

     Examples of experiments (laboratory, field or quasi/natural) should be considered as only
     one method.

If a candidate discusses more than one research method, credit should be given only to the first
discussion. Candidates may address other research methods and be awarded marks for these
as long as they are clearly used to discuss the main research method addressed in the
response.
