No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
http://www.ibo.org/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-
publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat
ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur,
des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des
gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs
d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit préalable de
l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre
pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse http://www.ibo.org/fr/contact-the-
ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-
to-apply-for-a-license.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de
apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de
aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan
recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido y estará
sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este enlace
encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia: http://www.ibo.org/es/
contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-
providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.
N19/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




Social and cultural anthropology
Higher level
Paper 1


Wednesday 6 November 2019 (afternoon)


2 hours


Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y Section A: read the passage and answer questions 1 and 2. Choose either question 3 or 4.
  Answer question 5.
y Section B: answer the question.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [40 marks].




                                                                                            8819 – 5801
     5 pages                                            © International Baccalaureate Organization 2019
                                                    –2–                   N19/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                                Section A
Read the passage.

Passage adapted from Griffiths, M. (2012) “ ‘Vile liars and truth distorters’: Truth, trust and the asylum
system” in Anthropology Today Vol 28 No 5.

         Asylum seekers and refused refugees are some of the most mistrusted persons in British
         society, and are commonly assumed to be manipulating the immigration system. Most of
         the 300 asylum seekers I spoke to had been accused by the UK Border Agency (UKBA)
         of providing at least some untrue information. Such accusations are crucial, because the
    5    notoriously difficult decisions about granting refugee status are often based on assessments of
         the applicant’s honesty.

         […] Deception, uncertainty and mistrust are as much characteristics of the asylum seekers’
         perspective of the immigration system as the reverse. But whilst an asylum applicant’s
         inconsistency is routinely interpreted as evidence of lying, that of UKBA representatives is
   10    considered indicative of inconsequential errors or even new versions of the “truth”. […]

         I conducted qualitative fieldwork from 2008–2010 with migrants who had claimed refugee
         protection in the UK. Some were detainees at a detention centre. There are considerable
         methodological challenges in conducting fieldwork in closed institutions and with such
         vulnerable individuals. Unable to perform “normal” participant observation, I used approaches
   15    including working for a local politician and non-governmental organisations. […]

         Constructs of truth tellers and liars are subjective, relying on cultural assumptions and
         expectations about how people think, remember and behave. British decision makers tend
         to assume that truthful asylum seekers have a good recall of events and present their stories
         in a consistent and unhesitating manner. In contrast, narrative variations and anomalies are
   20    associated with lying. […]

         However, people I spoke to admitted that occasionally they had been deceptive, generally in
         order to work illegally or to better their immigration chances. In some situations, “lies” may even
         be a rational response. For example, the rigid questions in the immigration paperwork may
         discourage full truthfulness. The UKBA assumes that people know “basic” information such as
   25    one’s date of birth, inherit names in particular ways, and that spellings remain consistent despite
         translation from different languages. Consequently, people may guess or invent these details
         rather than admit not knowing them; they adapt their statements to fit the decision makers’
         requirements. […]

         Not one of my informants trusted in the UKBA but rather gave comments such as: “I
   30    don’t have any faith in the establishment. They deceive me”, or “I don’t trust immigration.
         Immigration are stupid”. […] People also spoke of the UKBA as unfair and confusing. One
         could suddenly be released from detention and then promptly redetained, as happened to
         Sebastian from Cameroon: “They detain you, then they release you, then they detain you
         again. It is a matter of luck”. Sebastian lost his asylum appeal but was released from detention
   35    instead of being deported.

         […] Sometimes informants thought the system was downright irrational. For example, Richard’s
         assertion that he was homosexual (the basis of his asylum claim) was refuted by the authorities.
         Yet he was refused legal aid because of the income of his male British partner. Another
         man was accused of running away although he was actually in prison. Chronic mistrust and
   40    uncertainty may be a technology of power; one that encourages people to be hopeless and
         helpless. […]
                                                              –3–                       N19/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

          The irony is that a system that demands consistency from asylum seekers is itself inconsistent.
          As such, asylum seekers are held to a higher standard of truth telling than those making
          decisions about their claims. […] I would go further and suggest that the “truth value” of UKBA
     45   representatives is considered far greater than that of asylum seekers, allowing the former
          to insist on particular versions of the “truth”. This is not only discriminatory but potentially
          dangerous, as it might involve life or death decisions. […]

          I do not suggest that asylum seekers do not “lie”, merely that an examination of the context in
          which they are embedded may help explain their statements. Lying can be a rational response
     50   to negotiating a complex and inconsistent immigration system. In any case, the terms “truth”
          and “lies” are too simplistic. Sometimes people give incorrect information because they do not
          know the “truth”, or because it conveys information that is more “truthful” than the strict “truth”, or
          because they anticipate a bias of mistrust. This might not necessarily be the same as lying.
              [Source: Griffiths, M. (2012) “ ‘Vile liars and truth distorters’: Truth, trust and the asylum system,”
                               Anthropology Today, Vol 28 No 5, © John Wiley and Sons 2012]



Answer question 1 and question 2.

1.    Define the term status and explain how you would apply this term in the context of the
      asylum seekers and refused refugees in the passage.                                                                    [4]

2.    Explain how the key concept belief and knowledge helps you understand the ethnographic
      data presented in the passage.                                                                                         [6]


Answer either question 3 or question 4.

3.    Compare and contrast the way in which the key concept of power or culture is evident in this
      passage with how it is evident in one other ethnographic example you have studied. Make
      reference to theory in your answer.

OR

4.    Compare and contrast the approaches to research adopted by the anthropologist in this
      passage to the approaches to research used by another anthropologist you have studied.
      Make reference to concepts, ethnographic material and theory in your answer.                                          [10]


Answer question 5.

5.    Why does anthropology matter? Discuss with reference to at least two sources of
      ethnographic material and examples from the passage.                                                                  [10]




                                                                                                                        Turn over
                                                              –4–                      N19/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                                          Section B

Answer question 6.

6.        With reference to either stimulus A or stimulus B and your own knowledge, discuss the
          defining features of anthropological ethics.                                                                     [10]


Stimulus A

            Australia’s Stolen Generations

            “I began to understand that each time a file was reopened, a letter reread, and the story of
            removal retold, my respondents were forced into the contradictory role of custodian of the
            traumatic nature of Aboriginal child removal… Whether the uncovering of such narratives
      5     then can be deemed ‘remedy or poison’ is a question which this article as a ‘self conscious
            ethnography’ of the archives will attempt to answer.”

            From 1910 until the 1970s significant numbers of children of Aboriginal descent were removed
            from their families and raised in government or religious institutions. Murphy conducted
            ethnographic case studies with members of these “Stolen Generations”, using their personal
     10     archives of collections of letters, photographs and other documents to stimulate dialogue about
            the experience.

            Ethnographic research can have unexpected consequences, positive or negative. These
            archives both enable trauma survivors to connect with their origins and to piece together their
            past worlds; in some cases, entering into a process of healing and reconciliation, but in other
     15     cases reliving past traumas.

           [Source: Archives of Sorrow: An Exploration of Australia’s Stolen Generations and their Journey into the Past,
              by F. Murphy, 2011. History & Anthropology, 22(4), pp.481–495, reprinted by permission of the publisher
                                         Taylor & Francis Ltd, http://www.tandfonline.com]
                                                        –5–                     N19/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Stimulus B

A health worker administering a vaccine to a child during a yellow fever outbreak in Luanda, Angola
in December 2015. Anthropologists work with vaccination programmes to help overcome cultural
suspicions.




                 [Source: Public domain image, CDC Public Health Image Library, https://phil.cdc.gov/]
