Mathematics: applications and interpretation 
guide
First assessment 2021Mathematics: applications and interpretation 
guide
First assessment 2021
Published February 2019
Published on behalf of the International Baccalaureate Organization, a not-for-profit 
educational foundation of 15 Route des Morillons, 1218 Le Grand-Saconnex, Geneva, 
Switzerland by the
International Baccalaureate Organization (UK) Ltd  
Peterson House, Malthouse Avenue, Cardiff Gate  
Cardiff, Wales CF23 8GL  
United Kingdom  
Website: ibo.org
© International Baccalaureate Organization 2019
The International Baccalaureate Organization (known as the IB) offers four high-quality 
and challenging educational programmes for a worldwide community of schools, aiming 
to create a better, more peaceful world. This publication is one of a range of materials 
produced to support these programmes.
The IB may use a variety of sources in its work and checks information to verify accuracy 
and authenticity, particularly when using community-based knowledge sources such as 
Wikipedia. The IB respects the principles of intellectual property and makes strenuous 
efforts to identify and obtain permission before publication from rights holders of all 
copyright material used. The IB is grateful for permissions received for material used 
in this publication and will be pleased to correct any errors or omissions at the earliest 
opportunity.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the IB’s prior written 
permission, or as expressly permitted by the Rules for use of IB Intellectual Property .
IB merchandise and publications can be purchased through the IB Store  (email: sales@
ibo.org ). Any commercial use of IB publications (whether fee-covered or commercial) 
by third parties acting in the IB’s ecosystem without a formal relationship with the IB 
(including but not limited to tutoring organizations, professional development providers, 
educational publishers and operators of curriculum mapping or teacher resource digital 
platforms etc) is prohibited and requires a subsequent written license from the IB. License 
requests should be sent to copyright@ibo.org . More information can be obtained on the 
IB public website .
Diploma Programme
Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
International Baccalaureate , Baccalauréat International , Bachillerato Internacional   
and IB logos are registered trademarks of the International Baccalaureate Organization.IB learner profile I
profile IB learner p
arner profile IB lea
ile IB learner profi
IB learner profile I
er profile IB learne
© International Bac calaur eate Or ganiza tion 2017
International Bac calaur eate® | Bac calaur éat International® | Bachiller ato Internacional®
The IB learner pro/f_ile represents 10 attributes valued by IB World Schools. We believe these attributes, and others 
like them, can help individuals and groups become responsible members of local, national and global communities.We nurture our curiosity, developing skills for inquiry and 
research. We know how to learn independently and with others. 
We learn with enthusiasm and sustain our love of learning 
throughout life.
We develop and use conceptual understanding, exploring 
knowledge across a range of disciplines. We engage with issues 
and ideas that have local and global signi/f_icance. 
We use critical and creative thinking skills to analyse and take 
responsible action on complex problems. We exercise initiative in 
making reasoned, ethical decisions.
We express ourselves con/f_idently and creatively in more than one 
language and in many ways.  We collaborate eﬀectively, listening 
carefully to the perspectives of other individuals and groups.
We act with integrity and honesty, with a strong sense of 
fairness and justice, and with respect for the dignity and rights 
of people everywhere. We take responsibility for our actions 
and their consequences.We critically appreciate our own cultures and personal histories, 
as well as the values and traditions of others. We seek and evaluate 
a range of points of view, and we are willing to grow from the 
experience.
We show empathy, compassion and respect. We have a 
commitment to service, and we act to make a positive diﬀerence 
in the lives of others and in the world around us.
We understand the importance of balancing diﬀerent aspects of 
our lives /emdash.capintellectual, physical, and emotional/emdash.cap to achieve 
well-being for ourselves and others. We recognize our interde-
pendence with other people and with the world in which we live.
We thoughtfully consider the world and our own ideas and expe-
rience. We work to understand our strengths and weaknesses in 
order to support our learning and personal development.We approach uncertainty with forethought and determination; 
we work independently and cooperatively to explore new ideas 
and innovative strategies. We are resourceful and resilient in the 
face of challenges and change.IB learner profile
The aim of all IB programmes is to develop internationally minded people who, recognizing their common 
humanity and shared guardianship of the planet, help to create a better and more peaceful world.
As IB learners we strive to be:THE IB LEARNER PROFILEIB mission statement
The International Baccalaureate aims to develop inquiring, knowledgeable and caring young people who 
help to create a better and more peaceful world through intercultural understanding and respect.
To this end the organization works with schools, governments and international organizations to develop 
challenging programmes of international education and rigorous assessment.
These programmes encourage students across the world to become active, compassionate and lifelong 
learners who understand that other people, with their differences, can also be right.IB learner profile I
profile IB learner parner profile IB leaile IB learner profiIB learner profile Ier profile IB learne
© International Bac calaur eate Or ganiza tion 2017
International Bac calaur eate® | Bac calaur éat International® | Bachiller ato Internacional®
The IB learner pro/f_ile represents 10 attributes valued by IB World Schools. We believe these attributes, and others 
like them, can help individuals and groups become responsible members of local, national and global communities.We nurture our curiosity, developing skills for inquiry and 
research. We know how to learn independently and with others. 
We learn with enthusiasm and sustain our love of learning 
throughout life.
We develop and use conceptual understanding, exploring 
knowledge across a range of disciplines. We engage with issues 
and ideas that have local and global signi/f_icance. 
We use critical and creative thinking skills to analyse and take 
responsible action on complex problems. We exercise initiative in 
making reasoned, ethical decisions.
We express ourselves con/f_idently and creatively in more than one 
language and in many ways.  We collaborate eﬀectively, listening 
carefully to the perspectives of other individuals and groups.
We act with integrity and honesty, with a strong sense of 
fairness and justice, and with respect for the dignity and rights 
of people everywhere. We take responsibility for our actions 
and their consequences.We critically appreciate our own cultures and personal histories, 
as well as the values and traditions of others. We seek and evaluate 
a range of points of view, and we are willing to grow from the 
experience.
We show empathy, compassion and respect. We have a 
commitment to service, and we act to make a positive diﬀerence 
in the lives of others and in the world around us.
We understand the importance of balancing diﬀerent aspects of 
our lives /emdash.capintellectual, physical, and emotional/emdash.cap to achieve 
well-being for ourselves and others. We recognize our interde-
pendence with other people and with the world in which we live.
We thoughtfully consider the world and our own ideas and expe-
rience. We work to understand our strengths and weaknesses in order to support our learning and personal development.We approach uncertainty with forethought and determination; we work independently and cooperatively to explore new ideas and innovative strategies. We are resourceful and resilient in the face of challenges and change.IB learner profile
The aim of all IB programmes is to develop internationally minded people who, recognizing their common 
humanity and shared guardianship of the planet, help to create a better and more peaceful world.
As IB learners we strive to be:THE IB LEARNER PROFILEThis  publication  is intended  to guide  the planning,  teaching  and  assessment  of the subject  in schools. 
Subject teachers are the primary audience, although it is expected that teachers will use the guide to inform 
students and parents about the subject.
This  guide  can be found  on the subject  page  of the programme  resource  centre  at resources.ibo.org,  a 
password-protected  IB website  designed  to support  IB teachers.  It can also  be purchased  from  the IB store 
at store.ibo.org
Additional resources
Additional  publications  such  as specimen  papers  and  markschemes,  teacher  support  materials,  subject 
reports  and  grade  descriptors  can also  be found  on the programme  resource  centre.  Past  examination 
papers as well as markschemes can be purchased from the IB store.
Teachers are encouraged to check the programme resource centre for additional resources created or used 
by other  teachers.  Teachers  can provide  details  of useful  resources,  for example  websites,  books,  videos, 
journals or teaching ideas.
Acknowledgment
The IB wishes  to thank  the educators  and  associated  schools  for generously  contributing  time  and 
resources to the production of this guide.
First assessment 2021
Introduction
Purpose of this document
1 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
The Diploma Programme is a rigorous pre-university course of study designed for students in the 16-19 age 
range.  It is a broad-based  two-year  course  that  aims  to encourage  students  to be knowledgable  and 
inquiring,  but also  caring  and  compassionate.  There  is a strong  emphasis  on encouraging  students  to 
develop  intercultural  understanding,  open-mindedness,  and  the attitudes  necessary  for them  to respect 
and evaluate a range of points of view.
The Diploma Programme model
The course  is presented  as six academic  areas  enclosing  a central  core  (see  figure  1). It encourages  the 
concurrent  study  of a broad  range  of academic  areas.  Students  study  two  modern  languages  (or a modern 
language  and  a classical  language),  a humanities  or social  science  subject,  an experimental  science, 
mathematics and one of the creative arts. It is this comprehensive range of subjects that makes the Diploma 
Programme  a demanding  course  of study  designed  to prepare  students  effectively  for university  entrance. 
In each  of the academic  areas  students  have  flexibility  in making  their  choices,  which  means  they  can 
choose subjects that particularly interest them and that they may wish to study further at university.
Figure 1
The Diploma Programme model
Introduction
The Diploma Programme
2 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Choosing the right combination
Students  are required  to choose  one  subject  from  each  of the six academic  areas,  although  they  can, 
instead  of an arts subject,  choose  two  subjects  from  another  area.  Normally,  three  subjects  (and  not more 
than four) are taken at higher level (HL), and the others are taken at standard level (SL). The IB recommends 
240 teaching  hours  for HL subjects  and  150 hours  for SL. Subjects  at HL are studied  in greater  depth  and 
breadth than at SL.
At both  levels  many  skills  are developed,  especially  those  of critical  thinking  and  analysis.  At the end  of the 
course,  students’  abilities  are measured  by means  of external  assessment.  Many  subjects  contain  some 
element of coursework assessed by teachers.
The core of the Diploma Programme model
All Diploma Programme (DP) students participate in the three course elements that make up the core of the 
model.
Theory  of knowledge  (TOK)  is a course  that  is fundamentally  about  critical  thinking  and  inquiry  into  the 
process of knowing rather than about learning a specific body of knowledge. The TOK course examines the 
nature  of knowledge  and  how  we know  what  we claim  to know.  It does  this by encouraging  students  to 
analyse  knowledge  claims  and  explore  questions  about  the construction  of knowledge.  The task  of TOK  is 
to emphasize  connections  between  areas  of shared  knowledge  and  link them  to personal  knowledge  in 
such  a way  that  an individual  becomes  more  aware  of his or her own  perspectives  and  how  they  might 
differ from others.
Creativity,  activity,  service  (CAS)  is at the heart  of the Diploma  Programme.  The emphasis  in CAS  is on 
helping students to develop their own identities, in accordance with the ethical principles embodied in the 
IB mission  statement  and  the IB learner  profile.  It involves  students  in a range  of activities  alongside  their 
academic  studies  throughout  the Diploma  Programme.  The three  strands  of CAS  are creativity  (arts,  and 
other  experiences  that  involve  creative  thinking),  activity  (physical  exertion  contributing  to a healthy 
lifestyle)  and  service  (an unpaid  and  voluntary  exchange  that  has a learning  benefit  for the student). 
Possibly,  more  than  any other  component  in the Diploma  Programme,  CAS  contributes  to the IB’s mission 
to create a better and more peaceful world through intercultural understanding and respect.
The extended  essay,  including  the world  studies  extended  essay,  offers  the opportunity  for IB students  to 
investigate  a topic  of special  interest,  in the form  of a 4,000-word  piece  of independent  research.  The area 
of research undertaken is chosen from one of the students’ six Diploma Programme subjects, or in the case 
of the inter-disciplinary  World  Studies  essay,  two  subjects,  and  acquaints  them  with  the independent 
research  and  writing  skills  expected  at university.  This  leads  to a major  piece  of formally-presented, 
structured  writing,  in which  ideas  and  findings  are communicated  in a reasoned  and  coherent  manner, 
appropriate  to the subject  or subjects  chosen.  It is intended  to promote  high-level  research  and  writing 
skills,  intellectual  discovery  and  creativity.  An authentic  learning  experience,  it provides  students  with  an 
opportunity to engage in personal research on a topic of choice, under the guidance of a supervisor.
Approaches to teaching and approaches to 
learning
Approaches  to teaching  and  learning  across  the Diploma  Programme  refers  to deliberate  strategies,  skills 
and  attitudes  which  permeate  the teaching  and  learning  environment.  These  approaches  and  tools, 
intrinsically  linked  with  the learner  profile  attributes,  enhance  student  learning  and  assist  student 
preparation  for the Diploma  Programme  assessment  and  beyond.  The aims  of approaches  to teaching  and 
learning in the Diploma Programme are to:
• empower teachers as teachers of learners as well as teachers of content
• empower teachers to create clearer strategies for facilitating learning experiences in which students 
are more meaningfully engaged in structured inquiry and greater critical and creative thinkingThe Diploma Programme
3 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
• promote both the aims of individual subjects (making them more than course aspirations) and linking 
previously isolated knowledge (concurrency of learning)
• encourage students to develop an explicit variety of skills that will equip them to continue to be 
actively engaged in learning after they leave school, and to help them not only obtain university 
admission through better grades but also prepare for success during tertiary education and beyond
• enhance further the coherence and relevance of the students’ Diploma Programme experience
• allow schools to identify the distinctive nature of an IB Diploma Programme education, with its blend 
of idealism and practicality.
The five approaches  to learning  (developing  thinking  skills,  social  skills,  communication  skills,  self-
management  skills  and  research  skills)  along  with  the six approaches  to teaching  (teaching  that  is inquiry-
based,  conceptually-focused,  contextualized,  collaborative,  differentiated  and  informed  by assessment) 
encompass the key values and principles that underpin IB pedagogy.
The IB mission statement and the IB learner profile
The Diploma  Programme  aims  to develop  in students  the knowledge,  skills  and  attitudes  they  will need  to 
fulfill  the aims  of the IB, as expressed  in the organization’s  mission  statement  and  the learner  profile. 
Teaching  and  learning  in the Diploma  Programme  represent  the reality  in daily  practice  of the 
organization’s educational philosophy.
Academic honesty
Academic  honesty  in the Diploma  Programme  is a set of values  and  behaviours  informed  by the attributes 
of the learner  profile.  In teaching,  learning  and  assessment,  academic  honesty  serves  to promote  personal 
integrity,  engender  respect  for the integrity  of others  and  their  work,  and  ensure  that  all students  have  an 
equal opportunity to demonstrate the knowledge and skills they acquire during their studies.
All coursework—including  work  submitted  for assessment—is  to be authentic,  based  on the student’s 
individual  and  original  ideas  with  the ideas  and  work  of others  fully  acknowledged.  Assessment  tasks  that 
require  teachers  to provide  guidance  to students  or that  require  students  to work  collaboratively  must  be 
completed in full compliance with the detailed guidelines provided by the IB for the relevant subjects.
For further  information  on academic  honesty  in the IB and  the Diploma  Programme,  please  consult  the IB 
publications  Academic  honesty  in the IB educational  context , Effective  citing  and  referencing , The  Diploma 
Programme:  From  principles  into  practice  and  General  regulations:  Diploma  Programme . Specific  information 
regarding academic honesty as it pertains to external and internal assessment components of this Diploma 
Programme subject can be found in this guide.
Acknowledging the ideas or work of another 
person
Coordinators  and  teachers  are reminded  that  candidates  must  acknowledge  all sources  used  in work 
submitted for assessment. The following is intended as a clarification of this requirement.
Diploma  Programme  candidates  submit  work  for assessment  in a variety  of media  that  may  include  audio-
visual material, text, graphs, images and/or data published in print or electronic sources. If a candidate uses 
the work  or ideas  of another  person,  the candidate  must  acknowledge  the source  using  a standard  style  of 
referencing  in a consistent  manner.  A candidate’s  failure  to acknowledge  a source  will be investigated  by 
the IB as a potential  breach  of regulations  that  may  result  in a penalty  imposed  by the IB final  award 
committee.
The IB does not prescribe which style(s) of referencing or in-text citation should be used by candidates; this 
is left to the discretion  of appropriate  faculty/staff  in the candidate’s  school.  The wide  range  of subjects, 
three  response  languages  and  the diversity  of referencing  styles  make  it impractical  and  restrictive  to insist 
on particular  styles.  In practice,  certain  styles  may  prove  most  commonly  used,  but schools  are free  to The Diploma Programme
4 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
choose  a style  that  is appropriate  for the subject  concerned  and  the language  in which  candidates’  work  is 
written.  Regardless  of the reference  style  adopted  by the school  for a given  subject,  it is expected  that  the 
minimum  information  given  includes:  name  of author,  date  of publication,  title  of source,  and  page 
numbers as applicable.
Candidates  are expected  to use a standard  style  and  use it consistently  so that  credit  is given  to all sources 
used,  including  sources  that  have  been  paraphrased  or summarized.  When  writing  text,  candidates  must 
clearly  distinguish  between  their  words  and  those  of others  by the use of quotation  marks  (or other 
method, such as indentation) followed by an appropriate citation that denotes an entry in the bibliography. 
If an electronic  source  is cited,  the date  of access  must  be indicated.  Candidates  are not expected  to show 
faultless  expertise  in referencing,  but are expected  to demonstrate  that  all sources  have  been 
acknowledged.  Candidates  must  be advised  that  audio-visual  material,  text,  graphs,  images  and/or  data 
published  in print  or in electronic  sources  that  is not their  own  must  also  attribute  the source.  Again,  an 
appropriate style of referencing/citation must be used.
Learning diversity and learning support 
requirements
Schools  must  ensure  that  equal  access  arrangements  and  reasonable  adjustments  are provided  to 
candidates  with  learning  support  requirements  that  are in line with  the IB documents  Access  and  inclusion 
policy  and Learning diversity and inclusion in IB programmes.
The documents  Meeting  student  learning  diversity  in the classroom  and  The  IB guide  to inclusive  education:  a 
resource  for whole  school  development  are available  to support  schools  in the ongoing  process  of increasing 
access and engagement by removing barriers to learning .The Diploma Programme
5 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Introduction
Mathematics  has been  described  as the study  of structure,  order  and  relation  that  has evolved  from  the 
practices  of counting,  measuring  and  describing  objects.  Mathematics  provides  a unique  language  to 
describe, explore and communicate the nature of the world we live in as well as being a constantly building 
body of knowledge and truth in itself that is distinctive in its certainty. These two aspects of mathematics, a 
discipline  that  is studied  for its intrinsic  pleasure  and  a means  to explore  and  understand  the world  we live 
in, are both separate yet closely linked.
Mathematics is driven by abstract concepts and generalization. This mathematics is drawn out of ideas, and 
develops  through  linking  these  ideas  and  developing  new  ones.  These  mathematical  ideas  may  have  no 
immediate  practical  application.  Doing  such  mathematics  is about  digging  deeper  to increase 
mathematical  knowledge  and  truth.  The new  knowledge  is presented  in the form  of theorems  that  have 
been built from axioms and logical mathematical arguments and a theorem is only accepted as true when it 
has been  proven.  The body  of knowledge  that  makes  up mathematics  is not fixed;  it has grown  during 
human history and is growing at an increasing rate.
The side  of mathematics  that  is based  on describing  our world  and  solving  practical  problems  is often 
carried  out in the context  of another  area  of study.  Mathematics  is used  in a diverse  range  of disciplines  as 
both a language and a tool to explore the universe; alongside this its applications include analyzing trends, 
making predictions, quantifying risk, exploring relationships and interdependence.
While  these  two  different  facets  of mathematics  may  seem  separate,  they  are often  deeply  connected. 
When  mathematics  is developed,  history  has taught  us that  a seemingly  obscure,  abstract  mathematical 
theorem  or fact may  in time  be highly  significant.  On the other  hand,  much  mathematics  is developed  in 
response to the needs of other disciplines.
The two  mathematics  courses  available  to Diploma  Programme  (DP)  students  express  both  the differences 
that  exist  in mathematics  described  above  and  the connections  between  them.  These  two  courses  might 
approach  mathematics  from  different  perspectives,  but they  are connected  by the same  mathematical 
body  of knowledge,  ways  of thinking  and  approaches  to problems.  The differences  in the courses  may  also 
be related  to the types  of tools,  for instance  technology,  that  are used  to solve  abstract  or practical 
problems. The next section will describe in more detail the two available courses.
Summary of courses available
Individual  students  have  different  needs,  aspirations,  interests  and  abilities.  For this reason  there are two 
different  subjects  in mathematics,  each  available  at SL and  HL These  courses  are designed  for different 
types  of students:  those  who  wish  to study  mathematics  as a subject  in its own  right  or to pursue  their 
interests  in areas  related  to mathematics,  and  those  who  wish  to gain  understanding  and  competence  in 
how mathematics relates to the real world and to other subjects. Each course is designed to meet the needs 
of a particular group of students. Mathematics: analysis and approaches and Mathematics: applications and 
interpretation are both offered at SL and HL. Therefore, great care should be taken to select the course and 
level that is most appropriate for an individual student.
In making this selection, individual students should be advised to take into account the following factors:
• their own abilities in mathematics and the type of mathematics in which they can be successful
• their own interest in mathematics and those particular areas of the subject that may hold the most 
interest for them
• their other choices of subjects within the framework of the DP or Career-related Programme (CP)
Introduction
Nature of Mathematics
6 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
• their academic plans, in particular the subjects they wish to study in the future
• their choice of career.
Teachers are expected to assist with the selection process and to offer advice to students.
The nature of IB mathematics courses
Figure 2
The mathematics model
The structure  of IB DP mathematics  courses,  with  two  different  routes  to choose  from,  recognizes  the two 
different aspects of mathematics discussed in the introduction.
Mathematics:  analysis  and  approaches  is for students  who  enjoy  developing  their  mathematics  to become 
fluent  in the construction  of mathematical  arguments  and  develop  strong  skills  in mathematical  thinking. 
They  will also  be fascinated  by exploring  real and  abstract  applications  of these  ideas,  with  and  without 
technology.  Students  who  take  Mathematics:  analysis  and  approaches  will be those  who  enjoy  the thrill  of 
mathematical problem solving and generalization.
Mathematics:  applications  and  interpretation  is for students  who  are interested  in developing  their 
mathematics  for describing  our world  and  solving  practical  problems.  They  will also  be interested  in 
harnessing  the power  of technology  alongside  exploring  mathematical  models.  Students  who  take 
Mathematics:  applications  and  interpretation  will be those  who  enjoy  mathematics  best  when  seen  in a 
practical context.
Both  subjects  are offered  at higher  level  and  SL. There  are many  elements  common  to both  subjects 
although  the approaches  may  be different.  Both  subjects  will prepare  students  with  the mathematics 
needed for a range of further educational courses corresponding to the two approaches to mathematics set 
out above.Nature of Mathematics
7 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Mathematics: analysis and approaches
This  course  recognizes  the need  for analytical  expertise  in a world  where  innovation  is increasingly 
dependent on a deep understanding of mathematics. This course includes topics that are both traditionally 
part of a pre-university mathematics course (for example, functions, trigonometry, calculus) as well as topics 
that  are amenable  to investigation,  conjecture  and  proof,  for instance  the study  of sequences  and  series  at 
both SL and HL, and proof by induction at HL.
The course  allows  the use of technology,  as fluency  in relevant  mathematical  software  and  hand-held 
technology  is important  regardless  of choice  of course.  However,  Mathematics:  analysis  and  approaches 
has a strong  emphasis  on the ability  to construct,  communicate  and  justify  correct  mathematical 
arguments.
Mathematics: analysis and approaches: Distinction between SL and 
HL
Students  who  choose  Mathematics:  analysis  and  approaches  at SL or HL should  be comfortable  in the 
manipulation  of algebraic  expressions  and  enjoy  the recognition  of patterns  and  understand  the 
mathematical  generalization  of these  patterns.  Students  who  wish  to take  Mathematics:  analysis  and 
approaches at higher level will have strong algebraic skills and the ability to understand simple proof. They 
will be students  who  enjoy  spending  time  with  problems  and  get pleasure  and  satisfaction  from  solving 
challenging problems.
Mathematics: applications and interpretation
This course recognizes the increasing role that mathematics and technology play in a diverse range of fields 
in a data-rich  world.  As such,  it emphasizes  the meaning  of mathematics  in context  by focusing  on topics 
that  are often  used  as applications  or in mathematical  modelling.  To give  this understanding  a firm  base, 
this course  also  includes  topics  that  are traditionally  part  of a pre-university  mathematics  course  such  as 
calculus and statistics.
The course  makes  extensive  use of technology  to allow  students  to explore  and  construct  mathematical 
models.  Mathematics:  applications  and  interpretation  will develop  mathematical  thinking,  often  in the 
context of a practical problem and using technology to justify conjectures.
Mathematics: applications and interpretation: Distinction between 
SL and HL
Students  who  choose  Mathematics:  applications  and  interpretation  at SL or HL should  enjoy  seeing 
mathematics  used  in real-world  contexts  and  to solve  real-world  problems.  Students  who  wish  to take 
Mathematics:  applications  and  interpretation  at higher  level  will have  good  algebraic  skills  and  experience 
of solving  real-world  problems.  They  will be students  who  get pleasure  and  satisfaction  when  exploring 
challenging problems and who are comfortable to undertake this exploration using technology.
Mathematics and theory of knowledge
The relationship between each subject and theory of knowledge (TOK) is important and fundamental to the 
DP. The theory  of knowledge  course  provides  an opportunity  for students  to reflect  on questions  about 
how knowledge is produced and shared, both in mathematics and also across different areas of knowledge. 
It encourages  students  to reflect  on their  assumptions  and  biases,  helping  them  to become  more  aware  of 
their  own  perspective  and  the perspectives  of others  and  to become  “inquiring,  knowledgeable  and  caring 
young people” (IB mission statement).
As part  of their  theory  of knowledge  course,  students  are encouraged  to explore  tensions  relating  to 
knowledge  in mathematics.  As an area  of knowledge,  mathematics  seems  to supply  a certainty  perhaps 
impossible  in other  disciplines  and  in many  instances  provides  us with  tools  to debate  these  certainties. 
This  may  be related  to the “purity”  of the subject,  something  that  can sometimes  make  it seem  divorced Nature of Mathematics
8 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
from  reality.  Yet mathematics  has also  provided  important  knowledge  about  the world  and  the use of 
mathematics in science and technology has been one of the driving forces for scientific advances.
Despite  all its undoubted  power  for understanding  and  change,  mathematics  is in the end  a puzzling 
phenomenon.  A fundamental  question  for all knowers  is whether  mathematical  knowledge  really  exists 
independently  of our thinking  about  it. Is it there,  “waiting  to be discovered”,  or is it a human  creation? 
Indeed, the philosophy of mathematics is an area of study in its own right.
Students’  attention  should  be drawn  to questions  relating  theory  of knowledge  (TOK)  and  mathematics, 
and they should also be encouraged to raise such questions themselves in both their mathematics and TOK 
classes.  Examples  of issues  relating  to TOK  are given  in the “Connections”  sections  of the syllabus.  Further 
suggestions  for making  links  to TOK  can also  be found  in the mathematics  section  of the Theory  of 
knowledge guide .
Mathematics and international-mindedness
International-mindedness  is a complex  and  multi-faceted  concept  that  refers  to a way  of thinking,  being 
and acting characterized by an openness to the world and a recognition of our deep interconnectedness to 
others.
Despite  recent  advances  in the development  of information  and  communication  technologies,  the global 
exchange  of mathematical  information  and  ideas  is not a new  phenomenon  and  has been  essential  to the 
progress  of mathematics.  Indeed,  many  of the foundations  of modern  mathematics  were  laid many 
centuries ago by diverse civilisations – Arabic, Greek, Indian and Chinese among others.
Mathematics  can in some  ways  be seen  as an international  language  and,  apart  from  slightly  differing 
notation,  mathematicians  from  around  the world  can communicate  effectively  within  their  field. 
Mathematics can transcend politics, religion and nationality, and throughout history great civilizations have 
owed  their  success  in part  to their  mathematicians  being  able  to create  and  maintain  complex  social  and 
architectural  structures.  Politics  has dominated  the development  of mathematics,  to develop  ballistics, 
navigation  and  trade,  and  land  ownership,  often  influenced  by governments  and  leaders.  Many  early 
mathematicians  were  political  and  military  advisers  and  today  mathematicians  are integral  members  of 
teams who advise governments on where money and resources should be allocated.
Science  and  technology  are of significant  importance  in today’s  world.  As the language  of science, 
mathematics  is an essential  component  of most  technological  innovation  and  underpins  developments  in 
science  and  technology,  although  the contribution  of mathematics  may  not always  be visible.  Examples  of 
this include the role of the binary number system, matrix algebra, network theory and probability theory in 
the digital  revolution,  or the use of mathematical  simulations  to predict  future  climate  change  or spread  of 
disease. These examples highlight the key role mathematics can play in transforming the world around us.
One  way  of fostering  international-mindedness  is to provide  opportunities  for inquiry  into  a range  of local 
and  global  issues  and  ideas.  Many  international  organisations  and  bodies  now  exist  to promote 
mathematics,  and  students  are encouraged  to access  the resources  and  often-extensive  websites  of such 
mathematical  organisations.  This  can enhance  their  appreciation  of the international  dimension  of 
mathematics, as well as providing opportunities to engage with global issues surrounding the subject.
Examples  of links  relating  to international-mindedness  are given  in the “Connections”  sections  of the 
syllabus.
Mathematics and creativity, activity, service
CAS experiences can be associated with each of the subject groups of the DP.
CAS and mathematics can complement each other in a number of ways. Mathematical knowledge provides 
an important  key to understanding  the world  in which  we live,  and  the mathematical  skills  and  techniques 
students  learn  in the mathematics  courses  will allow  them  to evaluate  the world  around  them  which  will 
help them to develop, plan and deliver CAS experiences or projects.
An important  aspect  of the mathematics  courses  is that  students  develop  the ability  to systematically 
analyse  situations  and  can recognize  the impact  that  mathematics  can have  on the world  around  them.  An Nature of Mathematics
9 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
awareness  of how  mathematics  can be used  to represent  the truth  enables  students  to reflect  critically  on 
the information  that  societies  are given  or generate,  and  how  this influences  the allocation  of resources  or 
the choices that people make. This systematic analysis and critical reflection when problem solving may be 
inspiring springboards for CAS projects.
Students  may  also  draw  on their  CAS  experiences  to enrich  their  involvement  in mathematics  both  within 
and  outside  the classroom,  and  mathematics  teachers  can assist  students  in making  links  between  their 
subjects  and  students’  CAS  experiences  where  appropriate.  Purposeful  discussion  about  real CAS 
experiences and projects will help students to make these links.
The challenge  and  enjoyment  of CAS  can often  have  a profound  effect  on mathematics  students,  who 
might choose, for example, to engage with CAS in the following ways:
• plan, write and implement a “mathematics scavenger hunt” where younger students tour the school 
answering interesting mathematics questions as part of their introduction to a new school
• as a CAS project students could plan and carry out a survey, create a database and analyse the results, 
and make suggestions to resolve a problem in the students’ local area. This might be, for example, 
surveying the availability of fresh fruit and vegetables within a community, preparing an action plan 
with suggestions of how to increase availability or access, and presenting this to a local charity or 
community group
• taking an element of world culture that interests students and designing a miniature Earth (if the 
world were 100 people) to express the trend(s) numerically.
It is important  to note  that  a CAS  experience  can be a single  event  or may  be an extended  series  of events. 
However,  CAS  experiences  must  be distinct  from,  and  may  not be included  or used  in, the student’s 
Diploma course requirements.
Additional  suggestions  on the links  between  DP subjects  and  CAS  can be found  in the Creativity,  activity, 
service teacher support material .
Prior learning
It is expected that most students embarking on a DP mathematics course will have studied mathematics for 
at least  10 years.  There  will be a great  variety  of topics  studied,  and  differing  approaches  to teaching  and 
learning.  Thus,  students  will have  a wide  variety  of skills  and  knowledge  when  they  start  their  mathematics 
course.  Most  will have  some  background  in arithmetic,  algebra,  geometry,  trigonometry,  probability  and 
statistics. Some will be familiar with an inquiry approach, and may have had an opportunity to complete an 
extended piece of work in mathematics.
At the beginning  of the syllabus  section  there  is a list of topics  that  are considered  to be prior  learning  for 
the mathematics courses. It is recognized that this may contain topics that are unfamiliar to some students, 
but it is anticipated  that  there  may  be other  topics  in the syllabus  itself  which  these  students  have  already 
encountered. Teachers should be informed by their assessment of students’ prior learning to help plan their 
teaching so that topics mentioned that are unfamiliar to their students can be incorporated.
Links to the Middle Years Programme
The MYP mathematics framework is designed to prepare students for the study of DP mathematics courses. 
As students  progress  from  the MYP  to the DP or the Career-related  Programme  (CP)  they  continue  to 
develop their mathematics skills and knowledge, which will then allow them to go on to study a wide range 
of topics.  Inquiry-based  learning  is central  to mathematics  courses  in both  MYP  and  the DP, providing 
students  with  opportunities  to independently  and  collaboratively  investigate,  problem  solve  and 
communicate their mathematics with an increasing level of sophistication.
MYP  mathematics  courses  are concept-driven,  aimed  at helping  the learner  to construct  meaning  through 
improved critical thinking and the transfer of knowledge. The MYP courses use a framework of key concepts 
with which the concepts in the DP mathematics courses are aligned. These concepts are broad, organizing, 
powerful  ideas  that  have  relevance  within  the subject  but also  transcend  it, having  relevance  in other Nature of Mathematics
10 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
subject  groups.  The fundamental  concepts  of MYP  mathematics  provide  a very  useful  foundation  for 
students following DP mathematics courses.
The aims of the MYP mathematics courses align very closely with those of the DP mathematics courses. The 
prior  learning  topics  for the DP mathematics  courses  have  been  written  in conjunction  with  the MYP 
mathematics guide.
The MYP  mathematics  assessment  objectives  and  criteria  have  been  developed  with  both  the internal  and 
external  assessment  requirements  of the DP in mind.  MYP  mathematics  students  are required  to practise 
and  develop  their  investigation  skills,  one  of the MYP  four  assessment  objectives,  giving  an important 
foundation  for the internal  assessment  component  of the DP mathematics  courses.  The MYP  assessment 
objective  of thinking  critically  also  corresponds  to the higher-order  assessment  objectives  of 
communication and interpretation, and of reasoning that are expected from a DP mathematics student.
MYP  and  DP mathematics  courses  emphasized  the use of technology  as a powerful  tool  for learning, 
applying and communicating mathematics.
Where  students  in the MYP  may  select  either  standard  or extended  mathematics,  at DP there  are two 
mathematics  subjects  both  available  at SL and  HL. MYP  students  enrolled  in extended  mathematics 
generally  elect  to take  one  of the HL mathematics  courses  in the DP. Students  in MYP  standard 
mathematics  should  seek  the recommendation  of their  teacher  when  deciding  which  SL or HL course  they 
are best suited to pursue.
Figure 3
The IB continuum pathways to DP courses in mathematics
Links to the Career-related Programme
In the IB Career-related  Programme  (CP)  students  study  at least  two  DP subjects,  a core  consisting  of four 
components and a career-related study, which is determined by the local context and aligned with student 
needs.  The CP has been  designed  to add  value  to the student’s  career-related  studies.  This  provides  the 
context for the choice of DP courses. Courses can be chosen from any group of the DP. It is also possible to 
study more than one course from the same group (for example, visual arts and film).Nature of Mathematics
11 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Mathematics  may  be a beneficial  choice  for CP students  considering  careers  in, for example,  finance, 
planning,  healthcare  systems  or coding,  tourism  industries,  the technology  industry,  social  informatics,  or 
urban  planning.  Mathematics  helps  students  to understand  the value  of systematic  approaches,  how  to 
analyse complex real-world contexts, how to communicate this concisely and precisely and understand the 
implications of conclusions.
Mathematics  encourages  the development  of strong  written,  verbal,  and  graphical  communication  skills; 
critical  and  complex  thinking;  and  moral  and  ethical  considerations  influenced  by mathematics  that  will 
assist  students  in preparing  for the future  global  workplace.  This  in turn  fosters  the IB learner  profile 
attributes that are transferable to the entire CP, providing relevance and support for the student’s learning.
For the CP students,  DP courses  can be studied  at SL or HL. Schools  can explore  opportunities  to integrate 
CP students with DP students.Nature of Mathematics
12 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Conceptual understanding
Concepts  are broad,  powerful,  organizing  ideas,  the significance  of which  goes  beyond  particular  origins, 
subject matter or place in time. Concepts represent the vehicle for students’ inquiry into issues and ideas of 
personal,  local  and  global  significance,  providing  the means  by which  they  can explore  the essence  of 
mathematics.
Concepts  play  an important  role  in mathematics,  helping  students  and  teachers  to think  with  increasing 
complexity  as they  organize  and  relate  facts  and  topics.  Students  use conceptual  understandings  as they 
solve  problems,  analyse  issues  and  evaluate  decisions  that  can have  an impact  on themselves,  their 
communities and the wider world.
In DP mathematics  courses,  conceptual  understandings  are key to promoting  deep  learning.  The course 
identifies  twelve  fundamental  concepts  which  relate  with  varying  emphasis  to each  of the five topics. 
Teachers  may  identify  and  develop  additional  concepts  to meet  local  circumstances  and  national  or state 
curriculum  requirements.  Teachers  can use these  concepts  to develop  connections  throughout  the 
curriculum.
Each topic in this guide begins by stating the essential understanding of the topic and highlighting relevant 
concepts  fundamental  to the topic.  This  is followed  by suggested  conceptual  understandings  relevant  to 
the content within the topic, although this list is not intended to be prescriptive or exhaustive.
The concepts
Concepts  promote  the development  of a broad,  balanced,  conceptual  and  connected  curriculum.  They 
represent big ideas that are relevant and facilitate connections within topics, across topics and also to other 
subjects within the DP.
The twelve concepts identified below support conceptual understanding, can inform units of work and can 
help  to organize  teaching  and  learning.  Explanations  of each  of these  concepts  in a mathematical  context 
have also been provided.
Approximation This concept refers to a quantity or a representation which is nearly but not exactly 
correct.
Change This concept refers to a variation in size, amount or behaviour.
Equivalence This concept refers to the state of being identically equal or interchangeable, applied 
to statements, quantities or expressions.
Generalization This concept refers to a general statement made on the basis of specific examples.
Modelling This concept refers to the way in which mathematics can be used to represent the real 
world.
Patterns This concept refers to the underlying order, regularity or predictability of the elements 
of a mathematical system.
Quantity This concept refers to an amount or number.
Relationships This concept refers to the connection between quantities, properties or concepts; 
these connections may be expressed as models, rules or statements. Relationships 
provide opportunities for students to explore patterns in the world around them.
Introduction
Approaches to the teaching and learning of 
mathematics: applications and interpretation
13 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Representation This concept refers to using words, formulae, diagrams, tables, charts, graphs and 
models to represent mathematical information.
Space This concept refers to the frame of geometrical dimensions describing an entity.
Systems This concept refers to groups of interrelated elements.
Validity This concept refers to using well-founded, logical mathematics to come to a true and 
accurate conclusion or a reasonable interpretation of results.
Mathematical inquiry
Approaches  to teaching  and  learning  in the DP refer  to deliberate  strategies,  skills  and  attitudes  that 
permeate the teaching and learning environment. These approaches and tools are intrinsically linked to the 
IB learner profile, which encourages learning by experimentation, questioning and discovery.
In the IB classroom,  students  should  regularly  learn  mathematics  by being  active  participants  in learning 
activities.  Teachers  should  therefore  provide  students  with  regular  opportunities  to learn  through 
mathematical  inquiry,  by making  frequent  use of strategies  which  stimulate  students’  critical  thinking  and 
problem-solving skills.
Figure 4
The cycle of mathematical inquiry
Approaches to the teaching and learning of mathematics: applications and interpretation
14 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Mathematical modelling
Mathematical  modelling  is an important  technique  used  in problem  solving,  to make  sense  of the real 
world.  It is often  used  to help  us better  understand  a situation,  to check  the effects of change  or to inform 
decision-making.  Engaging  students  in the mathematical  modelling  process  provides  them  with  such 
opportunities.  It is one  of the most  useful  mathematical  skills  that  students  will need  to be successful  in 
many non-mathematical as well as mathematical courses and careers.
The mathematical  modelling  process  begins  with  consideration  of a situation  that  exists  in the real world 
and  is not usually  artificially  created.  At this stage  assumptions  sometimes  have  to be made  in order  to 
simplify  the situation  to allow  modelling  to take  place.  There  is often  a fine balance  needed  between  the 
simplicity and the accuracy of the model.
The first stage  involves  choosing  or fitting  a suitable  mathematical  representation  to the context.  This 
representation  is tested  to evaluate  whether  or not it returns  expected  results.  The testing  stage  allows  the 
results  returned  by the model  to be reflected  upon  and  adaptations  to be made  to the model  if necessary. 
Once a satisfactory model is established it can be applied or used to explain a situation, check the effects of 
change or to inform decision-making.
The process of mathematical modelling requires critical reflection throughout the process.
More  advice  and  guidance  on the process  of mathematical  modelling  is given  in the teacher  support 
material. The cycle of mathematical modelling is illustrated below.
Figure 5
The cycle of mathematical modelling
Approaches to the teaching and learning of mathematics: applications and interpretation
15 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Use of technology
The use of technology  is an integral  part  of DP mathematics  courses.  Developing  an appreciation  of how 
developments in technology and mathematics have influenced each other is one of the aims of the courses 
and  using  technology  accurately,  appropriately  and  efficiently  both  to explore  new  ideas  and  to solve 
problems  is one  of the assessment  objectives.  Learning  how  to use different  forms  of technology  is an 
important  skill in mathematics  and  time  has been  allowed  in each  topic  of the syllabus  and  through  the 
“toolkit” in order to do this.
Technology  is a powerful  tool  in mathematics  and  in recent  years  increased  student  and  teacher  access  to 
this technology  has supported  and  advanced  the teaching  and  learning  of mathematics.  Discerning  use of 
technology can make more mathematics accessible and motivating to a greater number of students.
Teachers can use technology to support and enhance student understanding in many ways including:
• to bring out teaching points
• to address misconceptions
• to aid visualization
• to enhance understanding of concepts that would otherwise be restricted by lengthy numerical 
calculations or algebraic manipulation
• to support students in making conjectures and checking generalizations
• to explicitly make the links between different mathematical representations or approaches.
Students  can also  use technology  to engage  with  the learning  process  in many  ways  including  the 
following:
• to develop and enhance their own personal conceptual understanding
• to search for patterns
• to test conjectures or generalizations
• to justify interpretations
• to collaborate on project based work
• to help organize and analyse data.
In the classroom  teachers  and  students  can use technology,  working  individually  or collaboratively,  to 
explore  mathematical  concepts.  The key to successful  learning  of mathematics  with  technology  is the fine 
balance  between  the teacher  and  student  use of technology,  with  carefully  chosen  use of technology  to 
support the understanding and the communication of the mathematics itself.
Many  topics  within  the DP mathematics  courses  lend  themselves  to the use of technology.  Graphical 
calculators,  dynamic  graphing  software,  spreadsheets,  simulations,  apps,  dynamic  geometry  software  and 
interactive  whiteboard  software  are just a few of the many  kinds  of technology  available  to support  the 
teaching and learning of mathematics.
Within the guide the term “technology” is used for any form of calculator, hardware or software that may be 
available  in the classroom.  The terms  “analysis”  and  “analytic  approach”  are generally  used  in the guide  to 
indicate an algebraic approach that may not require the use of technology. It is important to note there will 
be restrictions  on which  technology  may  be used  in examinations,  which  will be detailed  in relevant 
documents.
As teachers  tie together  the unifying  themes  of mathematical  inquiry , mathematical  modelling  and  the 
use  of technology , they  should  begin  by providing  substantial  guidance  and  then  gradually  encourage 
students  to become  more  independent  as inquirers  and  thinkers.  DP students  should  learn  to become 
strong  communicators  through  the language  of mathematics.  Teachers  should  create  a learning 
environment  in which  students  are comfortable  as risk takers  and  inquiry,  conceptual  understanding, 
collaboration and use of technology feature prominently.Approaches to the teaching and learning of mathematics: applications and interpretation
16 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
For further  information  on “Approaches  to teaching  and  learning  in the Diploma  Programme”,  please  refer 
to the publication  The  Diploma  Programme:  From  principles  into  practice . To support  teachers,  a variety  of 
resources  can be found  on the programme  resource  centre  and  details  of workshops  for professional 
development are available on the public website.
Format of the syllabus
The format  of the syllabus  section  of the mathematics  guides  is the same  for each  subject  and  each  level. 
This  structure  gives  prominence  and  focus  to the aspects  of teaching  and  learning,  including  conceptual 
understandings, content and enrichment.
There are five topics and within these topics there are sub-topics. The five topics are:
• number and algebra
• functions
• geometry and trigonometry
• probability and statistics
• calculus
Each topic begins with a section on conceptual understandings. Details are given of which of the twelve key 
concepts  could  be used  to relate  to the topic.  Essential  understandings  give  details  of the overall  aims  of 
the topic  and  then  content-specific  conceptual  understandings  give  specific  details  of the aims  and 
purpose of the topic and sub-topics.
Each  topic  begins  with  SL content  which  is common  to both  Mathematics:  analysis  and  approaches  and  to 
Mathematics: applications and interpretation.
Each  topic  has SL content  followed  by advanced  higher  level  (AHL)  content.  Teachers  should  ensure  that 
they  cover  all SL content  with  SL students,  and  all SL and  AHL  content  with  HL students.  The topics  are 
structured  so that  an informal  introduction  in the common  content  may  be formalized  in the SL content 
and  then  extended  further  in the AHL  content.  For example  the extension  of the set of numbers  for which 
something  is defined  could  be integers  in the common  content,  positive  real numbers  in the SL content 
and all real and complex numbers in the AHL content.
The content  of all five topics  at the appropriate  level  must  be taught,  however  not necessarily  in the order 
in which  they  appear  in the guide.  Teachers  are expected  to construct  a course  of study  that  addresses  the 
needs  of their  students  and  includes,  where  necessary,  the topics  noted  in prior  learning.  Guidance  on 
structuring a course is given in the teacher support material.
Each topic has three sections:
Content:  The column on the left contains details of the sub-topics to be covered.
Guidance,  clarification  and  syllabus  links:  The column  on the right  contains  more  detailed  information 
on specific  sub-topics  listed  in the content  column.  This  clarifies  the content  for the examination  and 
highlights where sub-topics relate to other sub-topics within the syllabus.
Connections:  Each  topic  also  contains  a short  section  that  provides  suggestions  for further  discussion, 
including real-life examples and ideas for further investigation.
These suggestions are only a guide and are not exhaustive. A downloadable version of these sections is also 
available,  so that  additional  connections  can be added  to the ones  already  suggested  by the IB. Potential 
areas for connections include:
• Other contexts: Real-life examples
• Links to other subjects:  Suggested links to other subjects within the DP. Note that these are correct 
for the current (2019) published versions of the guides
• Aim:  Links to the aims of the course
• International-mindedness:  Suggestions for discussions
• TOK:  Suggestions for discussions
• Links to TSM:  Links to the teacher support materials (TSM) in the “in practice” section of the websiteApproaches to the teaching and learning of mathematics: applications and interpretation
17 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
• Link to specimen paper:  Links to specific questions exemplifying how topics might be examined
• Use of technology:  Suggestions as to how technology can be used in the classroom to enhance 
understanding
• Links to websites:  Suggested websites for use in teaching or learning activities
• Enrichment:  Suggestions for further discussions that may reinforce understanding.
Planning your course
The syllabus  as provided  in the subject  guide  is not intended  to be a teaching  order.  Instead  it provides 
detail  of what  must  be covered  by the end  of the course.  A school  should  develop  a scheme  of work  that 
best  works  for its own  students.  For example,  the scheme  of work  could  be developed  to match  available 
resources,  to take  into  account  prior  learning  and  experience,  or in conjunction  with  other  local 
requirements.
HL teachers may choose to teach the SL content and AHL content at the same time or teach them in a spiral 
fashion,  by teaching  the SL content  first and  revisiting  these  topics  through  the delivery  of the AHL  topics 
after this.
However  the course  is planned,  adequate  time  must  be provided  for examination  revision.  Time  must  also 
be given to students to reflect on their learning experience and their growth as learners.
Time allocation
The recommended  teaching  time  for HL courses  is 240 hours  and  for SL courses  is 150 hours.  For 
mathematics  courses  at both  SL and  HL, it is expected  that  30 hours  will be spent  on developing  inquiry, 
modelling and investigation skills. This includes up to 15 hours for work on the internal assessment which is 
called  the exploration.  The time  allocations  given  in this guide  are approximate,  and  are intended  to 
suggest  how  the remaining  210 hours  for HL and  120 hours  for SL allowed  for the teaching  of the syllabus 
might  be allocated.  The exact  time  spent  on each  topic  depends  on a number  of factors,  including  the 
background  knowledge  and  level  of preparedness  of each  student.  Teachers  should  therefore  adjust  these 
timings to correspond to the needs of their students.
The Toolkit
Time  has been  allocated  within  the teaching  hours  for students  to undertake  the types  of activities  that 
mathematicians in the real world undertake and to allow students time to develop the skill of thinking like a 
mathematician–in  other words  providing  students  with  a mathematical  toolkit  which  will allow  them  to 
approach  any type  of mathematical  problem.  Underpinning  this are the six pedagogical  approaches  to 
teaching  and  the five approaches  to learning  which  support  all IB programmes.  This  time  gives  students 
opportunities  in the classroom  for undertaking  an inquiry-based  approach  and  focusing  on conceptual 
understanding  of the content,  developing  their  awareness  of mathematics  in local  and  global  contexts, 
gives them opportunities for teamwork and collaboration as well as time to reflect upon their own learning 
of mathematics.
Students should be encouraged to actively identify skills that they might add to their personal mathematics 
toolkit.  Teachers  are encouraged  to make  explicit  where  these  skills  might  transfer  across  areas  of 
mathematics  content  and  allow  students  to reflect  upon  where  these  skills  transfer  to other  subjects  the 
student is studying.
The teacher support material (TSM) contains a section referred to as the “toolkit”. This section contains ideas 
and  resources  that  teachers  can use with  their  students  to encourage  the development  of mathematical 
thinking  skills.  These  resources  have  been  developed  by teachers  for use in their  own  classrooms  and  are 
not exhaustive.Approaches to the teaching and learning of mathematics: applications and interpretation
18 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Formulae and the formula booklet
Formulae  are only  included  in this guide  document  where  there  may  be some  ambiguity.  All formulae 
required for the course are in the mathematics formula booklet.
From  the beginning  of the course  it is recommended  that  teachers  ensure  students  are familiar  with  the 
contents  of the formula  booklet  by either  giving  students  a printed  copy  or making  an electronic  copy 
available to them.
Each  student  is required  to have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  For 
each examination, it is the responsibility of the school to download a copy of the formula booklet from IBIS 
or the programme  resource  centre,  check  that  there  are no printing  errors,  and  ensure  that  there are 
sufficient copies available for all students.
Command terms and notation list
Teachers and students need to be familiar with the IB notation list and the command terms, as these will be 
used  without  explanation  in the examination  papers.  The “Glossary  of command  terms”  and  “Notation  list” 
appear as appendices in this guide.Approaches to the teaching and learning of mathematics: applications and interpretation
19 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
The aims of all DP mathematics courses are to enable students to:
1. develop a curiosity and enjoyment of mathematics, and appreciate its elegance and power
2. develop an understanding of the concepts, principles and nature of mathematics
3. communicate mathematics clearly, concisely and confidently in a variety of contexts
4. develop logical and creative thinking, and patience and persistence in problem solving to instil 
confidence in using mathematics
5. employ and refine their powers of abstraction and generalization
6. take action to apply and transfer skills to alternative situations, to other areas of knowledge and to 
future developments in their local and global communities
7. appreciate how developments in technology and mathematics influence each other
8. appreciate the moral, social and ethical questions arising from the work of mathematicians and the 
applications of mathematics
9. appreciate the universality of mathematics and its multicultural, international and historical 
perspectives
10. appreciate the contribution of mathematics to other disciplines, and as a particular “area of 
knowledge” in the TOK course
11. develop the ability to reflect critically upon their own work and the work of others
12. independently and collaboratively extend their understanding of mathematics.
Introduction
Aims
20 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Problem  solving  is central  to learning  mathematics  and  involves  the acquisition  of mathematical  skills  and 
concepts in a wide range of situations, including non-routine, open-ended and real-world problems. Having 
followed a DP mathematics course, students will be expected to demonstrate the following:
1. Knowledge and understanding:  Recall, select and use their knowledge of mathematical facts, 
concepts and techniques in a variety of familiar and unfamiliar contexts.
2. Problem solving:  Recall, select and use their knowledge of mathematical skills, results and models in 
both abstract and real-world contexts to solve problems.
3. Communication and interpretation:  Transform common realistic contexts into mathematics; 
comment on the context; sketch or draw mathematical diagrams, graphs or constructions both on 
paper and using technology; record methods, solutions and conclusions using standardized notation; 
use appropriate notation and terminology.
4. Technology:  Use technology accurately, appropriately and efficiently both to explore new ideas and 
to solve problems.
5. Reasoning:  Construct mathematical arguments through use of precise statements, logical deduction 
and inference and by the manipulation of mathematical expressions.
6. Inquiry approaches:  Investigate unfamiliar situations, both abstract and from the real world, 
involving organizing and analyzing information, making conjectures, drawing conclusions, and testing 
their validity.
Introduction
Assessment objectives
21 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Assessment objectives Paper 1
%Paper 2
%Paper 3
%
HL onlyExploration
%
Knowledge and understanding 20-30 20-30 10-20 5-15
Problem solving 20-30 20-30 20-30 5-20
Communication and interpretation 20-30 20-30 20-30 15-25
Technology 20-35 20-35 10-30 10-20
Reasoning 5-15 10-20 10-20 5-25
Inquiry approaches 5-15 5-20 15-30 25-35
Introduction
Assessment objectives in practice
22 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Syllabus component Suggested teaching hours—SL Suggested teaching hours—HL
Topic 1—Number and algebra 16 29
Topic 2—Functions 31 42
Topic 3—Geometry and 
trigonometry18 46
Topic 4—Statistics and 
probability36 52
Topic 5—Calculus 19 41
The “toolkit” and Mathematical 
exploration
Investigative, problem-solving and 
modelling skills development 
leading to an individual 
exploration. The exploration is a 
piece of written work that involves 
investigating an area of 
mathematics.30 30
Total teaching hours 150 240
All topics  are compulsory.  Students  must  study  all the sub-topics  in each  of the topics  in the syllabus  as 
listed in this guide. Students are also required to be familiar with the topics listed as prior learning.
Syllabus
Syllabus outline
23 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Prior  to starting  a DP mathematics  course  students  have  extensive  previous  mathematical  experiences,  but 
these  will vary.  It is expected  that  mathematics  students  will be familiar  with  the following  topics  before 
they take the examinations because questions assume knowledge of them. Teachers must therefore ensure 
that  any topics  listed  here  that  are unknown  to their  students  at the start  of the course  are included  at an 
early  stage.  Teachers  should  also  take  into  account  the existing  mathematical  knowledge  of their  students 
to design an appropriate course of study for mathematics. This table lists the knowledge, together with the 
syllabus content, that is essential for successful completion of the mathematics course.
Number and algebra
• Number systems: natural numbers ℕ; integers, ℤ; rationals, ℚ, and irrationals; real numbers, ℝ
• SI (Système International) units for mass, time, length, area and volume and their derived units, eg. 
speed
• Rounding, decimal approximations and significant figures, including appreciation of errors
• Definition and elementary treatment of absolute value (modulus), a
• Use of addition, subtraction, multiplication and division using integers, decimals and fractions, 
including order of operations
• Prime numbers, factors (divisors) and multiples
• Greatest common factor (divisor) and least common multiples (HL only)
• Simple applications of ratio, percentage and proportion
• Manipulation of algebraic expressions, including factorization and expansion
• Rearranging formulae
• Calculating the numerical value of expressions by substitution
• Evaluating exponential expressions with simple positive exponents
• Evaluating exponential expressions with rational exponents (HL only)
• Use of inequalities, < , ≤ , > , ≥ , intervals on the real number line
• Simplification of simple expressions involving roots (surds or radicals)
• Rationalising the denominator (HL only)
• Expression of numbers in the form a× 10k, 1 ≤a< 10 , k∈ℤ
• Familiarity with commonly accepted world currencies
• Solution of linear equations and inequalities
• Solution of quadratic equations and inequalities with rational coefficients (HL only)
• Solving systems of linear equations in two variables
• Concept and basic notation of sets. Operations on sets: union and intersection
• Addition and subtraction of algebraic fractions (HL only).
Functions
• Graphing linear and quadratic functions using technology
• Mappings of the elements of one set to another. Illustration by means of sets of ordered pairs, tables, 
diagrams and graphs.
Syllabus
Prior learning topics
24 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Geometry and trigonometry
• Pythagoras’ theorem and its converse
• Mid-point of a line segment and the distance between two points in the Cartesian plane
• Geometric concepts: point, line, plane, angle
• Angle measurement in degrees, compass directions
• The triangle sum theorem
• Right-angle trigonometry, including simple applications for solving triangles
• Three-figure bearings
• Simple geometric transformations: translation, reflection, rotation, enlargement
• The circle, its centre and radius, area and circumference. The terms diameter, arc, sector, chord, 
tangent and segment
• Perimeter and area of plane figures. Properties of triangles and quadrilaterals, including 
parallelograms, rhombuses, rectangles, squares, kites and trapezoids; compound shapes
• Familiarity with three-dimensional shapes (prisms, pyramids, spheres, cylinders and cones)
• Volumes and surface areas of cuboids, prisms, cylinders, and compound three-dimensional shapes
Statistics and probability
• The collection of data and its representation in bar charts, pie charts, pictograms, and line graphs
• Obtaining simple statistics from discrete data, including mean, median, mode, range
• Calculating probabilities of simple events
• Venn diagrams for sorting data
• Tree diagrams
Calculus
Speed  =  distance
timePrior learning topics
25 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Topic 1: Number and algebra
Concepts
Essential understandings
Number  and  algebra  allow  us to represent  patterns,  show  equivalencies  and  make  generalizations  which 
enable  us to model  real-world  situations.  Algebra  is an abstraction  of numerical  concepts  and  employs 
variables to solve mathematical problems.
Suggested concepts embedded in this topic
Generalization, representation, modelling, equivalence, approximation, quantity
AHL:  Systems, relationships.
Content-specific conceptual understandings:
• Modelling real-life situations with the structure of arithmetic and geometric sequences and series 
allows for prediction, analysis and interpretation.
• Different representations of numbers enable quantities to be compared and used for computational 
purposes with ease and accuracy.
• Numbers and formulae can appear in different, but equivalent forms, or representations, which can 
help us to establish identities.
• Formulae are a generalization made on the basis of specific examples, which can then be extended to new examples
• Mathematical financial models such as compounded growth allow computation, evaluation and 
interpretation of debt and investment both approximately and accurately.
• Approximation of numbers adds uncertainty or inaccuracy to calculations, leading to potential errors 
but can be useful when handling extremely large or small quantities.
• Quantities and values can be used to describe key features and behaviours of functions and models, 
including quadratic functions.
AHL
• Utilizing complex numbers provides a system to efficiently simplify and solve problems.
• Matrices allow us to organize data so that they can be manipulated and relationships can be 
determined.
• Representing abstract quantities using complex numbers in different forms enables the solution of 
real-life problems.
SL content
Recommended teaching hours: 16
The aim of the standard  level  (SL) content  of the number  and  algebra  topic  is to introduce  students  to 
numerical  concepts  and  techniques  which  combined  with  an introduction  to arithmetic  and  geometric 
sequences and series can be used for financial and other applications.
Sections  SL1.1  to SL1.5  are content  common  to Mathematics:  analysis  and  approaches  and  Mathematics: 
applications and interpretation.
Syllabus
Syllabus content
26 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
SL 1.1
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Operations with numbers in the form a× 10k where 
1 ≤a< 10  and k is an integer.Calculator or computer notation is not acceptable. 
For example, 5.2E30 is not acceptable and should be 
written as 5.2 × 1030.
Connections
Other  contexts:  Very  large  and  very  small  numbers,  for example  astronomical  distances,  sub-atomic 
particles in physics, global financial figures
Links  to other  subjects:  Chemistry  (Avogadro’s  number);  physics  (order  of magnitude);  biology 
(microscopic measurements); sciences (uncertainty and precision of measurement)
International-mindedness:  The history  of number  from  Sumerians  and  its development  to the present 
Arabic system
TOK:  Do the names that we give things impact how we understand them? For instance, what is the impact 
of the fact that  some  large  numbers  are named,  such  as the googol  and  the googolplex,  while  others  are 
represented in this form?
Download connections template
SL 1.2
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Arithmetic sequences and series.
Use of the formulae for the nth term and the sum of 
the first  n terms of the sequence.
Use of sigma notation for sums of arithmetic 
sequences.Spreadsheets, GDCs and graphing software may be 
used to generate and display sequences in several 
ways.
If technology is used in examinations, students will 
be expected to identify the first term and the 
common difference.
Applications. Examples include simple interest over a number of 
years.
Analysis, interpretation and prediction where a 
model is not perfectly arithmetic in real life.Students will need to approximate common 
differences.
Connections
International-mindedness:  The chess  legend  (Sissa  ibn Dahir);  Aryabhatta  is sometimes  considered  the 
“father  of algebra”–compare  with  alKhawarizmi;  the use of several  alphabets  in mathematical  notation  (for 
example the use of capital sigma for the sum).
TOK:  Is all knowledge  concerned  with  identification  and  use of patterns?  Consider  Fibonacci  numbers  and 
connections with the golden ratio.
Download connections template
SL 1.3
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Geometric sequences and series.
Use of the formulae for the nth term and the sum of 
the first n terms of the sequence.Spreadsheets, GDCs and graphing software may be 
used to generate and display sequences in several 
ways.Syllabus content
27 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Use of sigma notation for the sums of geometric 
sequences.If technology is used in examinations, students will 
be expected to identify the first term and the ratio.
Link to:  models/functions in topic 2 and regression 
in topic 4.
Applications. Examples include the spread of disease, salary 
increase and decrease and population growth.
Connections
Links to other subjects:  Radioactive decay, nuclear physics, charging and discharging capacitors (physics).
TOK:  How do mathematicians reconcile the fact that some conclusions seem to conflict with our intuitions? 
Consider for instance that a finite area can be bounded by an infinite perimeter.
Download connections template
SL 1.4
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Financial applications of geometric sequences and 
series:
• compound interest
• annual depreciation.Examination questions may require the use of 
technology, including built-in financial packages.
The concept of simple interest may be used as an 
introduction to compound interest.
Calculate the real value of an investment with an 
interest rate and an inflation rate.
In examinations, questions that ask students to 
derive the formula will not be set.
Compound interest can be calculated yearly, half-
yearly, quarterly or monthly.
Link to : exponential models/functions in topic 2.
Connections
Other contexts:  Loans.
Links to other subjects:  Loans and repayments (economics and business management).
Aim 8:  Ethical perceptions of borrowing and lending money.
International-mindedness:  Do all societies view investment and interest in the same way?
TOK:  How have technological advances affected the nature and practice of mathematics? Consider the use 
of financial packages for instance.
Enrichment:  The concept  of e can be introduced  through  continuous  compounding, 
(1 +1
n)n
→ e , as n→ ∞ , however this will not be examined.
Download connections template
SL 1.5
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Laws of exponents with integer exponents. Examples:Syllabus content
28 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
53× 5…6= 5…3, 64÷ 63= 6, 23…4= 2…12, 
2x4= 16 x4, 2x…3=2
x3
Introduction to logarithms with base 10 and e.
Numerical evaluation of logarithms using 
technology.Awareness that ax=b is equivalent to logab=x, 
that b> 0, and logex= lnx.
Connections
Other contexts:  Richter scale and decibel scale.
Links to other subjects:  Calculation of pH and buffer solutions (chemistry)
TOK : Is mathematics  invented  or discovered?  For instance,  consider  the number  e or logarithms–did  they 
already  exist  before  man  defined  them?  (This  topic  is an opportunity  for teachers  to generate  reflection  on 
“the nature of mathematics”).
Download connections template
SL 1.6
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Approximation: decimal places, significant figures. Students should be able to choose an appropriate 
degree of accuracy based on given data.
Upper and lower bounds of rounded numbers. If x= 4.1  to one decimal place, 4.05 ≤ x< 4.15 .
Percentage errors. Students should be aware of, and able to calculate, 
measurement errors (such as rounding errors or 
measurement limitations). For example finding the 
maximum percentage error in the area of a circle if 
the radius measured is 2.5 cm to one decimal place.
Estimation. Students should be able to recognize whether the results of calculations are reasonable. For example 
lengths cannot be negative.
Connections
Other  contexts:  Currency  approximations  are often  to nearest  whole  number,  for example  peso,  yen;  to 
nearest cent, euro, dollar, pound; meteorology, alternative rounding methods.
Links  to other  subjects:  Order  of magnitudes  (physics);  uncertainty  and  precision  of measurement 
(sciences).
Aim 8:  Caring about approximations; ethical implications.
TOK:  Is mathematical reasoning  different  from  scientific  reasoning,  or reasoning  in other  areas  of 
knowledge?
Download connections template
SL 1.7
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Amortization and annuities using technology. Technology includes the built-in financial packages 
of graphic display calculators, spreadsheets.Syllabus content
29 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
In examinations the payments will be made at the 
end of the period.
Knowledge of the annuity formula will enhance 
understanding but will not be examined.
Link to : exponential models (SL 2.5).
Connections
Other  contexts:  Evaluating  the real value  of an investment  when  affected  by interest  rates  and  inflation 
rates. Credit card debt, student loans, retirement planning.
Links to other subjects:  Exchange rates (economics), loans (business management).
Aim  8: Ethical  perceptions  of borrowing  and  lending  money;  short-term  loans  at high  interest  rates,  how 
can knowledge of mathematics result in individuals being exploited or protected from extortion?
International-mindedness : Do all societies view investment and interest in the same way?
Download connections template
SL 1.8
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Use technology to solve:
• Systems of linear equations in up to 3 variables
• Polynomial equationsIn examinations, no specific method of solution will 
be required.
In examinations, there will always be a unique 
solution to a system of equations.
Standard terminology, such as zeros or roots, should 
be taught.
Link to:  quadratic models (SL 2.5)
Connections
Links to other subjects:  Kirchhoff’s laws (physics).
TOK:  What  role  does  language  play  in the accumulation  and  sharing  of knowledge  in mathematics? 
Consider  for example  that  when  mathematicians  talk about  “imaginary”  or “real”  solutions  they  are using 
precise technical terms that do not have the same meaning as the everyday terms.
Download connections template
AHL content
Recommended teaching hours: 13
The aim of the AHL content in the number and algebra topic is to extend and build upon the aims, concepts 
and  skills  from  the standard  level  content.  It introduces  students  to the laws  of logarithms,  the important 
mathematical concepts of complex numbers and matrices, and their applications.
AHL 1.9
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Laws of logarithms:
logaxy= log ax+ log ayIn examinations, a will equal 10 or e.
Link to:  scaling large and small numbers (AHL 2.10).Syllabus content
30 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
logax
y= log ax… log ay
logaxm=mlogax
for a, x, y >  0
Connections
Links  to other  subjects:  pH, buffer  calculations  and  finding  activation  energy  from  experimental  data 
(chemistry).
TOK:  What  is meant  by the terms  “law”  and  “theory”  in mathematics.  How  does  this compare  to how 
these  terms are used in different areas of knowledge?
Download connections template
AHL 1.10
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Simplifying expressions, both numerically and 
algebraically, involving rational exponents.Examples:  51
2× 51
3= 55
6, 64
3÷ 61
2= 61
4, 323
5= 8 ,
x…1
2=1
x
Connections
Download connections template
AHL 1.11
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The sum of infinite geometric sequences. Link to:  the concept of a limit (SL 5.1), fractals (AHL 
3.9), and Markov chains (AHL 4.19).
Connections
Other contexts:  Total distance travelled by a bouncing ball.
TOK:  Is it possible to know about things of which we can have no experience, such as infinity?
Download connections template
AHL 1.12
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Complex numbers: the number i such that i2= … 1 .
Cartesian form: z=a+bi; the terms real part, 
imaginary part, conjugate, modulus and argument.
Calculate sums, differences, products, quotients, by 
hand and with technology. Calculating powers of 
complex numbers, in Cartesian form, with 
technology.Syllabus content
31 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The complex plane.
Complex numbers as solutions to quadratic equations of the form ax2+bx+c= 0, a≠ 0, with 
real coefficients where b2… 4ac< 0.Use and draw Argand diagrams.
Quadratic formula and the link with the graph of 
f(x) =ax2+bx+c.
Connections
TOK:  How  does  language  shape  knowledge?  For example  do the words  “imaginary”  and  “complex”  make 
the concepts more difficult than if they had different names?
Download connections template
AHL 1.13
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Modulus–argument (polar) form:
z=rcosθ+ isin θ=rcisθ .
Exponential form:
z=reiθ.Exponential form is sometimes called the Euler form.
Conversion between Cartesian, polar and 
exponential forms, by hand and with technology.
Calculate products, quotients and integer powers in 
polar or exponential forms.In examinations students will not be required to find 
the roots of complex numbers.
Adding sinusoidal functions with the same 
frequencies but different phase shift angles.Phase shift and voltage in circuits as complex 
quantities.
Example:  Two AC voltages sources are connected in 
a circuit. If V1= 10 cos (40 t) and 
V2= 20 cos (40 t+ 10)  find an expression for the 
total voltage in the form V=Acos (40 t+B).
Geometric interpretation of complex numbers. Addition and subtraction of complex numbers can 
be represented as vector addition and subtraction. 
Multiplication of complex numbers can be 
represented as a rotation and a stretch in the 
Argand diagram.
Connections
TOK:  Why  might  it be said  that  eiπ+1 = 0  is beautiful?  What  is the place  of beauty  and  elegance  in 
mathematics? What about the place of creativity?
Enrichment:  Solution  of differential  equations  by separation  of variables  (AHL5.15),  as both  polar  and 
exponential forms are solutions of dy
dθ= iy.
Download connections template
AHL 1.14
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Definition of a matrix: the terms element, row, 
column and order for m×n matrices.
Algebra of matrices: equality; addition; subtraction; 
multiplication by a scalar for m×n matrices.Including use of technology.
Multiplication of matrices.
Properties of matrix multiplication:
associativity, distributivity and non-commutativity.Multiplying matrices to solve practical problems.
Identity and zero matrices.
Determinants and inverses of n×n matrices with 
technology, and by hand for 2 × 2  matrices.Students should be familiar with the notation I and 
0.
Awareness that a system of linear equations can be 
written in the form Ax=b.In examinations A will always be an invertible matrix, 
except when solving for eigenvectors.
Solution of the systems of equations using inverse 
matrix.Model and solve real-life problems including:
Coding and decoding messages
Solving systems of equations.
Link to:  Markov chains (AHL 4.19), transition 
matrices (AHL 4.19) and phase portrait (AHL 5.17).
Connections
Other contexts:  Comparing sales/revenue/profit for multiple products over multiple weeks.
TOK:  Given  the many  applications  of matrices  in this course,  consider  the fact that  mathematicians  marvel 
at some  of the deep  connections  between  disparate  parts  of their  subject.  Is this evidence  for a simple 
underlying  mathematical  reality?  Mathematics,  sense,  perception  and  reason–if  we can find  solutions  of 
higher dimensions, can we reason that these spaces exist beyond our sense perception?
External link:  Simulation for encoding and decoding messages using various methods including exercises:
Download connections template
AHL 1.15
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
Characteristic polynomial of 2 × 2  matrices.
Diagonalization of 2 × 2  matrices (restricted to the 
case where there are distinct real eigenvalues).Students will only be expected to perform 
calculations by hand and with technology for 2 × 2
matrices.
Applications to powers of 2 × 2  matrices. Applications, for example movement of population 
between two towns, predator/prey models.
Mn=PDnP…1, where P is a matrix of eigenvectors, 
and D is a diagonal matrix of eigenvalues.
Link to:  coupled differential equations (AHL 5.17).
Connections
Other contexts:  Invariant states; representation of conics.Syllabus content
33 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Links to other subjects:  Stochastic processes, stock market values and trends (business management).
Aim  8: Damping  noise  in car design,  test for cracks  in solid  objects,  oil exploration,  the Google  PageRank 
formula, and “the $25 billion dollar eigenvector”; the natural frequency of an object can be characterized by 
the eigenvalue of smallest magnitude (1940 Tacoma Narrows bridge disaster).
TOK:  Mathematics can be used successfully to model real-world processes. Is this because mathematics was 
created to mirror the world or because the world is intrinsically mathematical?
Enrichment:  Principal  component  and  factor  analysis.  Link  between  discrete  change  and  continuous 
change in dynamical systems (including why e is such an important number).
Download connections template
Topic 2: Functions
Concepts
Essential understandings:
Models  are depictions  of real-life  events  using  expressions,  equations  or graphs  while  a function  is defined 
as a relation or expression involving one or more variable. Creating different representations of functions to 
model  the relationships  between  variables,  visually  and  symbolically  as graphs,  equations and/or  tables 
represents different ways to communicate mathematical ideas.
Suggested concepts embedded in this topic:
Representation, relationships, space, modelling, change.
AHL:  Generalization, validity.
Content-specific conceptual understandings:
• Different representations of functions, symbolically and visually as graphs, equations and tables 
provide different ways to communicate mathematical relationships.
• The parameters in a function or equation may correspond to notable geometrical features of a graph 
and can represent physical quantities in spatial dimensions.
• Moving between different forms to represent functions allows for deeper understanding and provides 
different approaches to problem solving.
• Our spatial frame of reference affects the visible part of a function and by changing this “window” can 
show more or less of the function to best suit our needs.
• Changing the parameters of a trigonometric function changes the position, orientation and shape of 
the corresponding graph.
• Different representations facilitate modelling and interpretation of physical, social, economic and 
mathematical phenomena, which support solving real-life problems.
• Technology plays a key role in allowing humans to represent the real world as a model and to quantify 
the appropriateness of the model.
AHL
• Extending results from a specific case to a general form and making connections between related 
functions allows us to better understand physical phenomena.
• Generalization provides an insight into variation and allows us to access ideas such as half-life and 
scaling logarithmically to adapt theoretical models and solve complex real-life problems.
• Considering the reasonableness and validity of results helps us to make informed, unbiased decisions.Syllabus content
34 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
SL content
Recommended teaching hours: 31
The aim of the standard  level  content  in the functions  topic  is to introduce  students  to the important 
unifying  theme  of a function  in mathematics  and  the skills  needed  to model  and  interpret  practical 
situations with a variety of key functions.
Throughout  this topic  students  should  be given  the opportunity  to use technology  such  as graphing 
packages  and  graphing  calculators  to develop  and  apply  their  knowledge  of functions,  rather  than  using 
elaborate analytical techniques.
On examination papers:
• questions may be set requiring the graphing of functions that do not explicitly appear on the syllabus
• the domain will be the largest possible domain for which a function is defined unless otherwise stated; 
this will usually be the real numbers.
Sections  SL2.1  to SL2.4  are content  common  to both  Mathematics:  analysis  and  approaches  and 
Mathematics: applications and interpretation.
SL 2.1
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Different forms of the equation of a straight line.
Gradient; intercepts.
Lines with gradients m1 and m2
Parallel lines m1=m2.
Perpendicular lines m1×m2= … 1 .y=mx+c (gradient-intercept form).
ax+by+d= 0 (general form).
y…y1=m(x…x1) (point-gradient form).
Calculate gradients of inclines such as mountain 
roads, bridges, etc.
Connections
Other contexts:  Gradients of mountain roads, gradients of access ramps.
Links  to other  subjects:  Exchange  rates  and  price  and  income  elasticity,  demand  and  supply  curves 
(economics); graphical analysis in experimental work (sciences).
TOK:  Descartes  showed  that  geometric  problems  could  be solved  algebraically  and  vice  versa.  What  does 
this tell us about mathematical representation and mathematical knowledge?
Download connections template
SL 2.2
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Concept of a function, domain, range and graph.
Function notation, for example f(x) ,v(t) ,C(n).
The concept of a function as a mathematical model.Example: f(x) = 2 …x, the domain is x≤ 2, 
range is f(x) ≥ 0 .
A graph is helpful in visualizing the range.
Informal concept that an inverse function reverses 
or undoes the effect of a function.
Inverse function as a reflection in the line y=x, and 
the notation f…1(x).Example:  Solving f(x) = 10  is equivalent to finding 
f…1(10) .
Students should be aware that inverse functions 
exist for one to one functions; the domain of f…1(x)
is equal to the range of f(x).
Connections
Other contexts:  Temperature and currency conversions .Syllabus content
35 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Links  to other  subjects:  Currency  conversions  and  cost  functions  (economics  and  business  management); 
projectile motion (physics).
Aim 8:  What is the relationship between real-world problems and mathematical models?
International-mindedness:  The development  of functions  by Rene  Descartes  (France),  Gottfried  Wilhelm 
Leibnitz  (Germany)  and  Leonhard  Euler  (Switzerland);  the notation  for functions  was  developed  by a 
number  of different  mathematicians  in the 17th  and  18th  centuries–how  did the notation  we use today 
become internationally accepted?
TOK:  Do you think mathematics or logic should be classified as a language?
Download connections template
SL 2.3
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The graph of a function; its equation y=f(x). Students should be aware of the difference between 
the command terms “draw” and “sketch”.
Creating a sketch from information given or a 
context, including transferring a graph from screen 
to paper.
Using technology to graph functions including their 
sums and differences.All axes and key features should be labelled.
This may include functions not specifically 
mentioned in topic 2.
Connections
Links to other subjects:  Sketching and interpreting graphs (sciences, geography, economics).
TOK:  Does  studying  the graph  of a function  contain  the same  level  of mathematical  rigour  as studying  the 
function algebraically? What are the advantages and disadvantages of having different forms and symbolic 
language in mathematics?
Download connections template
SL 2.4
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Determine key features of graphs. Maximum and minimum values; intercepts; 
symmetry; vertex; zeros of functions or roots of 
equations; vertical and horizontal asymptotes using 
graphing technology.
Finding the point of intersection of two curves or 
lines using technology.
Connections
Links  to other  subjects:  Identification  and  interpretation  of key features  of graphs  (sciences,  geography, 
economics); production possibilities curve model, market equilibrium (economics).
International-mindedness:  Bourbaki group analytical approach versus the Mandlebrot visual approach.
Use  of technology:  Graphing  technology  with  sliders  to determine  the effects  of altering  parameters  and 
variables.
Download connections template
SL 2.5
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Modelling with the following functions:
Linear models.
fx=mx+c.Including piecewise linear models, for example 
horizontal distances of an object to a wall, depth of a 
swimming pool, mobile phone charges.
Link to:  equation of a straight line (SL 2.1) and 
arithmetic sequences (SL 1.2).
Quadratic models.
fx=ax2+bx+c ; a≠ 0. Axis of symmetry, 
vertex, zeros and roots, intercepts on the  x-axis and 
y -axis.Technology can be used to find roots.
Link to:  use of technology to solve quadratic 
equations (SL 1.8).
Exponential growth and decay models.
f(x) =kax+c
f(x) =ka…x+c (for a> 0)  
f(x) =kerx+c
Equation of a horizontal asymptote.Link to:  compound interest (SL 1.4), geometric 
sequences and series (SL 1.3) and amortization (SL 
1.7).
Direct/inverse variation:
fx=axn, n∈ℤ
The y-axis as a vertical asymptote when n< 0.
Cubic models:
fx=ax3+bx2+cx+d.
Sinusoidal models:
fx=asin(bx) +d, fx=acos(bx) +d.Students will not be expected to translate between 
sinx and cosx, and will only be required to predict or 
find amplitude ( a), period (360∘
b), or equation of the principal axis (y=d).
Connections
Other contexts:
Linear  models:  Conversion  graphs,  for example  Fahrenheit  to Celsius,  currency.  Cost  of hiring  an item  at a 
daily rate with a fixed deposit.
Quadratic models:  Cost functions, satellite dishes, bridges, projectile motion.
Exponential  models:  Population  growth,  radioactive  decay,  cooling  of a liquid,  spread  of a virus,  compound 
interest, depreciation and amortization.
Direct/inverse variation : Boyle’s law and Charles’s law of gases, laws of supply and demand.
Cubic  models:  The volume  of a box with  a fixed  surface  area,  the amount  of wasted  space  in a can of tennis 
balls, power produced by a wind turbine and wind speed.
Sinusoidal  models:  Periodic phenomena that  give  rise to sinusoidal  models,  for example  tides,  weather 
patterns, motion of ferris and bicycle wheels, annual temperatures.
Links  to other  subjects:  Population  growth,  spread  of a virus  (biology);  radioactive  decay  and  half-life,  X-
ray attenuation,  cooling  of a liquid,  kinematics,  simple  harmonic  motion,  projectile  motion,  inverse  square 
law (physics);  compound  interest,  depreciation  (business  management);  the circular  flow  of income  model 
(economics);  the equilibrium  law and  rates  of reaction  (chemistry);  opportunities  to model  as part  of 
experimental work (science)Syllabus content
37 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Aim  8: The phrase  “exponential  growth”  is used  popularly  to describe  a number  of phenomena.  Is this a 
misleading use of the mathematical term?
International-mindedness:  The Babylonian method of multiplication: ab=(a+b)2…a2…b2
2. Sulba Sutras 
in ancient  India  and  the Bakhshali  Manuscript  contained  an algebraic  formula  for solving  quadratic 
equations.
TOK:  What  role  do models  play  in mathematics?  Do they  play  a different  role  in mathematics  compared  to 
their role in other areas of knowledge?
Use of technology:  Generating parabolas using dynamic geometry software.
Enrichment:  Conics–how can a parabola be created by cutting a cone?
Download connections template
SL 2.6
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Modelling skills:
Use the modelling process described in the 
“mathematical modelling” section to create, fit and 
use the theoretical models in section SL2.5 and their 
graphs.Fitting models using regression is covered in topic 4.
Link to : theoretical models (SL 2.5) to be used to 
develop the modelling skills and, for HL students, 
(AHL 2.9).
Develop and fit the model:
Given a context recognize and choose an 
appropriate model and possible parameters.
Determine a reasonable domain for a model.
Find the parameters of a model. By setting up and solving equations simultaneously 
(using technology), by consideration of initial 
conditions or by substitution of points into a given 
function.
At SL, students will not be expected to perform non-
linear regressions, but will be expected to set up and 
solve up to three linear equations in three variables 
using technology.
Test and reflect upon the model:
Comment on the appropriateness and 
reasonableness of a model.
Justify the choice of a particular model, based on the shape of the data, properties of the curve and/or 
on the context of the situation.
Use the model:
Reading, interpreting and making predictions based 
on the model.Students should be aware of the dangers of 
extrapolation.
Connections
Links to other subjects:  opportunities to model as part of experimental work (science).
TOK:  What  is it about  models  in mathematics  that  makes  them  effective?  Is simplicity  a desirable 
characteristic in models?Syllabus content
38 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Download connections template
AHL content
Recommended teaching hours: 11
The aim of the AHL  functions  topic  is to extend  the aims,  concepts  and  skills  from  the standard  level 
content.  It introduces  students  to further  numerical  and  graphical  techniques  and  further  key functions 
which can be used to model and interpret practical situations.
AHL 2.7
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Composite functions in context.
The notation (f∘g)(x) =f(g(x)).
Inverse function f…1, including domain restriction.
Finding an inverse function.f∘f…1x=f…1∘fx=x.
Example: f(x) = ( x… 3)2… 2 has an inverse if the domain is restricted to x≥ 3 or to x≤ 3.
Connections
Download connections template
AHL 2.8
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Transformations of graphs. Students will be expected to be able to perform 
transformations on all functions from the SL and 
AHL section of this topic, and others in the context 
of modelling real-life situations.
Translations: y=f(x) +b;y=f(x…a).
Reflections: in the  x axis y= … f(x), and in the y axis 
y=f( …x).Translation by the vector (3
…2) denotes horizontal 
translation of 3 units to the right, and vertical 
translation of 2 units down.
Vertical stretch with scale factor p: y=p f(x).
Horizontal stretch with scale factor 1
q: y=f(qx)x and  y axes are invariant.
Composite transformations. Students should be made aware of the significance 
of the order of transformations.
Example: y=x2 used to obtain y= 3x2+ 2 by a 
vertical stretch of scale factor 3 followed by a 
translation of (0
2).
Example: y= sin x used to obtain y= 4sin2 x by a 
vertical stretch of scale factor 4 and a horizontal 
stretch of scale factor 1
2.
Connections
Other contexts:  Translating curves to reduce rounding errors for large values.
Links  to other  subjects:  Shifting  of supply  and  demand  curves  (economics);  electromagnetic  induction 
(physics)
TOK:  Is mathematics independent of culture? To what extent are we aware of the impact of culture on what 
we believe or know?
Download connections template
AHL 2.9
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
In addition to the models covered in the SL content 
the AHL content extends this to include modelling 
with the following functions:
Exponential models to calculate half-life.Link to:  modelling skills (SL2.6).
Natural logarithmic models:
f(x) =a+blnx
Sinusoidal models:
fx=asinbx…c+dRadian measure should be assumed unless 
otherwise indicated by the use of the degree 
symbol, for example with f(x) = sin x°.
In radians, period is 2π
b.
Students should be aware that a horizontal 
translation of  c can be referred to as a phase shift.
Link to:  radian measure (AHL 3.7)
Logistic models:
fx=L
1 +Ce…kx; L, C, k> 0The logistic function is used in situations where 
there is a restriction on the growth. For example 
population on an island, bacteria in a petri dish or 
the increase in height of a person or seedling.
Horizontal asymptote at f(x) =L is often referred to 
as the carrying capacity.
Piecewise models. In some cases, parameters may need to be found 
that ensure continuity of the function, for example 
find a to make f(x) = {1 +x, 0 ≤ x< 2
ax2+x,x≥ 2 continuous. 
The formal definition of continuity is not required.
In examinations, students may be expected to 
interpret and use other models that are introduced 
in the question.
Connections
Other contexts:  Sinusoidal  models : Waxing  and  waning  of the moon,  rainfall  patterns,  temperature,  movement  of ferris and bicycle wheels, annual temperatures.
Piecewise  models : Income  taxes  and  taxi fares,  friction,  mobile  phone  plans,  depth  of pool  as function  of 
distance  from  the deep  end (piecewise  linear),  postage  rates  for letters,  stock  prices,  parachuting  before 
and  after  the chute  opens,  Hooke’s  law,  shapes  of buildings,  horizontal  distance  from  a wall  to a curved 
object.Syllabus content
40 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Links  to other  subjects:  Half-life  (chemistry  and  physics);  AC circuits  and  waves  (physics);  the Gini 
coefficient  and  the Lorenz  curve,  and  progressive,  regressive  and  proportional  taxes,  the J-curve 
(economics)
TOK:  Is there a hierarchy of areas of knowledge in terms of their usefulness in solving problems?
Enrichment:  For the population  equation  dP
dt=kP(1 …P
L) with  P=P0 when  t= 0, the solution  is the 
logistic equation: P=L
1 +Ce…kt, with C=L
P0… 1.
Download connections template
AHL 2.10
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Scaling very large or small numbers using 
logarithms.
Linearizing data using logarithms to determine if the 
data has an exponential or a power relationship 
using best-fit straight lines to determine parameters.Choosing a manageable scale, for example for data 
with a wide range of values in one, or both variables 
and/or where the emphasis of a graph is the rate of 
growth, rather than the absolute value.
Link to:  laws of logarithms (AHL 1.9) and Pearson’s 
product moment correlation coefficient (SL 4.4).
Interpretation of log-log and semi-log graphs. In examinations, students will not be expected to 
draw or sketch these graphs.
Connections
Other  contexts:  Growth  of bacteria  or traffic  to websites/social  media;  exponential  graphs  that  show 
alarming absolute figures, but reasonable rates of growth.
Links  to other  subjects:  pH semi-log  curves  and  finding  activation  energy  from  experimental  data 
(chemistry); exponential decay (physics); experimental work (sciences).
TOK:  Does  the applicability  of knowledge  vary  across  the different  areas  of knowledge?  What  would  the 
implications be if the value of all knowledge was measured solely in terms of its applicability?
Links to websites:  Gapminder makes use of log-log graphs: www.gapminder.org
Download connections template
Topic 3: Geometry and trigonometry
Concepts
Essential understandings
Geometry  and  trigonometry  allow  us to quantify  the physical  world,  enhancing  our spatial  awareness  in 
two  and  three  dimensions.  This  branch  provides  us with  the tools  for analysis,  measurement  and 
transformation of quantities, movements and relationships.
Suggested concepts embedded in this topic
Generalization, space, relationships, systems, representations
AHL:  Quantity, change.
Content-specific conceptual understandings:
• The properties of shapes are highly dependent on the dimension they occupy in space.Syllabus content
41 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
• Volume and surface area of shapes are determined by formulae, or general mathematical relationships 
or rules expressed using symbols or variables.
• The relationships between the length of the sides and the size of the angles in a triangle can be used 
to solve many problems involving position, distance, angles and area.
• Different representations of trigonometric expressions help to simplify calculations.
• Systems of equations often, but not always, lead to intersection points.
• In two dimensions, the Voronoi diagram allows us to navigate, path-find or establish an optimum 
position.
AHL
• Different measurement systems can be used for angles to facilitate ease of calculation.
• Vectors allow us to determine position, change of position (movement) and force in two and three-
dimensional space.
• Graph theory algorithms allow us to represent networks and to model complex real-world problems.
• Matrices are a form of notation which allow us to show the parameters or quantities of several linear 
equations simultaneously.
SL content
Recommended teaching hours: 18
The aim of the standard  level  content  of the geometry  and  trigonometry  topic  is to introduce  students  to 
appropriate skills and techniques for practical problem solving in two and three dimensions.
Throughout  this topic  students  should  be given  the opportunity  to use technology  such as graphing 
packages,  graphing  calculators  and  dynamic  geometry  software  to develop  and  apply  their  knowledge  of 
geometry and trigonometry.
Sections  SL3.1  to SL3.3  are content  common  to both  Mathematics:  analysis  and  approaches  and 
Mathematics: applications and interpretation.
SL 3.1
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The distance between two points in three-
dimensional space, and their midpoint.
Volume and surface area of three-dimensional solids 
including right-pyramid, right cone, sphere, 
hemisphere and combinations of these solids.
The size of an angle between two intersecting lines 
or between a line and a plane.In SL examinations, only right-angled trigonometry 
questions will be set in reference to three-
dimensional shapes.
In problems related to these topics, students should 
be able to identify relevant right-angled triangles in 
three-dimensional objects and use them to find 
unknown lengths and angles.
Connections
Other contexts:  Architecture and design.
Links to other subjects:  Design technology; volumes of stars and inverse square law (physics).
TOK:  What is an axiomatic system? Are axioms self evident to everybody?
Download connections template
SL 3.2
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Use of sine, cosine and tangent ratios to find the 
sides and angles of right-angled triangles.In all areas of this topic, students should be 
encouraged to sketch well-labelled diagrams to 
support their solutions.
Link to:  inverse functions (SL2.2) when finding 
angles.
The sine rule: a
sinA=b
sinB=c
sinC
The cosine rule: c2=a2+b2… 2abcosC
cosC=a2+b2…c2
2ab
Area of a triangle as 1
2absinC.This section does not include the ambiguous case of 
the sine rule.
Connections
Other contexts:  Triangulation, map-making.
Links to other subjects:  Vectors (physics).
International-mindedness:  Diagrams  of Pythagoras’ theorem  occur  in early  Chinese  and Indian 
manuscripts.  The earliest  references  to trigonometry  are in Indian  mathematics;  the use of triangulation  to 
find  the curvature  of the Earth  in order  to settle  a dispute  between  England  and  France  over  Newton’s 
gravity.
TOK:  Is it ethical  that  Pythagoras  gave  his name  to a theorem  that  may  not have  been  his own  creation? 
What criteria might we use to make such a judgment?
Download connections template
SL 3.3
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Applications of right and non-right angled 
trigonometry, including Pythagoras’ theorem.
Angles of elevation and depression.
Construction of labelled diagrams from written 
statements.Contexts may include use of bearings.
Connections
Other  contexts:  Triangulation,  map-making,  navigation  and  radio  transmissions.  Use of parallax  for 
navigation.
Links to other subjects:  Vectors, scalars, forces and dynamics (physics); field studies (sciences)
Aim 8:  Who really invented Pythagoras’ theorem?
Aim 9:  In how many ways can you prove Pythagoras’ theorem?
International-mindedness:  The use of triangulation  to find  the curvature  of the Earth  in order  to settle  a 
dispute between England and France over Newton’s gravity.
TOK:  If the angles  of a triangle  can add  up to less than  180°,  180°  or more  than  180°,  what  does  this tell us 
about the nature of mathematical knowledge?Syllabus content
43 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Download connections template
SL 3.4
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The circle: length of an arc; area of a sector. Radians are not required at SL.
Connections
TOK:  Does  personal  experience  play  a role  in the formation  of knowledge  claims  in mathematics?  Does  it 
play a different role in mathematics compared to other areas of knowledge?
Download connections template
SL 3.5
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Equations of perpendicular bisectors. Given either two points, or the equation of a line 
segment and its midpoint.
Link to:  equations of straight lines (SL 2.1).
Connections
Download connections template
SL 3.6
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Voronoi diagrams: sites, vertices, edges, cells.
Addition of a site to an existing Voronoi diagram.
Nearest neighbour interpolation.
Applications of the “toxic waste dump” problem.In examinations, coordinates of sites for calculating 
the perpendicular bisector equations will be given. 
Students will not be required to construct 
perpendicular bisectors. Questions may include 
finding the equation of a boundary, identifying the 
site closest to a given point, or calculating the area 
of a region.
All points within a cell can be estimated to have the 
same value (e.g. rainfall) as the value of the site.
In examinations, the solution point will always be at 
an intersection of three edges.
Contexts:  Urban planning, spread of diseases, 
ecology, meteorology, resource management.
Connections
Other  contexts:  Applications  in subjects  including  geography,  economics,  biology, and  computer  science. 
www.ics.uci.edu/~eppstein/gina/scot.drysdale.html
TOK:  Is the division of knowledge into disciplines or areas of knowledge artificial?
Link to TSM:  Incremental algorithm for constructing Voronoi diagrams.
Enrichment:  Delaunay triangulations as the duals of Voronoi triangulations; self-driving cars; the art gallery 
problem. Natural neighbour interpolation. Manhattan metric.Syllabus content
44 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Download connections template
AHL Content
Recommended teaching hours: 28
The aim of the AHL  content  in the geometry  and  trigonometry  topic  is to extend  and  build  upon  the aims, 
concepts  and  skills  from  the standard  level  content.  It introduces  students  to an alternative  measurement 
system  for angles  and  some  important  trigonometric  identities,  extends  the application  of matrices  to 
transformations,  and  introduces  students  to vectors  and  their  applications  in kinematics.  Graph  theory  is 
introduced  to allow  students  to apply  their  knowledge  of matrices  and  develop  their  knowledge  of 
algorithms in practical contexts.
On HL examination papers radian measure should be assumed unless otherwise indicated.
AHL 3.7
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The definition of a radian and conversion between 
degrees and radians.
Using radians to calculate area of sector, length of 
arc.Radian measure may be expressed as exact 
multiples of π, or decimals.
Link to : trigonometric functions (AHL 2.9).
Connections
Links to other subjects:  Diffraction patterns and circular motion (physics)
International-mindedness:  Seki  Takakazu  calculating  π to ten decimal  places;  Hipparchus,  Menelaus  and 
Ptolemy;  why  are there  360 degrees  in a complete  turn?  Why  do we use minutes  and  seconds  for time?; 
Links to Babylonian mathematics.
TOK:  Which  is the better  measure  of an angle,  degrees  or radians?  What  criteria  can/do/should 
mathematicians use to make such judgments?
Download connections template
AHL 3.8
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The definitions of cosθ and sinθ in terms of the unit 
circle.
The Pythagorean identity: cos2θ+ sin2θ= 1
Definition of tanθassinθ
cosθ
Extension of the sine rule to the ambiguous case.Students should understand how the graphs of 
f(x) = sin x and f(x) = cos x can be constructed from 
the unit circle.
Knowledge of exact values of cosθ, sinθ, and tanθ will 
not be assessed on examinations, but may aid 
student understanding of trigonometric functions.
Graphical methods of solving trigonometric 
equations in a finite interval.Link to:  sinusoidal models (SL2.5 and AHL2.9).
Connections
Other contexts:  Generation of sinusoidal voltage in electrical engineering.
International-mindedness:  The origin  of the word  “sine”;  trigonometry  was  developed  by successive 
civilizations and cultures; how is mathematical knowledge considered from a sociocultural perspective?
TOK:  To what  extent  is mathematical  knowledge  embedded  in particular  traditions  or bound  to particular 
cultures? How have key events in the history of mathematics shaped its current form and methods?Syllabus content
45 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Use  of technology:  Animation  applets  that  show  the development  of a trigometric  function  graph  from 
the unit circle.
Download connections template
AHL 3.9
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Geometric transformations of points in two 
dimensions using matrices: reflections, horizontal 
and vertical stretches, enlargements, translations 
and rotations.Matrix transformations of the form:
a b
c dx
y+e
f.
Link to:  matrices (AHL 1.14).
Compositions of the above transformations. Iterative techniques to generate fractals.
Link to:  infinite geometric series (AHL 1.11) and 
Markov chains (AHL 4.19).
Geometric interpretation of the determinant of a 
transformation matrix.Area of image = | det A| × area of object .
Connections
Other contexts:  Fractals:  “mutations”  in biology–changing  the probability  with  which  different  “matrix 
transformations”  occur  [or changing  the initial  value  (Z0=c) in the Mandelbrot  quadratic  recurrence 
equation: Zn+ 1=Zn2+c] and then observing what part of the structure/form this affects.
Sierpinski’s triangle and Koch’s snowflake make a good introduction to algorithms that generate fractals.
Aim  8: Matrices  used  in computer  graphics  for three-dimensional  modelling:  how  has this been  used  to 
advance diagnoses of health conditions?
TOK:  When  mathematicians  and  historians  say that  they  have  explained  something,  are they  using  the 
word “explain” in the same way?
Website:  Useful  examples  of fractal  applications:  http://www.fractal.org/Bewustzijns-Besturings-Model/
Fractals-Useful-Beauty.htm
Enrichment:  Affine transformations and digital image processing.
Download connections template
AHL 3.10
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Concept of a vector and a scalar.
Representation of vectors using directed line 
segments.
Unit vectors; base vectors i,  j,  k.
Components of a vector; column representation;
v=v1
v2
v3=v1i+v2j+v3k
The zero vector 0, the vector …v.Use algebraic and geometric approaches to 
calculate the sum and difference of two vectors, 
multiplication by a scalar, kv (parallel vectors), 
magnitude of a vector |v| from components.
The resultant as the sum of two or more vectors.Syllabus content
46 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Position vectors OA→=a.
Rescaling and normalizing vectors. v
v, the unit normal vector.
Example:  Find the velocity of a particle with speed 
7ms-1 in the direction 3i+ 4j.
Connections
Links to other subjects:  Vector sums, differences and resultants (physics).
Aims:  Vector theory is used for tracking displacement of objects, including peaceful and harmful purposes.
TOK:  Vectors  are used  to solve  many  problems  in position  location.  This  can be used  to save  a lost sailor  or 
destroy a building with a laser-guided bomb. To what extent does possession of knowledge carry with it an 
ethical obligation?
Download connections template
AHL 3.11
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Vector equation of a line in two and three 
dimensions:
r=a+λb, where b is a direction vector of the line.Convert to parametric form:
x=x0+λl, y=y0+λm, z=z0+λn.
Connections
TOK:  Mathematics  and  the knower:  Why  are symbolic  representations  of three-dimensional  objects  easier 
to deal  with  than  visual  representations?  What  does  this tell us about  our knowledge  of mathematics  in 
other dimensions?
Download connections template
AHL 3.12
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Vector applications to kinematics.
Modelling linear motion with constant velocity in 
two and three dimensions.Finding positions, intersections, describing paths, 
finding times and distances when two objects are 
closest to each other.
r=r0+vt.
Relative position of B from A is AB→.
Motion with variable velocity in two dimensions.
For example: (vx
vy) = (7
6 … 4 t).
Projectile motion and circular motion are special 
cases.
ft…a to indicate a time-shift of a.
Link to:  kinematics (AHL 5.13) and phase shift (AHL 
1.13).
Connections
Download connections template
AHL 3.13
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Definition and calculation of the scalar product of 
two vectors.
The angle between two vectors; the acute angle 
between two lines.Calculate the angle between two vectors using 
v·w= |v||w|cosθ, where θ is the angle between 
two non-zero vectors v and  w, and ascertain whether 
the vectors are perpendicular ( v·w= 0).
Definition and calculation of the vector product of 
two vectors.v×w=vwsinθn, where θ is the angle between  v
and w and n is the unit normal vector whose 
direction is given by the right-hand screw rule.
Not required:  generalized properties and proofs of 
scalar and cross product.
Geometric interpretation of |v×w|. Use of |v×w| to find the area of a parallelogram 
(and hence a triangle).
Components of vectors. The component of vector a acting in the direction of 
vector b is a·b
|b|= |a|cosθ.
The component of a vector a acting perpendicular 
to vector b, in the plane formed by the two vectors, 
is |a×b|
|b|= |a|sinθ.
Connections
Other contexts:  Computer graphics : Lighting–normalize one vector onto another to determine the intensity 
of light  on a surface.  Perspective–project  a three-dimensional  vector  onto  a two-dimensional  plane  using 
the scalar product.
Physics:  Torque–  magnitude  of the rotational  force  (‘torque’)  applied  to a point/object  is equal  to the 
magnitude  of the cross  product.  The direction of the torque, for example will the force twist the the nut “on” (tightening) or “off” (loosening) the bolt,  is the cross  product.  Electro-magnetic  forces  and  the right  and  left hand  rules.  W = F · d . Forces–what 
component of a vector’s force is acting in the direction of another–useful for any “structural” analysis when 
working out the “strain” on each part of the structure that results from a given force.
Links to other subjects:  Magnetic forces and fields, and dynamics (physics)
TOK:  What counts as understanding in mathematics? Is it more than just getting the right answer?
Download connections template
AHL 3.14
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Graph theory: Graphs, vertices, edges, adjacent 
vertices, adjacent edges. Degree of a vertex.Students should be able to represent real-world 
structures (circuits, maps, etc) as graphs (weighted 
and unweighted).
Simple graphs; complete graphs; weighted graphs. Knowledge of the terms connected and strongly 
connected.Syllabus content
48 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Directed graphs; in degree and out degree of a 
directed graph.
Subgraphs; trees.Link to : matrices (AHL 1.14).
Connections
Aim  8: The importance  of symbolic  maps,  for example  Metro  and  Underground  maps,  structural  formulae 
in chemistry, electrical circuits.
TOK:  Mathematics  and  knowledge  claims.  Proof  of the four-colour  theorem.  If a theorem  is proved  by 
computer, how can we claim to know that it is true?
Download connections template
AHL 3.15
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Adjacency matrices.
Walks.
Number of k -length walks (or less than  k -length 
walks) between two vertices.Given an adjacency matrix  A, the (i, j)th entry of Ak
gives the number of k length walks connecting i and 
j.
Weighted adjacency tables.
Construction of the transition matrix for a strongly-
connected, undirected or directed graph.Weights could be costs, distances, lengths of time 
for example.
Consideration of simple graphs, including the 
Google PageRank algorithm as an example of this.
Link to:  transition matrices and Markov chains (AHL 
4.19).
Connections
International-mindedness:  The “Bridges of Konigsberg” problem.
Links to websites:  Adjacency matrix and airlines:
Page  rank  is one  method  used  to determine  the importance  rank  of a webpage.  Simulation  for PageRank: 
www.eprisner.de/MAT103/PageRank.html
Download connections template
AHL 3.16
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Tree and cycle algorithms with undirected graphs.
Walks, trails, paths, circuits, cycles.
Eulerian trails and circuits.
Hamiltonian paths and cycles.
Minimum spanning tree (MST) graph algorithms:
Kruskal’s and Prim’s algorithms for finding minimum 
spanning trees.Determine whether an Eulerian trail or circuit exists.
Use of matrix method for Prim’s algorithm.
Chinese postman problem and algorithm for 
solution, to determine the shortest route around a Students should be able to explain why the 
algorithm for constructing the Chinese postman Syllabus content
49 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
weighted graph with up to four odd vertices, going 
along each edge at least once.problem works, apply the algorithm and justify their 
choice of algorithm.
Travelling salesman problem to determine the Hamiltonian cycle of least weight in a weighted 
complete graph.
Nearest neighbour algorithm for determining an upper bound for the travelling salesman problem.
Deleted vertex algorithm for determining a lower bound for the travelling salesman problem.Practical problems should be converted to the 
classical problem by completion of a table of least 
distances where necessary.
Connections
Other contexts:  Using GPS  to find  the shortest  route  home;  describe  current  and  voltage  in circuits  as 
cycles; vehicle routing problems.
International-mindedness:  The “Bridges  of Konigsberg”  problem;  the Chinese  postman  problem  was  first 
posed by the Chinese mathematician Kwan Mei-Ko in 1962.
TOK:  What  practical  problems  can or does  mathematics  try to solve?  Why  are problems  such  as the 
travelling salesman problem so enduring? What does it mean to say the travelling salesman problem is “NP 
hard”?
Download connections template
Topic 4: Statistics and probability
Concepts
Essential understandings:
Statistics  is concerned  with  the collection,  analysis  and  interpretation  of quantitative  data  and  uses  the 
theory  of probability  to estimate  parameters,  discover  empirical  laws,  test hypotheses  and  predict  the 
occurrence  of events.  Statistical  representations  and  measures  allow  us to represent  data  in many  different 
forms to aid interpretation.
Probability enables us to quantify the likelihood of events occurring and so evaluate risk. Both statistics and 
probability provide important representations which enable us to make predictions, valid comparisons and 
informed  decisions.  These  fields  have  power  and  limitations  and  should  be applied  with  care  and  critically 
questioned,  in detail,  to differentiate  between  the theoretical  and  the empirical/observed.  Probability 
theory  allows  us to make  informed  choices,  to evaluate  risk and  to make  predictions  about  seemingly 
random events.
Suggested concepts embedded in this topic:
Quantity, validity, approximation, modelling, relationships, patterns.
AHL:  Systems, representation.
Content-specific conceptual understandings:
• Organizing, representing, analysing and interpreting data, and utilizing different statistical tools 
facilitates prediction and drawing of conclusions.
• Different statistical techniques require justification and the identification of their limitations and 
validity.
• Approximation in data can approach the truth but may not always achieve it.
• Correlation and regression are powerful tools for identifying patterns and equivalence of systems.
• Modelling and finding structure in seemingly random events facilitates prediction.
• Different probability distributions provide a representation of the relationship between the theory and 
reality, allowing us to make predictions about what might happen.
AHL
• Statistical literacy involves identifying reliability and validity of samples and whole populations in a 
closed system.
• A systematic approach to hypothesis testing allows statistical inferences to be tested for validity.
• Representation of probabilities using transition matrices enables us to efficiently predict long-term 
behaviour and outcomes.
SL content
Recommended teaching hours: 36
The aim of the standard  level  content  in the statistics  and  probability  topic  is to introduce  students  to 
important concepts, techniques and representations used in statistics and probability and their meaningful 
application in the real world. Students should be given the opportunity to approach this topic in a practical 
way,  to understand  why  certain  techniques  are used  and  to interpret  the results.  The use of technology 
such as simulations, spreadsheets, statistics software and statistics apps can greatly enhance this topic.
It is expected  that  most  of the calculations  required  will be carried  out using  technology,  but explanations 
of calculations  by hand  may  enhance  understanding.  The emphasis  is on choosing  the most  appropriate 
technique, and understanding and interpreting the results obtained in context.
In examinations  students  should  be familiar  with  how  to use the statistics  functionality  of allowed 
technology.
At SL the data set will be considered to be the population unless otherwise stated.
Sections  SL4.1  to SL4.9  are content  common  to both  Mathematics:  analysis  and  approaches  and 
Mathematics: applications and interpretation.
SL 4.1
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Concepts of population, sample, random sample, 
discrete and continuous data.This is designed to cover the key questions that 
students should ask when they see a data set/
analysis.
Reliability of data sources and bias in sampling. Dealing with missing data, errors in the recording of 
data.
Interpretation of outliers. Outlier is defined as a data item which is more than 
1.5 × interquartile range (IQR) from the nearest 
quartile.
Awareness that, in context, some outliers are a valid 
part of the sample but some outlying data items 
may be an error in the sample.
Link to : box and whisker diagrams (SL4.2) and 
measures of dispersion (SL4.3).
Sampling techniques and their effectiveness. Simple random, convenience, systematic, quota and 
stratified sampling methods.Syllabus content
51 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Connections
Links  to other  subjects:  Descriptive  statistics  and  random  samples  (biology,  psychology,  sports  exercise 
and  health  science,  environmental  systems  and  societies,  geography,  economics;  business  management); 
research methodologies (psychology).
Aim  8: Misleading  statistics;  examples  of problems  caused  by absence  of representative  samples,  for 
example  Google  flu predictor,  US presidential  elections  in 1936,  Literary  Digest  v George  Gallup,  Boston 
“pot-hole” app.
International-mindedness:  The Kinsey report–famous sampling techniques.
TOK:  Why  have  mathematics  and  statistics  sometimes  been  treated  as separate  subjects?  How  easy  is it to 
be misled by statistics? Is it ever justifiable to purposely use statistics to mislead others?
Download connections template
SL 4.2
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Presentation of data (discrete and continuous): 
frequency distributions (tables).Class intervals will be given as inequalities, without 
gaps.
Histograms.
Cumulative frequency; cumulative frequency 
graphs; use to find median, quartiles, percentiles, 
range and interquartile range (IQR).Frequency histograms with equal class intervals.
Not required:  Frequency density histograms.
Production and understanding of box and whisker 
diagrams.Use of box and whisker diagrams to compare two 
distributions, using symmetry, median, interquartile 
range or range. Outliers should be indicated with a 
cross.
Determining whether the data may be normally 
distributed by consideration of the symmetry of the 
box and whiskers.
Connections
Links to other subjects:  Presentation of data (sciences, individuals and societies).
International-mindedness:  Discussion  of the different  formulae  for the same  statistical  measure  (for 
example, variance).
TOK:  What  is the difference  between  information  and  data?  Does  “data”  mean  the same  thing  in different 
areas of knowledge?
Download connections template
SL 4.3
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Measures of central tendency (mean, median and 
mode).
Estimation of mean from grouped data.Calculation of mean using formula and technology.
Students should use mid-interval values to estimate 
the mean of grouped data.
Modal class. For equal class intervals only.
Measures of dispersion (interquartile range, 
standard deviation and variance).Calculation of standard deviation and variance of 
the sample using only technology, however hand 
calculations may enhance understanding.Syllabus content
52 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Variance is the square of the standard deviation.
Effect of constant changes on the original data. Examples:  If three is subtracted from the data items, 
then the mean is decreased by three, but the 
standard deviation is unchanged.
If all the data items are doubled, the mean is 
doubled and the standard deviation is also doubled.
Quartiles of discrete data. Using technology. Awareness that different 
methods for finding quartiles exist and therefore the 
values obtained using technology and by hand may 
differ.
Connections
Other  contexts:  Comparing  variation  and  spread  in populations,  human  or natural,  for example 
agricultural crop data, social indicators, reliability and maintenance.
Links  to other  subjects:  Descriptive  statistics  (sciences  and  individuals  and  societies);  consumer  price 
index (economics).
International-mindedness:  The benefits of sharing and analysing data from different countries; discussion 
of the different formulae for variance.
TOK:  Could  mathematics  make  alternative,  equally  true,  formulae?  What  does  this tell us about 
mathematical  truths?  Does  the use of statistics  lead  to an over-emphasis  on attributes  that  can be easily 
measured over those that cannot?
Download connections template
SL 4.4
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Linear correlation of bivariate data.
Pearson’s product-moment correlation coefficient,  r.Technology should be used to calculate r. However, 
hand calculations of r may enhance understanding.
Critical values of r will be given where appropriate.
Students should be aware that Pearson’s product 
moment correlation coefficient ( r) is only meaningful 
for linear relationships.
Scatter diagrams; lines of best fit, by eye, passing 
through the mean point.Positive, zero, negative; strong, weak, no correlation.
Students should be able to make the distinction 
between correlation and causation and know that 
correlation does not imply causation.
Equation of the regression line of y on x.
Use of the equation of the regression line for 
prediction purposes.
Interpret the meaning of the parameters,  a and b, in 
a linear regression y=ax+b.Technology should be used to find the equation.
Students should be aware:
• of the dangers of extrapolation
• that they cannot always reliably make a 
prediction of x from a value of  y, when using a y
on x line.
Connections
Other  contexts:  Linear  regressions  where  correlation  exists  between  two  variables.  Exploring  cause  and 
dependence for categorical variables, for example, on what factors might political persuasion depend?Syllabus content
53 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Links to other subjects:  Curves of best fit, correlation and causation (sciences); scatter graphs (geography).
Aim  8: The correlation  between  smoking  and  lung  cancer  was  “discovered”  using  mathematics.  Science 
had to justify the cause.
TOK:  Correlation  and  causation–can  we have  knowledge  of cause  and  effect  relationships  given  that  we 
can only  observe  correlation?  What factors affect the reliability and validity of mathematical models  in 
describing real-life phenomena?
Download connections template
SL 4.5
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Concepts of trial, outcome, equally likely outcomes, 
relative frequency, sample space ( U) and event.
The probability of an event A is P(A) =n(A)
n(U).
The complementary events A and A′ (not A).Sample spaces can be represented in many ways, for 
example as a table or a list.
Experiments using coins, dice, cards and so on, can 
enhance understanding of the distinction between 
experimental (relative frequency) and theoretical 
probability.
Simulations may be used to enhance this topic.
Expected number of occurrences. Example:  If there are 128 students in a class and the 
probability of being absent is 0.1, the expected 
number of absent students is 12.8.
Connections
Other contexts:  Actuarial  studies  and  the link between  probability  of life spans  and  insurance  premiums, 
government planning based on likely projected figures, Monte Carlo methods.
Links  to other  subjects:  Theoretical  genetics  and  Punnett  squares  (biology);  the position  of a particle 
(physics).
Aim 8:  The ethics of gambling.
International-mindedness:  The St Petersburg paradox; Chebyshev and Pavlovsky (Russian).
TOK:  To what  extent  are theoretical  and  experimental  probabilities  linked?  What  is the role  of emotion  in 
our perception of risk, for example in business, medicine and travel safety?
Use of technology:  Computer simulations may be useful to enhance this topic.
Download connections template
SL 4.6
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Use of Venn diagrams, tree diagrams, sample space 
diagrams and tables of outcomes to calculate 
probabilities.
Combined events: 
P(A∪B) = P( A) + P( B) … P( A∩B).
Mutually exclusive events: P (A∩B) = 0 .The non-exclusivity of “or”.
Conditional probability: P(A|B) =P(A∩B)
P(B).An alternate form of this is:
PA∩B= P BP(A|B).Syllabus content
54 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Problems can be solved with the aid of a Venn 
diagram, tree diagram, sample space diagram or 
table of outcomes without explicit use of formulae.
Probabilities with and without replacement.
Independent events: P(A∩B) = P( A)P(B).
Connections
Aim  8: The gambling  issue:  use of probability  in casinos.  Could  or should  mathematics  help  increase 
incomes in gambling?
TOK:  Can  calculation  of gambling  probabilities  be considered  an ethical  application  of mathematics? 
Should mathematicians be held responsible for unethical applications of their work?
Download connections template
SL 4.7
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Concept of discrete random variables and their 
probability distributions.
Expected value (mean), EX for discrete data.
Applications.Probability distributions will be given in the following ways:
X 1 2 3 4 5
P(X=x) 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 15 0 . 05 0 . 5
P(X=x) =1
18(4 + x) for x∈ {1, 2, 3} ;
EX= 0 indicates a fair game where X represents 
the gain of a player.
Connections
Other contexts:  Games of chance.
Aim  8: Why  has it been  argued  that  theories  based  on the calculable  probabilities  found  in casinos  are 
pernicious when applied to everyday life (for example, economics)?
TOK:  What do we mean by a “fair” game? Is it fair that casinos should make a profit?
Download connections template
SL 4.8
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Binomial distribution.
Mean and variance of the binomial distribution.Situations in which the binomial distribution is an 
appropriate model.
In examinations, binomial probabilities should be 
found using available technology.
Not required:  Formal proof of mean and variance.
Link to:  expected number of occurrences (SL4.5).
Connections
Aim 8:  Pascal’s triangle, attributing the origin of a mathematical discovery to the wrong mathematician.Syllabus content
55 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
International-mindedness:  The so-called  “Pascal’s  triangle”  was  known  to the Chinese  mathematician 
Yang Hui much earlier than Pascal.
TOK:  What criteria can we use to decide between different models?
Enrichment:  Hypothesis testing using the binomial distribution.
Download connections template
SL 4.9
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The normal distribution and curve.
Properties of the normal distribution.
Diagrammatic representation.Awareness of the natural occurrence of the normal 
distribution.
Students should be aware that approximately 68% 
of the data lies between μ±σ, 95% lies between 
μ± 2σ and 99.7% of the data lies between μ± 3σ.
Normal probability calculations. Probabilities and values of the variable must be found using technology.
Inverse normal calculations For inverse normal calculations mean and standard deviation will be given.
This does not involve transformation to the 
standardized normal variable z.
Connections
Links  to other  subjects:  Normally  distributed  real-life  measurements  and  descriptive  statistics  (sciences, 
psychology, environmental systems and societies)
Aim 8:  Why might the misuse of the normal distribution lead to dangerous inferences and conclusions?
International-mindedness:  De Moivre’s  derivation  of the normal  distribution  and  Quetelet’s  use of it to 
describe l’homme moyen .
TOK:  To what extent can we trust mathematical models such as the normal distribution? How can we know 
what to include, and what to exclude, in a model?
Download connections template
SL 4.10
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient, rs. In examinations Spearman’s rank correlation 
coefficient,  rs, should be found using technology.
If data items are equal, ranks should be averaged.
Awareness of the appropriateness and limitations of 
Pearson’s product moment correlation coefficient 
and Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient, and the 
effect of outliers on each.Students should be aware that Pearson’s product 
moment correlation coefficient is useful when 
testing for only linearity and Spearman’s correlation 
coefficient for any monotonic relationship.
Spearman’s correlation coefficient is less sensitive to 
outliers than Pearson’s product moment correlation 
coefficient.Syllabus content
56 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Not required:  Derivation/proof of Pearson’s product 
moment correlation coefficient and Spearman’s rank 
correlation coefficient.
Connections
Links  to other  subjects:  Fieldwork  (biology,  psychology,  environmental  systems  and  societies,  sports 
exercise and health science, geography).
Aim  8: The physicist  Frank  Oppenheimer  wrote:  “Prediction  is dependent  only  on the assumption  that 
observed  patterns  will be repeated”.  This  is the danger  of extrapolation.  There  are many  examples  of its 
failure in the past, for example share prices, the spread of disease, climate change.
TOK:  Does  correlation  imply  causation?  Mathematics  and  the world.  Given  that  a set of data  may  be 
approximately  fitted  by a range  of curves,  where  would  a mathematician  seek  for knowledge  of which 
equation is the “true” model?
Links to websites:  www.wikihow.com/Calculate-Spearman%27s-Rank-Correlation-Coefficient
External website:  Use of databases such as Gapminder.
Download connections template
SL 4.11
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Formulation of null and alternative hypotheses, 
H
0and H
1.
Significance levels.
p -values.Students should express H
0 and H
1 as an equation or 
inequality, or in words as appropriate.
Expected and observed frequencies.
The χ2 test for independence: contingency tables, 
degrees of freedom, critical value.
The χ2 goodness of fit test.In examinations:
• the maximum number of rows or columns in a 
contingency table will be 4
• the degrees of freedom will always be greater 
than one. At SL the degrees of freedom for the 
goodness of fit test will always be n… 1
• the χ2 critical value will be given if appropriate
• students will be expected to use technology to 
find a  p -value and the χ2 statistic
• only questions on upper tail tests with 
commonly-used significance levels (1%, 5%, 
10%) will be set
• students will be expected to either compare a p 
-value to the given significance level or 
compare the χ2 statistic to a given critical value
• expected frequencies will be greater than 5.
Hand calculations of the expected values or the χ2
statistic may enhance understanding.
If using χ2 tests in the IA, students should be aware 
of the limitations of the test for expected 
frequencies of 5 or less.Syllabus content
57 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The t -test.
Use of the p -value to compare the means of two 
populations.
Using one-tailed and two-tailed tests.In examinations calculations will be made using 
technology.
At SL, samples will be unpaired, and population 
variance will always be unknown.
Students will be asked to interpret the results of a 
test.
Students should know that the underlying 
distribution of the variables must be normal for the t 
-test to be applied. In examinations, students should 
assume that variance of the two groups is equal and 
therefore the pooled two-sample t -test should be 
used.
Connections
Other contexts:  Psychology:  A common  test is the Mann-Whitney  U test.  When  and  why  is this thought  to 
be a more reliable test in psychology?
Links  to other  subjects:  Fieldwork  (biology,  psychology,  environmental  systems  and  societies,  sports 
exercise and health science, geography).
TOK:  Why have some research journals “banned” p -values from their articles because they deem them too 
misleading?  In practical  terms,  is saying  that  a result  is significant  the same  as saying  it is true?  How  is the 
term “significant” used differently in different areas of knowledge?
Use of technology:  Use of simulations to generate data.
Enrichment:  When  performing  a χ2 test Yates  continuity  correction  is often  applied  to small  samples.  Is it 
universally  accepted  as a valid  method?  In what  situations  would  you use Yates  and  why?  Are there  other 
ways to deal with small sample sizes?
Download connections template
AHL content
Recommended teaching hours: 16
The aim of the AHL  content  in the statistics  and  probability  topic  is to extend  and  build  upon  the aims, 
concepts and skills from the standard level content. It allows students to develop skills in the design of data 
collection  methods  taking  consideration  of validity  and  reliability,  regression  is extended  to non-linear 
situations, concepts involving samples and populations are introduced and students will develop their skills 
in deciding  which  tests  to use in context.  Students  will be introduced  to transition  matrices  and  establish 
the links between matrices, probability and eigenvalues.
It is expected  that  students  will be able  to choose  appropriate  techniques  and  interpret  their  results. 
Students  are expected  to set up a problem  mathematically  and  then  calculate  the answers  using 
technology. Technology-specific language should not be used within these explanations.
AHL 4.12
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Design of valid data collection methods, such as 
surveys and questionnaires.
Selecting relevant variables from many variables.
Choosing relevant and appropriate data to analyse.Biased and unbiased, personal, unstructured and 
structured (with consistent answer choices), and 
precise questioning.Syllabus content
58 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Categorizing numerical data in a χ2 table and 
justifying the choice of categorisation.
Choosing an appropriate number of degrees of freedom when estimating parameters from data 
when carrying out the χ2 goodness of fit test.Appropriate categories should be chosen with 
expected frequencies greater than 5.
Definition of reliability and validity.
Reliability tests.
Validity tests.Students should understand the difference between 
reliability and validity and be familiar with the 
following methods:
Reliability: Test-retest, parallel forms.
Validity: Content, criterion-related.
Connections
Other contexts:  Data from social media behaviour and algorithms.
Links  to other  subjects:  Data  collection  in field  work  (biology,  psychology,  environmental  systems  and 
societies,  sports  exercise  and  health  science,  geography,  business  management  and  design  technology); 
data from social media and marketing sources (business management)
TOK:  What  are the strengths  and  limitations  of different  methods  of data  collection,  such  as 
questionnaires?
Download connections template
AHL 4.13
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Non-linear regression. Link to:  geometric sequences and series (SL1.3).
Evaluation of least squares regression curves using 
technology.In examinations, questions may be asked on linear, 
quadratic, cubic, exponential, power and sine 
regression.
Sum of square residuals ( SSres) as a measure of fit for 
a model.
The coefficient of determination ( R2).
Evaluation of R2 using technology.R2 gives the proportion of variability in the second 
variable accounted for by the chosen model.
Awareness that R2= 1 …SSres
SStot and hence = 1 if 
SSres= 0, may enhance understanding but will not 
be examined.
Awareness that many factors affect the validity of a 
model and the coefficient of determination, by itself, 
is not a good way to decide between different 
models.
The connection between the coefficient of 
determination and the Pearson’s product moment 
correlation coefficient for linear models.
Connections
Links to other subjects:  Evaluation of R2 in graphical analysis (sciences).Syllabus content
59 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Download connections template
AHL 4.14
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Linear transformation of a single random variable. Var X is the expected variance of the random 
variable X. Variance formula will not be required in 
examinations.
EaX+b=aEX+b.
VaraX+b=a2Var X.
Expected value of linear combinations of n random 
variables.
Variance of linear combinations of n independent 
random variables.
x¯ as an unbiased estimate of μ.
x¯=∑
i= 1nxi
n.
sn… 12 as an unbiased estimate of σ2.sn−12=n
n−1sn2=∑
i=1kfixi−x¯2
n−1, where n=∑
i= 1k
fi.
Demonstration that E(X¯) =μ and E(sn… 12) =σ2 will 
not be examined, but may help understanding.
Connections
TOK:  Mathematics  and  the world:  In the absence  of knowing  the value  of a parameter,  will an unbiased 
estimator always be better than a biased one?
Download connections template
AHL 4.15
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
A linear combination of  n independent normal 
random variables is normally distributed. In 
particular,
X~Nμ, σ2⇒X¯~Nμ,σ2
n.
Central limit theorem. In general, X¯ approaches normality for large n, how 
large depends upon the distribution from which the 
sample is taken. In examinations, n> 30  will be 
considered sufficient.
Online simulations are useful for visualisation.
Connections
Links  to other  subjects:  Data  from  multiple  samples  in field  studies  (sciences,  and  individuals  and 
societies).
Aim  8: Mathematics  and  the world.  “Without  the central  limit  theorem,  there  could  be no statistics  of any 
value within the human sciences”.Syllabus content
60 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
TOK:  The central  limit  theorem  can be proved  mathematically  (formalism),  but its truth  can be confirmed 
by its applications (empiricism). What does this suggest about the nature and methods of mathematics?
Enrichment:  For a normally  distributed  population  of size N, how  many  random  samples  of size n do you 
need to take in order to verify the central limit theorem?
Download connections template
AHL 4.16
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Confidence intervals for the mean of a normal 
population.Students should be able to interpret the meaning of 
their results in context.
Use of the normal distribution when σ is known and 
the t-distribution when σ is unknown, regardless of 
sample size.
Connections
Other contexts:  Forecasting–attaching value to claims and predictions.
Links to other subjects:  Analysis of data from field studies (sciences and individuals and societies).
TOK:  Mathematics and the world. Claiming brand A is “better” on average than brand B can mean very little 
if there is a large overlap between the confidence intervals of the two means.
Download connections template
AHL 4.17
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Poisson distribution, its mean and variance.
Sum of two independent Poisson distributions has a 
Poisson distribution.Situations in which it is appropriate to use a Poisson 
distribution as a model:
1. Events are independent
2. Events occur at a uniform average rate (during the 
period of interest).
Given a context, students should be able to select 
between the normal, the binomial and the Poisson 
distributions, recognizing where a particular 
distribution is appropriate.
Not required:  Formal proof of means and variances 
for probability distributions.
Connections
Other contexts:  Telecommunications,  call management,  traffic  management,  biological  mutations, 
emergency room admissions, typos in publications.
TOK:  To what  extent  can mathematical  models  such as the Poisson  distribution  be trusted?  What  role  do 
mathematical models play in other areas of knowledge?
Download connections template
AHL 4.18
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Critical values and critical regions.
Test for population mean for normal distribution.Use of the normal distribution when σ is known and 
the t-distribution when σ is unknown, regardless of 
sample size.
Samples may be paired or unpaired.
The case of matched pairs is to be treated as an 
example of a single sample technique.
Students will not be expected to calculate critical 
regions for t-tests.
Test for proportion using binomial distribution.
Test for population mean using Poisson distribution. Poisson and binomial tests will be one-tailed only.
Use of technology to test the hypothesis that the 
population product moment correlation coefficient 
(ρ) is 0 for bivariate normal distributions.In examinations the data will be given.
Type I and II errors including calculations of their 
probabilities.Applied to normal with known variance, Poisson and 
binomial distributions.
For discrete random variables, hypothesis tests and 
critical regions will only be required for one-tailed 
tests. The critical region will maximize the 
probability of a Type I error while keeping it less than the stated significance level.
Connections
Links to other subjects:  Field studies (sciences and individuals and societies).
TOK:  Mathematics  and  the world.  In practical  terms,  is saying  that  a result  is significant  the same  as saying 
that  it is true?  Mathematics  and  the world.  Does  the ability  to test only  certain  parameters  in a population 
affect the way knowledge claims in the human sciences are valued? When is it more important not to make 
a Type I error and when is it more important not to make a Type II error?
Download connections template
AHL 4.19
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Transition matrices.
Powers of transition matrices.In general, the column state matrix ( sn) after n
transitions is given by sn=Tns0, where T is the 
transition matrix, with Ti j representing the 
probability of moving from state j to state i, and s0 is 
the initial state matrix.
Use of transition diagrams to represent transitions in 
discrete dynamical systems.
Regular Markov chains.
Initial state probability matrices.
Calculation of steady state and long-term 
probabilities by repeated multiplication of the transition matrix or by solving a system of linear 
equations.Awareness that the solution is the eigenvector 
corresponding to the eigenvalue equal to 1.
Link to:  matrices (AHL1.14), eigenvalues (AHL1.15) 
and adjacency matrices (AHL3.15).
Connections
Other contexts:  Absorbing states for Markov chains, the gambler’s ruin problem.
Website:  Simulation for Markov chains: setosa.io/blog/2014/07/26/markov-chains/
Enrichment:  Leslie matrices are used extensively in biology.
Download connections template
Topic 5: Calculus
Concepts
Essential understandings:
Calculus  describes  rates  of change  between  two  variables  and  the accumulation  of limiting  areas. 
Understanding  these  rates  of change  allows  us to model,  interpret  and  analyze  real-world  problems  and 
situations.  Calculus  helps  us understand  the behaviour  of functions  and  allows  us to interpret  the features 
of their graphs.
Suggested concepts embedded in this topic:
Change, patterns, relationships, approximation, space, generalization.
AHL:  Systems, quantity.
Content-specific conceptual understandings:
• Students will understand the links between the derivative and the rate of change and interpret the 
meaning of this in context.
• Students will understand the relationship between the integral and area and interpret the meaning of 
this in context.
• Finding patterns in the derivatives of polynomials and their behavior, such as increasing or decreasing, 
allows a deeper appreciation of the properties of the function at any given point or instant.
• Calculus is a concise form of communication used to approximate nature.
• Numerical integration can be used to approximate areas in the physical world.
• Optimization of a function allows us to find the largest or smallest value that a function can take in 
general and can be applied to a specific set of conditions to solve problems.
• Maximum and minimum points help to solve optimization problems.
• The area under a function on a graph has a meaning and has applications in space and time.
AHL
• Kinematics allows us to describe the motion and direction of objects in closed systems in terms of 
displacement, velocity, and acceleration.
• Many physical phenomena can be modelled using differential equations and analytic and numeric 
methods can be used to calculate optimum quantities.
• Phase portraits enable us to visualize the behavior of dynamic systems.
SL content
Recommended teaching hours: 19
The aim of the standard level content in the calculus topic is to introduce students to the key concepts and 
techniques of differential and integral calculus and their use to approach practical problems.
Throughout  this topic  students  should  be given  the opportunity  to use technology  such as graphing 
packages and graphing calculators to develop and apply their knowledge of calculus.
Sections  SL5.1  to SL5.5  are content  common  to both  Mathematics:  analysis  and  approaches  and 
Mathematics: applications and interpretation.
SL 5.1
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Introduction to the concept of a limit. Estimation of the value of a limit from a table or 
graph.
Not required:  Formal analytic methods of 
calculating limits.
Derivative interpreted as gradient function and as 
rate of change.Forms of notation: dy
dx, f′(x), dV
dr or ds
dt for the first 
derivative.
Informal understanding of the gradient of a curve as 
a limit.
Connections
Links  to other  subjects:  Marginal  cost,  marginal  revenue,  marginal  profit,  market  structures  (economics); 
kinematics,  induced  emf  and  simple  harmonic  motion  (physics);  interpreting  the gradient  of a curve 
(chemistry)
Aim  8: The debate  over  whether  Newton  or Leibnitz  discovered  certain  calculus  concepts;  how  the Greeks’ 
distrust of zero meant that Archimedes’ work did not lead to calculus.
International-mindedness:  Attempts by Indian mathematicians (500-1000 CE) to explain division by zero.
TOK:  What  value  does  the knowledge  of limits  have?  Is infinitesimal  behaviour  applicable  to real life?  Is 
intuition a valid way of knowing in mathematics?
Use of technology:  Spreadsheets, dynamic graphing software and GDC should be used to explore ideas of 
limits, numerically and graphically. Hypotheses can be formed and then tested using technology.
Download connections template
SL 5.2
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Increasing and decreasing functions.
Graphical interpretation of 
f′(x) > 0, f′(x) = 0, f′(x) < 0.Identifying intervals on which functions are 
increasing (f′(x) > 0)  or decreasing (f′(x) < 0) .
Connections
Download connections template
SL 5.3
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Derivative of f(x) =axn is f′(x) =anxn… 1, n∈ℤ
The derivative of functions of the form 
fx=axn+bxn… 1+ …  where all exponents are 
integers.
Connections
TOK:  The seemingly  abstract  concept  of calculus  allows  us to create  mathematical  models  that  permit 
human  feats  such as getting  a man  on the Moon.  What  does  this tell us about  the links  between 
mathematical models and reality?
Download connections template
SL 5.4
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Tangents and normals at a given point, and their 
equations.Use of both analytic approaches and technology.
Connections
Links  to other  subjects:  Instantaneous  velocity  and  optics,  equipotential  surfaces  (physics);  price  elasticity 
(economics).
TOK:  In what  ways  has technology  impacted  how  knowledge  is produced  and  shared  in mathematics? 
Does  technology  simply  allow  us to arrange  existing  knowledge  in new  and  different  ways,  or should  this 
arrangement itself be considered knowledge?
Download connections template
SL 5.5
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Introduction to integration as anti-differentiation of 
functions of the form f(x) =axn+bxn… 1+ ....,
where n∈ℤ, n≠ … 1 .Students should be aware of the link between anti-
derivatives, definite integrals and area.
Anti-differentiation with a boundary condition to 
determine the constant term.Example:  If dy
dx= 3x2+x and y= 10  when x= 1, 
then y=x3+1
2x2+ 8.5 .
Definite integrals using technology.
Area of a region enclosed by a curve y=f(x) and 
the x-axis, where f(x) > 0 .Students are expected to first write a correct 
expression before calculating the area, for example 
∫
26
(3x2+ 4)d x.
The use of dynamic geometry or graphing software 
is encouraged in the development of this concept.
Connections
Other contexts:  Velocity-time graphsSyllabus content
63 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Links  to other  subjects:  Velocity-time  and  acceleration-time  graphs  (physics  and  sports  exercise  and 
health science)
TOK:  Is it possible for an area of knowledge to describe the world without transforming it?
Download connections template
SL 5.6
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Values of x where the gradient of a curve is zero.
Solution of f′(x) = 0 .
Local maximum and minimum points.Students should be able to use technology to 
generate f′(x) given f(x), and find the solutions of 
f′(x) = 0 .
Awareness that the local maximum/minimum will 
not necessarily be the greatest/least value of the 
function in the given domain.
Connections
Other contexts:  Profit, area, volume, cost.
Links to other subjects:  Displacement-time and velocity-time graphs and simple harmonic motion graphs 
(physics).
TOK:  Is it possible for an area of knowledge to describe the world without transforming it?
Download connections template
SL 5.7
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Optimisation problems in context. Examples:  Maximizing profit, minimizing cost, 
maximizing volume for a given surface area.
In SL examinations, questions on kinematics will not 
be set.
Connections
Other contexts:  Efficient use of material in packaging.
Links to other subjects:  Kinematics (physics); allocative efficiency (economics).
TOK:  How  can the rise in tax for plastic  containers,  for example  plastic  bags,  plastic  bottles  etc be justified 
using optimization?
Download connections template
SL 5.8
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Approximating areas using the trapezoidal rule. Given a table of data or a function, make an estimate 
for the value of an area using the trapezoidal rule, 
with intervals of equal width.
Link to:  upper and lower bounds (SL1.6) and areas 
under curves (SL5.5).Syllabus content
64 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Connections
Other contexts:  Irregular areas that are not described by mathematical functions, for example lakes.
Links to other subjects:  Kinematics (Physics).
Use  of technology:  Use dynamic  graphing  software  to calculate  the approximate  area  under  a curve  and 
interpret its meaning.
Enrichment:  Exploring other numerical integration techniques such as Simpson’s rule.
Download connections template
AHL content
Recommended teaching hours: 22 hours
The aim of the AHL  content  in the calculus  topic  is to extend  and  build  upon  the aims,  concepts  and  skills 
from  the standard  level  content.  Further  differential  and  integral  calculus  techniques  are introduced  to 
enable students to model and interpret practical contexts.
AHL 5.9
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The derivatives of sin x, cos  x, tan x, ex, ln x, xn where 
n∈ℚ.
The chain rule, product rule and quotient rules.
Related rates of change.Link to : maximum and minimum points (SL5.6) and 
optimisation (SL5.7).
Connections
Links to other subjects:  Uniform circular motion and induced emf (physics).
TOK:  Euler was able to make important advances in mathematical analysis before calculus had been put on 
a solid  theoretical  foundation  by Cauchy  and  others.  However,  some  work  was  not possible  until  after 
Cauchy’s  work.  What  does  this suggest  about  the nature  of progress  and  development  in mathematics? 
How might  this be similar/different  to the nature  of progress  and  development  in other  areas  of 
knowledge?
Download connections template
AHL 5.10
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
The second derivative.Both forms of notation, d2y
dx2 and f′′(x) for the 
second derivative.
Use of second derivative test to distinguish between 
a maximum and a minimum point.Awareness that a point of inflexion is a point at 
which the concavity changes and interpretation of 
this in context.
Use of the terms “concave-up” for f′′x> 0, and 
“concave-down” for f′′x< 0.
Link to:  kinematics (AHL5.13) and second order 
differential equations (AHL5.18).
Connections
Links to other subjects:  Simple harmonic motion (physics).Syllabus content
65 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
TOK:  Music  can be expressed  using  mathematics.  Does  this mean  that  music  is mathematical/that 
mathematics is musical?
Download connections template
AHL 5.11
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Definite and indefinite integration of xn where 
n∈ℚ, including n= … 1  , sin x, cos x, 1
cos2x and ex.
Integration by inspection, or substitution of the 
form ∫f(g(x))g′(x)dx.Examples: ∫sin(2 x+ 5)d x, ∫1
3x+ 2dx, 
∫4xsinx2dx,∫sinx
cosxdx.
Connections
International-mindedness:  The successful  calculation  of the volume  of a pyramidal  frustrum  by ancient 
Egyptians (the Egyptian Moscow mathematical papyrus).
Download connections template
AHL 5.12
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Area of the region enclosed by a curve and the x or 
y-axes in a given interval.Including negative integrals.
Volumes of revolution about the  x- axis or y- axis.
V=∫
ab
πy2dx or V=∫
ab
πx2dy
Connections
Other contexts:  Industrial design; architecture.
International-mindedness:  Accurate calculation of the volume of a cylinder by Chinese mathematician Liu 
Hui;  use of infinitesimals  by Greek  geometers;  Ibn Al Haytham,  the first mathematician  to calculate  the 
integral of a function in order to find the volume of a paraboloid.
Download connections template
AHL 5.13
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Kinematic problems involving displacement s, 
velocity v and acceleration a.v=ds
dt; a=dv
dt=d2s
dt2=vdv
ds.
Displacement = ∫t1t2
v(t)dt.
Total distance travelled = ∫t1t2
|v(t)|dt.
Speed is the magnitude of velocity.Syllabus content
68 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Connections
Links to other subjects:  Kinematics (physics).
International-mindedness:  Does  the inclusion  of kinematics  as core  mathematics  reflect  a particular 
cultural heritage? Who decides what mathematics is?
TOK:  What  is the role  of convention  in mathematics?  Is this similar  or different  to the role  of convention  in 
other areas of knowledge?
Download connections template
AHL 5.14
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Setting up a model/differential equation from a 
context.Example:  The growth of an algae  G, at time  t, is 
proportional to G.
Solving by separation of variables. Example:  An exponential model as a solution of 
dy
dx=ky.
The term “general solution”.
Connections
Download connections template
AHL 5.15
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Slope fields and their diagrams. Students will be required to use and interpret slope 
fields.
Connections
TOK:  In what  ways  do values  affect  our representations  of the world,  for example  in statistics,  maps,  visual 
images or diagrams?
Download connections template
AHL 5.16
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Euler’s method for finding the approximate solution 
to first order differential equations.
Numerical solution of dy
dx=f(x,y).Spreadsheets should be used to find approximate 
solutions to differential equations.
In examinations, values will be generated using 
permissible technology.Syllabus content
69 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Numerical solution of the coupled system 
dx
dt=f1(x,y,t) and dy
dt=f2(x,y,t).Contexts could include predator-prey models.
Connections
Other contexts:  The SIR model for infection as an extension of the method; Lotka-Volterra models.
TOK:  To what  extent  is certainty  attainable  in mathematics?  Is certainty  attainable,  or desirable,  in other 
areas of knowledge?
Enrichment:  Runge-Kutta methods.
Download connections template
AHL 5.17
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Phase portrait for the solutions of coupled 
differential equations of the form:
dx
dt=ax+by
dy
dt=cx+dy.
Qualitative analysis of future paths for distinct, real, 
complex and imaginary eigenvalues.
Sketching trajectories and using phase portraits to 
identify key features such as equilibrium points, 
stable populations and saddle points.Systems will have distinct, non-zero, eigenvalues.
If the eigenvalues are:
• Positive or complex with positive real part, all 
solutions move away from the origin
• Negative or complex with negative real part, all 
solutions move towards the origin
• Complex, the solutions form a spiral
• Imaginary, the solutions form a circle or ellipse
• Real with different signs (one positive, one 
negative) the origin is a saddle point.
Calculation of exact solutions is only required for the 
case of real distinct eigenvalues.
Link to:  eigenvectors and eigenvalues (AHL1.15).
Connections
Other contexts:  Jacobian  matrix  is used  to investigate  the stability  of equilibrium  states  for non-linear 
differential equations.
Download connections template
AHL 5.18
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
Solutions of d2x
dt2=f(x,dx
dt,t) by Euler’s method. Write as coupled first order equations dx
dt=y and 
dy
dt=f(x,y,t).
Solutions of d2x
dt2+adx
dt+b= 0, can also be 
investigated using the phase portrait method in AHL 
5.17 above.
Understanding the occurrence of simple second 
order differential equations in physical phenomena Syllabus content
70 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Content Guidance, clarification and syllabus links
would aid understanding but in examinations the 
equation will be given.
Connections
TOK:  How  have  notable  individuals  such  as Euler  shaped  the development  of mathematics  as an area  of 
knowledge?
Use of technology:  Use of spreadsheets to generate values.
Download connections template
General
Assessment  is an integral  part  of teaching  and  learning.  The most  important  aim of assessment  in the DP is 
that  it should  support  curricular  goals  and  encourage  appropriate  student  learning.  Both  external  and 
internal  assessments  are used  in the DP. IB examiners  mark  work  produced  for external  assessment,  while 
work produced for internal assessment is marked by teachers and externally moderated by the IB.
There are two types of assessment identified by the IB.
Formative  assessment  informs  both  teaching  and  learning.  It is concerned  with  providing  accurate  and 
helpful  feedback  to students  and  teachers  on the kind  of learning  taking place  and  the nature  of students’ 
strengths  and  weaknesses  in order  to help  develop  students’  understanding  and  capabilities.  Formative 
assessment  can also  help  to improve  teaching  quality,  as it can provide  information  to monitor  progress 
towards meeting the course aims and objectives.
Summative  assessment  gives  an overview  of previous  learning  and  is concerned  with  measuring  student 
achievement.
The DP primarily focuses on summative assessment designed to record student achievement at, or towards 
the end of, the course of study. However, many of the assessment instruments can also be used formatively 
during  the course  of teaching  and  learning,  and  teachers  are encouraged  to do this.  A comprehensive 
assessment  plan  is viewed  as being  integral  with  teaching,  learning  and  course  organization.  For further 
information, see the IB  Programme standards and practices  document.
The approach  to assessment  used  by the IB is criterion-related,  not norm-referenced.  This  approach  to 
assessment  judges  students’  work  by their  performance  in relation  to identified  levels  of attainment,  and 
not in relation  to the work  of other  students.  For further  information  on assessment  within  the DP please 
refer to the publication DP assessment: Principles and practice .
To support  teachers  in the planning,  delivery  and  assessment  of the DP courses,  a variety  of resources  can 
be found  on the programme  resource  centre  or purchased  from  the IB store  (store.ibo.org).  Additional 
publications  such  as specimen  papers  and  markschemes,  teacher  support  materials,  subject  reports  and 
grade descriptors can also be found on the programme resource centre. Past examination papers as well as 
markschemes can be purchased from the IB store.
Methods of assessment
The IB uses several methods to assess work produced by students.
Assessment criteria
Assessment  criteria  are used  when  the assessment  task  is open-ended.  Each  criterion  concentrates  on a 
particular  skill that  students  are expected  to demonstrate.  An assessment  objective  describes  what 
students should be able to do, and assessment criteria describe how well they should be able to do it. Using 
assessment criteria allows discrimination between different answers and encourages a variety of responses. 
Each  criterion  comprises  a set of hierarchically-ordered  level descriptors.  Each  level descriptor  is worth  one 
or more marks. Each criterion is applied independently using a best-fit model. The maximum marks for each 
criterion may differ according to the criterion’s importance. The marks awarded for each criterion are added 
together to give the total mark for the piece of work.
Markbands
Markbands  are a comprehensive  statement  of expected  performance  against  which  responses  are judged. 
They represent a single holistic criterion divided into level descriptors. Each level descriptor corresponds to 
a range  of marks  to differentiate  student  performance.  A best-fit  approach  is used  to ascertain  which 
particular mark to use from the possible range for each level descriptor.
Analytic markschemes
Analytic  markschemes  are prepared  for those  examination  questions  that  expect  a particular  kind  of 
response and/or a given final answer from students. They give detailed instructions to examiners on how to 
break down the total mark for each question for different parts of the response.
Marking notes
For some  assessment  components  marked  using  assessment  criteria,  marking  notes  are provided.  Marking 
notes give guidance on how to apply assessment criteria to the particular requirements of a question.
Inclusive assessment arrangements
Inclusive  assessment  arrangements  are available  for candidates  with  assessment  access  requirements. 
These  arrangements  enable  candidates  with  diverse  needs  to access  the examinations  and  demonstrate 
their knowledge and understanding of the constructs being assessed.
The IB’s Access  and  inclusion  policy  provides  details  on all the inclusive  assessment  arrangements  available 
to candidates with learning support requirements. The IB document Learning diversity and inclusion in the IB 
programmes  outlines  the position  of the IB with  regard  to candidates  with  diverse  learning  needs  in the IB 
programmes.  For candidates  affected  by adverse  circumstances,  the IB documents  General  regulations: 
Diploma  Programme  and  Diploma  Programme  Assessment  procedures  provide  details  on access 
consideration.
Responsibilities of the school
The school  is required  to ensure  that  that  equal  access  arrangements  and  reasonable  adjustments  are 
provided  to candidates  with  learning  support  requirements  that  are in line with  the IB documents  Access 
and inclusion policy  and Learning diversity and inclusion in the IB programmes.
Assessment in the Diploma Programme
73 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
First assessment 2021
Assessment component Weighting
External assessment (3 hours)
Paper 1 (90 minutes)
Technology required. (80 marks)
Compulsory short-response questions based on the syllabus. (80 marks)80%
40%
Paper 2 (90 minutes)
Technology required. (80 marks)
Compulsory extended-response questions based on the syllabus. (80 marks)40%
Internal assessment
This component is internally assessed by the teacher and externally moderated by the IB at 
the end of the course.
Mathematical exploration
Internal assessment in mathematics is an individual exploration. This is a piece of written 
work that involves investigating an area of mathematics. (20 marks)20%
Assessment
Assessment outline—SL
74 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
First assessment 2021
Assessment component Weighting
External assessment (5 hours)
Paper 1 (120 minutes)
Technology required. (110 marks)
Compulsory short-response questions based on the syllabus.80%
30%
Paper 2 (120 minutes)
Technology required. (110 marks)
Compulsory extended-response questions based on the syllabus.30%
Paper 3 (60 minutes)
Technology required. (55 marks)
Two cumpulsory extended response problem-solving questions.20%
Internal assessment
This component is internally assessed by the teacher and externally moderated by the IB at 
the end of the course.
Mathematical exploration
Internal assessment in mathematics is an individual exploration. This is a piece of written 
work that involves investigating an area of mathematics. (20 marks)20%
Assessment
Assessment outline—HL
75 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.
External assessment details—SL
General information
Paper 1 and paper 2
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with HL.
Calculators
For both  examination  papers,  students  must  have  access  to a graphic  display  calculator  (GDC)  at all times. 
Regulations covering the types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility of the school to download a copy from IBIS or the Programme Resource Centre and to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In paper 1 and paper 2, full marks are not necessarily awarded for a correct answer with no working. Where 
an answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  this is shown  by written 
working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 1 hour 30 minutes
Weighting: 40%
• This paper consists of compulsory short-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to test students’ knowledge and understanding across the breadth of the 
syllabus. However, it should not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Assessment
External assessment
76 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 80 marks, representing  40%  of the final mark.
Question type
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty are set.
• One or more steps may be needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Paper 2
Duration: 1 hour 30 minutes
Weighting: 40%
• This paper consists of compulsory extended-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of  all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to assess students’ knowledge and understanding of the syllabus in 
depth. The range of syllabus topics tested in this paper may be narrower than that tested in paper 1.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth  80 marks, representing  40%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is upon sustained 
reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth  55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not 
be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline in difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of the question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.External assessment
77 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
For all three examination papers, students must have access to a GDC at all times. Regulations covering the 
types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the programme  resource  centre  and  to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers 1, 2 and 3, full marks are not necessarily awarded for a correct answer with no working. Where an 
answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  this is shown  by written 
working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory short-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to test students’ knowledge and understanding across the breadth of the 
syllabus. However, it should not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
Question type
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty are set.
• One or more steps may be needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory extended-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of  all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to assess students’ knowledge and understanding of the syllabus in 
depth. The range of syllabus topics tested in this paper may be narrower than that tested in paper 1.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is upon sustained 
reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth  55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not 
be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline in difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of the question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.External assessment
78 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
For all three examination papers, students must have access to a GDC at all times. Regulations covering the 
types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the programme  resource  centre  and  to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers 1, 2 and 3, full marks are not necessarily awarded for a correct answer with no working. Where an 
answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  this is shown  by written 
working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory short-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to test students’ knowledge and understanding across the breadth of the 
syllabus. However, it should not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
Question type
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty are set.
• One or more steps may be needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory extended-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of  all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to assess students’ knowledge and understanding of the syllabus in 
depth. The range of syllabus topics tested in this paper may be narrower than that tested in paper 1.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is upon sustained 
reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth  55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not 
be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline in difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of the question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.External assessment
78 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
For all three examination papers, students must have access to a GDC at all times. Regulations covering the 
types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the programme  resource  centre  and  to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers 1, 2 and 3, full marks are not necessarily awarded for a correct answer with no working. Where an 
answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  this is shown  by written 
working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory short-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to test students’ knowledge and understanding across the breadth of the 
syllabus. However, it should not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
Question type
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty are set.
• One or more steps may be needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory extended-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of  all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to assess students’ knowledge and understanding of the syllabus in 
depth. The range of syllabus topics tested in this paper may be narrower than that tested in paper 1.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is upon sustained 
reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth  55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not 
be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline in difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of the question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.External assessment
78 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
For all three examination papers, students must have access to a GDC at all times. Regulations covering the 
types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the programme  resource  centre  and  to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers 1, 2 and 3, full marks are not necessarily awarded for a correct answer with no working. Where an 
answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  this is shown  by written 
working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory short-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to test students’ knowledge and understanding across the breadth of the 
syllabus. However, it should not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
Question type
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty are set.
• One or more steps may be needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory extended-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of  all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to assess students’ knowledge and understanding of the syllabus in 
depth. The range of syllabus topics tested in this paper may be narrower than that tested in paper 1.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is upon sustained 
reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth  55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not 
be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline in difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of the question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.External assessment
78 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
For all three examination papers, students must have access to a GDC at all times. Regulations covering the 
types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the programme  resource  centre  and  to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers 1, 2 and 3, full marks are not necessarily awarded for a correct answer with no working. Where an 
answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  this is shown  by written 
working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory short-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to test students’ knowledge and understanding across the breadth of the 
syllabus. However, it should not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
Question type
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty are set.
• One or more steps may be needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory extended-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of  all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to assess students’ knowledge and understanding of the syllabus in 
depth. The range of syllabus topics tested in this paper may be narrower than that tested in paper 1.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is upon sustained 
reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth  55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not 
be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline in difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of the question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.External assessment
78 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
For all three examination papers, students must have access to a GDC at all times. Regulations covering the 
types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the programme  resource  centre  and  to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers 1, 2 and 3, full marks are not necessarily awarded for a correct answer with no working. Where an 
answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  this is shown  by written 
working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory short-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to test students’ knowledge and understanding across the breadth of the 
syllabus. However, it should not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
Question type
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty are set.
• One or more steps may be needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory extended-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of  all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to assess students’ knowledge and understanding of the syllabus in 
depth. The range of syllabus topics tested in this paper may be narrower than that tested in paper 1.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is upon sustained 
reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth  55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not 
be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline in difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of the question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.External assessment
78 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
For all three examination papers, students must have access to a GDC at all times. Regulations covering the 
types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the programme  resource  centre  and  to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers 1, 2 and 3, full marks are not necessarily awarded for a correct answer with no working. Where an 
answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  this is shown  by written 
working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory short-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to test students’ knowledge and understanding across the breadth of the 
syllabus. However, it should not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
Question type
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty are set.
• One or more steps may be needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory extended-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of  all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to assess students’ knowledge and understanding of the syllabus in 
depth. The range of syllabus topics tested in this paper may be narrower than that tested in paper 1.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is upon sustained 
reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth  55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not 
be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline in difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of the question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.External assessment
78 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
For all three examination papers, students must have access to a GDC at all times. Regulations covering the 
types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the programme  resource  centre  and  to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers 1, 2 and 3, full marks are not necessarily awarded for a correct answer with no working. Where an 
answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  this is shown  by written 
working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory short-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to test students’ knowledge and understanding across the breadth of the 
syllabus. However, it should not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
Question type
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty are set.
• One or more steps may be needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory extended-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of  all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to assess students’ knowledge and understanding of the syllabus in 
depth. The range of syllabus topics tested in this paper may be narrower than that tested in paper 1.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is upon sustained 
reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth  55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not 
be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline in difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of the question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.External assessment
78 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
For all three examination papers, students must have access to a GDC at all times. Regulations covering the 
types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the programme  resource  centre  and  to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers 1, 2 and 3, full marks are not necessarily awarded for a correct answer with no working. Where an 
answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  this is shown  by written 
working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory short-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to test students’ knowledge and understanding across the breadth of the 
syllabus. However, it should not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
Question type
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty are set.
• One or more steps may be needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory extended-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of  all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to assess students’ knowledge and understanding of the syllabus in 
depth. The range of syllabus topics tested in this paper may be narrower than that tested in paper 1.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is upon sustained 
reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth  55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not 
be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline in difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of the question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.External assessment
78 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
For all three examination papers, students must have access to a GDC at all times. Regulations covering the 
types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the programme  resource  centre  and  to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers 1, 2 and 3, full marks are not necessarily awarded for a correct answer with no working. Where an 
answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  this is shown  by written 
working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory short-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to test students’ knowledge and understanding across the breadth of the 
syllabus. However, it should not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
Question type
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty are set.
• One or more steps may be needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory extended-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of  all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to assess students’ knowledge and understanding of the syllabus in 
depth. The range of syllabus topics tested in this paper may be narrower than that tested in paper 1.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is upon sustained 
reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth  55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not 
be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline in difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of the question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.External assessment
78 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
For all three examination papers, students must have access to a GDC at all times. Regulations covering the 
types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the programme  resource  centre  and  to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers 1, 2 and 3, full marks are not necessarily awarded for a correct answer with no working. Where an 
answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  this is shown  by written 
working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory short-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to test students’ knowledge and understanding across the breadth of the 
syllabus. However, it should not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
Question type
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty are set.
• One or more steps may be needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory extended-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of  all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to assess students’ knowledge and understanding of the syllabus in 
depth. The range of syllabus topics tested in this paper may be narrower than that tested in paper 1.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is upon sustained 
reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth  55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not 
be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline in difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of the question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.External assessment
78 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
For all three examination papers, students must have access to a GDC at all times. Regulations covering the 
types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the programme  resource  centre  and  to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers 1, 2 and 3, full marks are not necessarily awarded for a correct answer with no working. Where an 
answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  this is shown  by written 
working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory short-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to test students’ knowledge and understanding across the breadth of the 
syllabus. However, it should not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
Question type
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty are set.
• One or more steps may be needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory extended-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of  all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to assess students’ knowledge and understanding of the syllabus in 
depth. The range of syllabus topics tested in this paper may be narrower than that tested in paper 1.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is upon sustained 
reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth  55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not 
be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline in difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of the question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.External assessment
78 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
For all three examination papers, students must have access to a GDC at all times. Regulations covering the 
types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the programme  resource  centre  and  to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers 1, 2 and 3, full marks are not necessarily awarded for a correct answer with no working. Where an 
answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  this is shown  by written 
working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory short-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to test students’ knowledge and understanding across the breadth of the 
syllabus. However, it should not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
Question type
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty are set.
• One or more steps may be needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory extended-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of  all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to assess students’ knowledge and understanding of the syllabus in 
depth. The range of syllabus topics tested in this paper may be narrower than that tested in paper 1.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is upon sustained 
reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth  55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not 
be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline in difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of the question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.External assessment
78 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
For all three examination papers, students must have access to a GDC at all times. Regulations covering the 
types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the programme  resource  centre  and  to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers 1, 2 and 3, full marks are not necessarily awarded for a correct answer with no working. Where an 
answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  this is shown  by written 
working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory short-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to test students’ knowledge and understanding across the breadth of the 
syllabus. However, it should not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
Question type
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty are set.
• One or more steps may be needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory extended-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of  all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to assess students’ knowledge and understanding of the syllabus in 
depth. The range of syllabus topics tested in this paper may be narrower than that tested in paper 1.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is upon sustained 
reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth  55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not 
be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline in difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of the question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.External assessment
78 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
For all three examination papers, students must have access to a GDC at all times. Regulations covering the 
types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the programme  resource  centre  and  to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers 1, 2 and 3, full marks are not necessarily awarded for a correct answer with no working. Where an 
answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  this is shown  by written 
working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory short-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to test students’ knowledge and understanding across the breadth of the 
syllabus. However, it should not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
Question type
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty are set.
• One or more steps may be needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory extended-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of  all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to assess students’ knowledge and understanding of the syllabus in 
depth. The range of syllabus topics tested in this paper may be narrower than that tested in paper 1.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is upon sustained 
reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth  55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not 
be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline in difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of the question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.External assessment
78 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
For all three examination papers, students must have access to a GDC at all times. Regulations covering the 
types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the programme  resource  centre  and  to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers 1, 2 and 3, full marks are not necessarily awarded for a correct answer with no working. Where an 
answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  this is shown  by written 
working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory short-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to test students’ knowledge and understanding across the breadth of the 
syllabus. However, it should not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
Question type
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty are set.
• One or more steps may be needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory extended-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of  all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to assess students’ knowledge and understanding of the syllabus in 
depth. The range of syllabus topics tested in this paper may be narrower than that tested in paper 1.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is upon sustained 
reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth  55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not 
be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline in difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of the question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.External assessment
78 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
For all three examination papers, students must have access to a GDC at all times. Regulations covering the 
types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the programme  resource  centre  and  to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers 1, 2 and 3, full marks are not necessarily awarded for a correct answer with no working. Where an 
answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  this is shown  by written 
working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory short-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to test students’ knowledge and understanding across the breadth of the 
syllabus. However, it should not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
Question type
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty are set.
• One or more steps may be needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory extended-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of  all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to assess students’ knowledge and understanding of the syllabus in 
depth. The range of syllabus topics tested in this paper may be narrower than that tested in paper 1.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is upon sustained 
reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth  55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not 
be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline in difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of the question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.External assessment
78 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
For all three examination papers, students must have access to a GDC at all times. Regulations covering the 
types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the programme  resource  centre  and  to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers 1, 2 and 3, full marks are not necessarily awarded for a correct answer with no working. Where an 
answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  this is shown  by written 
working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory short-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to test students’ knowledge and understanding across the breadth of the 
syllabus. However, it should not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
Question type
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty are set.
• One or more steps may be needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory extended-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of  all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to assess students’ knowledge and understanding of the syllabus in 
depth. The range of syllabus topics tested in this paper may be narrower than that tested in paper 1.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is upon sustained 
reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth  55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not 
be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline in difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of the question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.External assessment
78 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
For all three examination papers, students must have access to a GDC at all times. Regulations covering the 
types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the programme  resource  centre  and  to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers 1, 2 and 3, full marks are not necessarily awarded for a correct answer with no working. Where an 
answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  this is shown  by written 
working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory short-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to test students’ knowledge and understanding across the breadth of the 
syllabus. However, it should not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
Question type
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty are set.
• One or more steps may be needed to solve each question.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory extended-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of  all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to assess students’ knowledge and understanding of the syllabus in 
depth. The range of syllabus topics tested in this paper may be narrower than that tested in paper 1.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%  of the final mark.
• Questions of varying levels of difficulty and length are set. Therefore, individual questions may not 
necessarily each be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each 
question is indicated at the start of the question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses.
• Individual questions may require knowledge of more than one topic.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline of difficulty, from relatively easy tasks at the start of a 
question to relatively difficult tasks at the end of a question. The emphasis is upon sustained 
reasoning.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour
Weighting: 20%
• This paper consists of two compulsory extended-response problem-solving questions.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question part will necessarily require its use.
Syllabus coverage
• Where possible, the first part of each question will be on syllabus content leading to the problem-
solving context. Therefore, knowledge of all syllabus topics is required for this paper.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth  55 marks, representing 20%  of the final mark.
• Questions may be unequal in terms of length and level of difficulty. Therefore, each question may not 
be worth the same number of marks. The exact number of marks allocated to each question is 
indicated at the start of each question.
Question type
• Questions require extended responses involving sustained reasoning.
• Individual questions will develop from a single theme where the emphasis is on problem solving 
leading to a generalization or the interpretation of a context.
• Questions may be presented in the form of words, symbols, diagrams or tables, or combinations of 
these.
• Normally, each question reflects an incline in difficulty, from relatively easy at the start of a question to 
relatively difficult tasks at the end of the question. The emphasis is on problem solving.
General
Markschemes are used to assess students in all papers. The markschemes are specific to each examination.External assessment
78 Mathematics: applications and interpretation guide
External assessment details—HL
General information
Papers 1, 2 and 3
These  papers  are externally  set and  externally  marked.  Together,  they  contribute  80%  of the final  mark  for 
the course.  These  papers  are designed  to allow  students  to demonstrate  what  they  know  and  what  they 
can do.
Papers 1 and 2 will contain some questions, or parts of questions, which are common with SL.
Calculators
For all three examination papers, students must have access to a GDC at all times. Regulations covering the 
types of GDC allowed are provided in Diploma Programme Assessment procedures .
Formula booklet
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the formula  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the programme  resource  centre  and  to ensure 
that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Awarding of marks
Marks are awarded for method, accuracy, answers and reasoning, including interpretation.
In papers 1, 2 and 3, full marks are not necessarily awarded for a correct answer with no working. Where an 
answer  is incorrect,  some  marks  may  be given  for correct  method,  provided  this is shown  by written 
working. All students should therefore be advised to show their working.
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 30%
• This paper consists of compulsory short-response questions.
• Questions on this paper will vary in terms of length and level of difficulty.
• A GDC is required for this paper, but not every question will necessarily require its use.
• Individual questions will not be worth the same number of marks. The marks allocated are indicated at 
the start of each question.
Syllabus coverage
• Knowledge of all topics is required for this paper. However, not all topics are necessarily assessed in 
every examination session.
• The intention of this paper is to test students’ knowledge and understanding across the breadth of the 
syllabus. However, it should not be assumed that the separate topics are given equal emphasis.
Mark allocation
• This paper is worth 110  marks, representing  30%