N13/1/AYENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




     88132015

ENGLISH A: LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE – STANDARD LEVEL – PAPER 1
ANGLAIS A : LANGUE ET LITTÉRATURE – NIVEAU MOYEN – ÉPREUVE 1
INGLÉS A: LENGUA Y LITERATURA – NIVEL MEDIO – PRUEBA 1

Monday 4 November 2013 (morning)
Lundi 4 novembre 2013 (matin)
Lunes 4 de noviembre de 2013 (mañana)

1 hour 30 minutes / 1 heure 30 minutes / 1 hora 30 minutos


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES
 Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Write an analysis on one text only.
 It is not compulsory for you to respond directly to the guiding questions provided.
  However, you may use them if you wish.
 The maximum mark for this examination paper is [20 marks].

INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS
 N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
 Rédigez une analyse d’un seul texte.
 Vous n’êtes pas obligé(e) de répondre directement aux questions d’orientation fournies.
  Vous pouvez toutefois les utiliser si vous le souhaitez.
 Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est [20 points].

INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS
 No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
 Escriba un análisis de un solo texto.
 No es obligatorio responder directamente a las preguntas de orientación que se incluyen, pero
  puede utilizarlas si lo desea.
 La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [20 puntos].




8813-2015                                                                                   5 pages/páginas
                                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2013
                                                          –2–                   N13/1/AYENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Write an analysis on one of the following texts. Include comments on the signiﬁcance of context, audience,
purpose and formal and stylistic features.

Text 1



             ISLANDS                               LOG IN / REGISTER

                                                      Facebook      Twitter     RSS
                                                                                        Go
                                                                                                         Subscribe
                                                                                                          Today!
                                                                                                       PRINT     DIGITAL

             Home Magazine Destinations & Travel Planning Travel Specials                      Blogs      Photos


            Travel Tales: Indonesia’s Wild Spin on Ping-Pong
            In the Indonesian archipelago of Mentawai, ping-pong has evolved into an                           email
            odd game of reﬂexes and relief.                                                                    print
            by Eddy Patricelli                                                                                 share
                                                                                                               comment

            It’s a blinding series of attacks. Arms and legs whip toward me.
            Tiny balls ricochet off my body. Spectators laugh with
            each barrage. I would duck, but there’s no hiding. My attacker
            gathers a small orange piece of ammunition, raises it in his
     5      cupped hand for all to see, then crouches — his wooden
            racket drawn taut behind his ear as if he were steadying an
            arched bow. He glances my way. “Three seero.”

            At home, I love pingpong. Here in the Mentawai Islands,
            a tiny Indonesian archipelago, the game confuses me. I hold
    10      a weird paddle. The mahogany table before me is covered
            with sand. I want to brush it off, but the local teens here won’t
            let me. Even weirder, they aren’t cheering for my opponent.
            They aren’t cheering for me. They seem to be cheering for
            the ball. Every time it bounces they make short bursts of
                                                                                      Photo courtesy Kandui Resort
    15      odd noises. All of them are smoking. It’s 7.05am.

            An hour ago, shouts from these teens woke me from a bad dream. In it, a tsunami was rolling
            over this low-lying island, over my beach hut and my bed with me in it. My mind is a mess.
            An earthquake devastated the nearby city of Padang just days ago. Tsunami warnings have
            been constant. I’m told that’s not unusual here. The region is one of the most seismically active
    20      in the world. Now these teens have given me something else to ponder: this game.

            I look at the artwork carved directly into my pingpong paddle’s open wooden face. A question
            gnaws at me: How does one hit a pingpong ball with a wooden sculpture?

            Crouch. Uncoil. Slam. “Four seero.”

            The ball is dented, more cookie jar than sphere. I hold it up to the group. “It’s broken,” I tell them.
    25      A teen examines the ball and tosses it to my attacker, who again crouches and raises his paddle.
            “Four seero.”

            “Wait. What?” The teens nod for me to keep playing, to ignore the dented ball. “But … but
            it’s broken.”


8813-2015
                                                        –3–                  N13/1/AYENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

            “Ball better this way,” one of them says. Better?

    30      Slam. The ball buzzes past me. “Five seero.”

            The teens point behind me. I scan the sand. No ball. They shout for me to find it, but even they
            don’t speak a common language. Most hail from Padang, a developed city on Sumatra. A few
            were born here in the Mentawai Islands, a time capsule with its own vernacular. The only shared
            aspect of the two languages has neither a past nor a future tense. It’s all right here, right now. It’s
    35      all about the ball.

            I find it 10 steps from the pingpong table. I look back at the teens; bed hair, bloodshot eyes and
            cigarette smoke.

            I spot a different ball lying in the sand in perfect condition. “This one?” I ask, holding the new
            ball high.

    40      “No no no,” they protest. “Other ball. Other ball.” I toss the mangled ball to my attacker.
            He tosses it back to me. It’s my serve. I hold the dented ball up, raise my weird wooden paddle
            and look across the sandy table. None of this makes sense. Whatever. Just swing.

            Contact. The ball bounces true. My attacker returns it. We rally. The teens shout at the ball —
            wishing, willing it in some fashion with each bounce. My attacker slams a winner. The teens sigh,
    45      clearly disappointed.

            Yesterday, a local elder told me that only a few of these teens returned to Padang to see their
            families after the earthquake. “Earthquakes are part of life,” he shrugged. “They’re devastating,
            but ever-present.”

            “Six seero.” My attacker wants me to serve. We rally. The teens shout at the ball, louder as the rally
    50      builds steam.

            My attacker mis-hits. The ball rises high in the air, a lob — an easy slam for me. I turn my
            shoulders, crouch and uncoil — arms and body unleashing at …

            The ball bounces off its dent and darts sideways off the table. My swing parts yards of empty air.
            Roars of laughter fill it. Teens fall to their knees, wipe their eyes, lean on one another for support.
    55      Even my attacker, now lying in the sand, looks like a baby on his back, cooing at the world above.

            Eventually, one of the teens holds the dented ball before me. “Ball better, yes?” he asks beaming.
            I nod, take the dented ball and smile. To the teens, to me, nothing at this moment could be better
            than an unexpected bounce that brings joy.

            Kandui Resort 714-369-5621
    60      info@kanduiresort.com

                            Adapted from the online magazine ISLANDS www.islands.com (7 February 2012)
                                                                             Text used with permission.

         – In what ways does the title of this article offer more than one interpretation?

         – Comment on the way this article attempts to entertain the reader while also revealing the strangeness
           of the author’s experience.

8813-2015                                                        Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                    –4–               N13/1/AYENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Text 2




            Text and images removed
              for copyright reasons




8813-2015
                       –5–                N13/1/AYENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




            Text and images removed for
                  copyright reasons




8813-2015
