N13/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




     88132013

ENGLISH A: LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE – HIGHER LEVEL – PAPER 1
ANGLAIS A : LANGUE ET LITTÉRATURE – NIVEAU SUPÉRIEUR – ÉPREUVE 1
INGLÉS A: LENGUA Y LITERATURA – NIVEL SUPERIOR – PRUEBA 1

Monday 4 November 2013 (morning)
Lundi 4 novembre 2013 (matin)
Lunes 4 de noviembre de 2013 (mañana)

2 hours / 2 heures / 2 horas


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES
   Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
   Section A consists of two texts for comparative analysis.
   Section B consists of two texts for comparative analysis.
   Choose either Section A or Section B. Write one comparative textual analysis.
   The maximum mark for this examination paper is [20 marks].

INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS
   N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
   La section A comporte deux textes pour l’analyse comparative.
   La section B comporte deux textes pour l’analyse comparative.
   Choisissez soit la section A, soit la section B. Rédigez une analyse comparative de textes.
   Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est [20 points].

INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS
   No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
   En la sección A hay dos textos para el análisis comparativo.
   En la sección B hay dos textos para el análisis comparativo.
   Elija la sección A o la sección B. Escriba un análisis comparativo de los textos.
   La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [20 puntos].




8813-2013                                                                                      7 pages/páginas
                                                                © International Baccalaureate Organization 2013
                                                    –2–                N13/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Choose either Section A or Section B.

                                                SECTION A

1.    Analyse, compare and contrast the following two texts. Include comments on the similarities and
      differences between the texts and the significance of context, audience, purpose and formal and
      stylistic features.

Text 1

            New York
            November 10, 1958

            Dear Thom:

            We had your letter this morning. I will answer it from my point of view and of course
      5     Elaine1 will from hers.

            First – if you are in love – that’s a good thing – that’s about the best thing that can happen
            to anyone. Don’t let anyone make it small or light to you.

            Second – There are several kinds of love. One is a selfish, mean, grasping, egotistical
            thing which uses love for self-importance. This is the ugly and crippling kind.
     10     The other is an outpouring of everything good in you – of kindness and consideration
            and respect – not only the social respect of manners but the greater respect which is
            recognition of another person as unique and valuable. The first kind can make you sick
            and small and weak but the second can release in you strength, and courage and goodness
            and even wisdom you didn’t know you had.

     15     You say this is not puppy love. If you feel so deeply – of course it isn’t puppy love.

            But I don’t think you were asking me what you feel. You know better than anyone.
            What you wanted me to help you with is what to do about it – and that I can tell you.

            Glory in it for one thing and be very glad and grateful for it.

            The object of love is the best and most beautiful. Try to live up to it.

     20     If you love someone – there is no possible harm in saying so – only you must remember
            that some people are very shy and sometimes the saying must take that shyness
            into consideration.

            Girls have a way of knowing or feeling what you feel, but they usually like to hear it also.

            It sometimes happens that what you feel is not returned for one reason or another – but
     25     that does not make your feeling less valuable and good.




8813-2013
                                                                  –3–             N13/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

            Lastly, I know your feeling because I have it and I’m glad you have it.

            We will be glad to meet Susan. She will be very welcome. But Elaine will make all such
            arrangements because that is her province and she will be very glad to. She knows about
            love too and maybe she can give you more help than I can.

    30      And don’t worry about losing. If it is right, it happens – The main thing is not to hurry.
            Nothing good gets away.

            Love,

            Fa2


‘11/10/58 letter to Thom Steinbeck, from STEINBECK: A LIFE IN LETTERS by Elaine Steinbeck
                                and Robert Wallsten, editors, copyright 1952 by John Steinbeck,
    © 1969 by The Estate of John Steinbeck, © 1975 by Elaine A. Steinbeck and Robert Wallsten.
                  Used by permission of Viking Penguin, a division of Penguin Group (USA) LLC.


1
    Elaine: John Steinbeck's second wife (Thom was son of first wife)
2
    Fa: short for father




8813-2013                                                               Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                            –4–               N13/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Text 2




            Cartoon removed for copyright reasons




8813-2013
                                                                   –5–                 N13/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                                              SECTION B

2.     Analyse, compare and contrast the following two texts. Include comments on the similarities and
       differences between the texts and the significance of context, audience, purpose and formal and
       stylistic features.

Text 3

                                                                Eyepiece

                                                          Tonight, this place looks
                                                          like a slide being viewed
                                                          under a microscope –
                                                          the spirochetes*

                                                  5       of dust, these ceaseless
                                                          dividing clouds.
                                                          A living biomass
                                                          moving quicker than

                                                          time-lapse, swimming
                                                10        in light like
                                                          biotic fluid.  All
                                                          that water’s moving

                                                          as if being shifted
                                                          through magnitudes.
                                                15        Flowers flicked through
                                                          focuses that sharpen

                                                          and blur.  These trees
                                                          coloured like dots
                                                          of lens-thinned blood,
                                                20        the air’s thick

                                                          and quivering
                                                          as swamp-water brought
                                                          to life.
                                                          And on the lake

                                                25        the moon grows oblong
                                                          as a cell ready to divide.
                                                          The reflector tilts.
                                                          Night clouds the lens.

                                                                     Judith Beveridge, The Domesticity of Giraffes (1987)
                                                                                       Used with the author’s permission.
* spirochetes: bacteria with long, helical-shaped cells


8813-2013                                                                   Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                       –6–                N13/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Text 4

New User? Register | Sign In | Help



                                                                                              Search the Web


 Microscope – Microscopy as a hobby or profession


                             Message List                                               < Previous Next >
    Info Settings
  Group Information
                             Swamp Water
  Members: 2869              Posted By: edwilli Sun Oct 24, 2004 9:51am
  Category: Biology
  Founded: Mar 11, 99
  Language: English

                             For almost a year now I have been following the behaviour of a variety
                             of amoebas and flagellates in a 20 cm diameter crystallization dish half
    Already a
    Member?                  full of gunk (and topped up from time to time with distilled water) taken
    Sign into Yahoo!
                             from the swamp on our property…

  Yahoo! Group Tips      5   The first interesting micro-organisms to draw my attention were
  Did you know...            amoeboid flagellates of the genus Naegleria. No proof of this
  Real people. Real
  stories. See how           identification is offered, but I did spend a couple of years investigating
  Yahoo! Groups
  impacts members            them in South Africa long ago. Now and again a few grains of rice are
  worldwide.                 dropped in around the edges. At one stage a few dozen small nematodes
                        10   hatched and were to be seen crawling up the glass. They died down after
                             a while but probably bred and there may be eggs ready to hatch later.

                             [...]

                             Soon after the slide is prepared large numbers of sulphur bacteria
                             (coiled, one turn, with numerous granules) are to be found in close
                             proximity to the Vaseline1 seal. There are also helical organisms large
                        15   and small. One had escaped notice because of its minute size and
                             has now been tentatively identified as Leptospira biflexa. They also
                             proliferate at a rapid rate, also close to the Vaseline, and can be found
                             in large numbers clustered round encysted amoebae. This particular
                             Spirochete is very easy to culture and all it needs is fatty acids and a few
                        20   vitamins.

                             The Vaseline is a very important part of this micro-environment, not
                             only as a nutrient. Many small bays and completely enclosed chambers
                             are formed in which, sometimes, almost pure “cultures” of some
                             bacteria appear. Isolated as they are from the rest of the chamber they
                        25   are very interesting to watch. Sometimes these little chambers become
                             completely filled with cells and population density halts further growth.




8813-2013
                                                          –7–                N13/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                   These micro-environments, that seem to go on indefinitely, make it very
                                   easy to understand the fascination of the early microscopists who must
                                   have been amazed, if not shocked and horrified by what they saw in their
                           30      water samples. But I doubt many kept the slides for long. I have some
                                   that are at least nine months old and still going strong…

                                   These preparations are fascinating and keep me busy when I’m not
                                   building contraptions for the microscope, such as electronic flashes and
                                   Halogen lamp holders. I have become as enthusiastic, mainly due to
                           35      interaction with members of this group, as I was when using my own
                                   beautiful Zeiss Winkel2 (mainly on bovine blood3 slides) at the tender
                                   age of 21 in Rhodesia.

                                                                                                    Reply


                                                  © Dr E D F Williams, Toivakka, Finland. Used with permission.

1
    Vaseline: brand of petroleum jelly     
2
    Zeiss Winkel: brand of microscope
3
    bovine blood: blood from cattle




8813-2013
