N13/1/AXENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX




     88130060

ENGLISH A: LITERATURE – STANDARD LEVEL – PAPER 2
ANGLAIS A : LITTÉRATURE – NIVEAU MOYEN – ÉPREUVE 2
INGLÉS A: LITERATURA – NIVEL MEDIO – PRUEBA 2

Tuesday 5 November 2013 (afternoon)
Mardi 5 novembre 2013 (après-midi)
Martes 5 de noviembre de 2013 (tarde)

1 hour 30 minutes / 1 heure 30 minutes / 1 hora 30 minutos


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES
 Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on at least two of the Part 3
  works you have studied and compare and contrast these works in response to the question.
  Answers which are not based on a discussion of at least two Part 3 works will not score
  high marks.
 You are not permitted to bring copies of the works you have studied into the examination room.
 The maximum mark for this examination paper is [25 marks].

INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS
 N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
 Traitez un seul sujet de composition. En basant votre réponse sur au moins deux des œuvres
  de la troisième partie que vous avez étudiées, vous devez comparer et opposer ces œuvres
  dans le cadre du sujet. Les réponses qui ne sont pas basées sur au moins deux des œuvres de
  la troisième partie n’obtiendront pas une note élevée.
 Vous n’êtes pas autorisé(e) à apporter des exemplaires des œuvres que vous avez étudiées dans
  la salle d’examen.
 Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est [25 points].

INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS
 No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
 Conteste una sola pregunta de redacción. Base su respuesta en al menos dos de las obras
  estudiadas de la Parte 3, comparándolas y contrastándolas en relación con la pregunta.
  Las respuestas que no se basen en al menos dos obras de la Parte 3 no recibirán una puntuación
  alta.
 No está permitido traer copias de las obras estudiadas a la sala de examen.
 La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [25 puntos].




8813-0060                                                                                   3 pages/páginas
                                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2013
                                                   –2–                 N13/1/AXENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on at least two of the Part 3 works you have
studied and compare and contrast these works in response to the question. Answers which are not based
on a discussion of at least two Part 3 works will not score high marks.

Drama

1.    With reference to at least two works you have studied, discuss how the playwrights have used props
      to enhance the effectiveness of the plays.


2.    How do at least two playwrights you have studied use dramatic irony in their works and to
      what effect?


3.    If an audience is to be engaged by a play, the exposition must very quickly include elements that
      promise interesting ideas, characters or events. In what ways have at least two playwrights you have
      studied ensured that the plays’ opening moments are likely to engage the audience?



Poetry

4.    Some poems tell a “story”, of events, revelations or reactions. With reference to works by
      at least two poets you have studied, explore the ways in which poets deliver these narratives of
      thoughts and feelings.


5.    Linking human qualities to objects, actions or animals can often enliven poetry. In works by
      at least two poets you have studied, explore the ways, such as personification, in which likenesses to
      humans and their behaviours are employed by these writers.


6.    Poets often enrich their meaning by the use of sounds, whether soft and harmonious, or harsh and
      discordant. In works by at least two poets you have studied, discuss the use of these types of sounds
      to enhance the meaning of their poems.



Prose: novel and short story

7.    Writers often use important decisions by characters to move the plot along. Compare how at least two
      writers you have studied use decisions, either large or small, in their works.


8.    Consider how symbols are used to enrich at least two works you have studied.


9.    Writers often import or adapt historical material in writing their works. In at least two works you
      have studied, explore what or how this material contributes to the works.

8813-0060
                                                    –3–                  N13/1/AXENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Prose other than fiction

10.     With reference to at least two works you have studied, discuss the ways in which writers not only
        describe their subject but also go on to offer value judgments about it.


11.     Much will depend in a work on those things to which the writer chooses to assign emphasis.
        With reference to at least two works you have studied, consider what elements of their content
        writers have highlighted and to what effect.


12.     The inclusion of unusual or unfamiliar elements of time, place, culture and the like can add interest.
        With reference to at least two works you have studied, consider what such elements may add to
        your appreciation of the works.




8813-0060
