M22/1/AYENG/BP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                  May / Mai / Mayo de 2022


        English A: language and literature
         Anglais A : langue et littérature
          Inglés A: Lengua y Literatura


         Higher level and standard level
        Niveau supérieur et niveau moyen
           Nivel Superior y Nivel Medio

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1



6 pages/páginas
                                            –2–              M22/1/AYENG/BP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2021

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2021

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2021

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                               –3–             M22/1/AYENG/BP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


General marking instructions

 These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking. They are not offered
 as an exhaustive and fixed set of features which all answers must include.

 Answers which do not follow the approach suggested in the guiding question, but have provided
 an alternative formal or technical focus should be rewarded appropriately in line with the
 assessment criteria.




Instructions générales pour la notation

 Ces notes ne sont que simples lignes directrices pour aider les examinateurs lors de la notation.
 Elles ne peuvent en aucun cas être considérées comme un ensemble fixe et exhaustif de
 caractéristiques que les réponses doivent présenter.

 Les réponses qui ne suivent pas l’approche suggérée dans la question d’orientation, mais qui ont
 adopté un autre angle technique ou formel doivent être récompensées de manière appropriée,
 conformément aux critères d’évaluation.




Instrucciones generales para la corrección

 El objetivo de estas notas para los examinadores es servir de directrices a fin de ayudar en la
 corrección. No deben considerarse un conjunto fijo y exhaustivo de características que deban
 estar presentes en todas las respuestas.

 Las respuestas que no sigan el enfoque recomendado en la pregunta de orientación, pero
 posean un enfoque alternativo, de carácter formal o técnico, también deberán ser valoradas
 de acuerdo con los criterios de evaluación.
                   –4–            M22/1/AYENG/BP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


1.

              Literary Form



     Significant elements for analysis




     Removed for copyright reasons
                                                 –5–              M22/1/AYENG/BP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


2.

                                            Literary Form

                                            Advertisement

                                 Significant elements for analysis


     -   direct question (“Would dad rather aftershave or an adventure?”)
     -   use of the word “dad” is familial, suggesting familiarity, as though writer and reader are
         from the same family
     -   logical fallacy of false equivalence (a bottle of aftershave and a holiday getaway are not
         equivalent gifts/question is posed as though it only matters whether dad
         would prefer aftershave or a holiday getaway—as though money were no object
     -   audience is referred to as “Australia” (not “Australians”) as though the people are the
         country, perhaps alluding to patriotism
     -   Australia is called a “gift shop,” which is intended positively (use of the superlative “best”
         to suggest there’s no need to go (shop) elsewhere; could also be viewed with a critical
         lens, as calling Australia a “gift shop” commodifies Australia, and, in calling the people
         “Australia,” the advert is commodifying Australians)
     -   use of the first-person plural pronoun (“we”) to indicate a sense of unity and
         collectiveness
     -   use of the imperative (“visit Australia.com”)
     -   much of text is in all capital letters, suggesting importance
     -   only two of the four sentences contain punctuation
     -   consonance & repetition: “give the gift”
     -   diction: “unforgettable”
     -   text is arranged over the sky (sunset or sunrise) in the photo, conflating text with dreams
         and inspiration; map of Australia with adverb of place in the centre
     -   people appear ‘on top of the world’ in stadium climb; of all the people pictured, only one
         woman’s face is visible, prompting viewer to identify with her; she is sharing a moment
         with what appears to be her husband appreciating her gift of travel; apart from the
         mother, all family members are facing the sun, suggesting that they are enlightened by
         the experience; mum is smiling, implying that dad will not be the only one to benefit from
         the experience
     -   predominant colours of blue and gold, suggesting abundance/pathetic fallacy: sunshine
         and blue sky elicits positive mood/happiness
     -   stadium lines look like path leading to rolling hills
     -   empty stadium builds anticipation and suggests they are receiving a private tour; sense
         of privacy in a public space or “being ‘at home’ in Australia”
     -   contrast between the sense of adventure and the safety gear they are wearing,
         suggesting that they will be safe at home in Australia
     -   light/glint of a camera suggests someone is taking a photograph, suggesting that this trip
         will help make lasting memories for the family
     -   tilt of camera angle dramatizes the height of the climb
     -   stadium lights are off and natural light illuminates the family, suggesting no need for
         artificial elements; Australian natural beauty is enough
     -   Australia is ‘branded’ with logo of jumping kangaroo against the backdrop of a sun at the
         bottom of advert; the logo colours match the jumpsuits to reinforce the idea of Australians
         enjoying Australia
     -   gender: appeal is made to someone who would be buying “dad” a gift (e.g., his spouse);
         thus, the advert appears largely directed at women (women are often the ones
         responsible for purchasing decisions in the home)
                                           –6–              M22/1/AYENG/BP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M



-   class: appeal is made to affluent Australians; not all Australians could afford to purchase
    such a “gift”
-   race: only white Australians are pictured; no representation of Australians of colour,
    conflating race and class
-   age: people in photo are young and fit and thus well-suited for physical adventure.
