M22/1/AXENG/BP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                  May / Mai / Mayo de 2022


                    English A: literature
                    Anglais A : littérature
                     Inglés A: Literatura


         Higher level and standard level
        Niveau supérieur et niveau moyen
           Nivel Superior y Nivel Medio

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




6 pages/páginas
                                            –2–                M22/1/AXENG/BP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2022

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2022

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2022

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                               –3–               M22/1/AXENG/BP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M



General marking instructions

  These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking. They are not offered
  as an exhaustive and fixed set of features which all answers must include.

  Answers which do not follow the approach suggested in the guiding question, but have provided
  an alternative formal or technical focus should be rewarded appropriately in line with the
  assessment criteria.




Instructions générales pour la notation

  Ces notes ne sont que simples lignes directrices pour aider les examinateurs lors de la notation.
  Elles ne peuvent en aucun cas être considérées comme un ensemble fixe et exhaustif de
  caractéristiques que les réponses doivent présenter.

  Les réponses qui ne suivent pas l’approche suggérée dans la question d’orientation, mais qui ont
  adopté un autre angle technique ou formel doivent être récompensées de manière appropriée,
  conformément aux critères d’évaluation.




Instrucciones generales para la corrección

  El objetivo de estas notas para los examinadores es servir de directrices a fin de ayudar en la
  corrección. No deben considerarse un conjunto fijo y exhaustivo de características que deban
  estar presentes en todas las respuestas.

  Las respuestas que no sigan el enfoque recomendado en la pregunta de orientación, pero
  posean un enfoque alternativo, de carácter formal o técnico, también deberán ser valoradas de
  acuerdo con los criterios de evaluación.
                                                  –4–               M22/1/AXENG/BP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M



1.

                                               Literary form
                                                 Song lyric
                              Elements of the text significant for analysis
     • some consideration of the title/the word ‘plague’
     • the characterization of the speaker/narrative voice eg through ‘waiting’, ‘lonely’, ‘solitude’,
       ‘witness’, ‘molten wax’
     • some focus on ‘saviour’, ‘contrition’, ‘prophesy’
     • sense of fear eg of death, loneliness, madness
     • metaphorical representation of the sea as an ever present, destructive and threatening force
       (some candidates may validly link this to their study of Romanticism)
     • use of contrasts eg in first line; shine but shining dying; blunt scissors; solidity/fragility
     • violent/disturbing imagery eg ‘skeletons of sailing-ships’; ‘the waves crash on the bleak
       stones…’
     • use of onomatopoeia eg ‘crash’ and rhythm -e.g. the use of enjambment between ‘bleak’ and
       ‘stones’ to accentuate the violence of the imagery
     • references to/foreshadowing of death/dying
     • references to time eg the shifts between past and present tense
     • use of sibilance eg ‘still…saviour…storms’; ‘smiles…stars…shine’
     • direct address to audience eg ‘When you see’; ‘You’ll begin to wonder’
     • some focus on final verse
     • use of ellipsis.
                                                  –5–               M22/1/AXENG/BP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M



2.

                                               Literary form
                                               Prose fiction
                              Elements of the text significant for analysis
     • narrative point of view eg how the third person narrator reveals the male characters’
       pretentiousness and posturing
     • characterization eg through diction and imagery and the use of pretentious language and
       cliche, its use in highlighting the tension in the passage and Jess’s role
     • the use of and or absence of dialogue
     • the orientation/positioning of the characters eg the physical positioning and how this may be
       related to social positioning/status
     • the ways in which time is significant and the patterns created, with Robert and DeCoverley’s
       posturing over the importance of ‘now ‘and also the way in which Jess looks to the past as a
       time of greater happiness
     • the descriptions of subtle movements in the passage eg ‘touching the tip of his forefinger
       momentarily to his lips’; angling his head and eyes slightly upward’, and how these suggest
       DeCoverley’s posturing
     • the possibly animalistic and warlike imagery eg ‘flared nostrils’ and ‘as if he’d been
       ambushed…’
     • the use of other figurative aspects such as simile eg ‘absorbed this statement like a
       particularly complex scent’, and metaphor’ eg ‘their little chess match of self-consciousness’
     • the creation of the mocking tone in the passage
     • the suggestion of fakeness/insincerity and how these are satirized.
