M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                               May 2018


                               Philosophy


           Higher level and standard level


                                Paper 2




35 pages
                           –2–               M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use
of examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Global Centre, Cardiff.
                                                –3–                 M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The following are the annotations available to use when marking responses.

         Annotation                          Explanation                        Shortcuts

                      Highlight (can be expanded)


                      Unclear


                      Incorrect Point


                      Good Response/Good Point


                      Underline tool


                      Apply to blank pages


                      On-page comment text box (for adding specific comments)

             AE       Attempts Evaluation

             AQ       Answers the Question

            CKS       Clear Knowledge Shown

             Des      Descriptive

             EE       Effective Evaluation

            EXP       Expression

             GD       Good Definition

           GEXA       Good Example

           GEXP       Good Explanation

             GP       Good Point

            GUT       Good Use of Text

              IL      Inaccurate Language

             IR       Irrelevant

            LNK       Good linkage to course (P3 only)

            NAQ       Not Answered Question
                                             –4–              M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


           Nexa     No examples

          NMRD      Not much reasoning or discussion

           NUT      No Use of Text

            PE      Poorly Expressed

          PEOC      Personal experience of course (P3 only)

           REF      Reference Needed

           REP      Repetition

          TNCE      Theory is Not Clearly Explained

            U       Understanding

            VG      Vague


You must make sure you have looked at all pages. Please put the      annotation on any blank
page, to indicate that you have seen it.
                                                    –5–                  M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


I. QIG availability
The following QIGs are available this coming session for you to attempt qualification for:

   QIG                       Text/author                      English QIG        Spanish QIG
  number                                                      availability        availability
    01        Simone de Beauvoir The Second Sex,
              Vol. 1 part 1, Vol. 2 part 1 and Vol. 2 part
              4
     02       René Descartes Meditations

     03       David Hume Dialogues           Concerning
              Natural Religion
     04       John Stuart Mill On Liberty

     05       Friedrich Nietzsche The Genealogy of
              Morals
     06       Martha Nussbaum Creating Capabilities:
              The Human Development Approach
     07       Ortega y Gasset The Origin of Philosophy
     08       Plato The Republic, Books IV–IX

     09       Peter Singer The Life You Can Save

     10       Charles Taylor The Ethics of Authenticity

     11       Lao Tzu Tao Te Ching
     12       Zhuangzi Zhuangzi, Inner Chapters




II. Candidates who overlook the new Paper 2 rubric of answer both parts a and b of one question
 However clearly the IB sets out its expectations on how candidates should answer exam questions there
 are occasions when we receive work that does not match what we asked for. There is a specific case in
 exams where we ask students to select particular questions to answer and they fail to follow these rules
 (rubrics).
 This note is intended to clarify how we deal with these situations through a series of scenarios. The actions
 have been check to ensure that they are supported by RM Assessor.

Overarching principles
The following statements underpin our decisions below:
   1. No candidate should be disadvantaged for following the rules.
   2. Whenever possible candidates should receive credit for what they know.

Example
To help understand the different scenarios we will make reference to an example assessment.
Instruction: candidates must respond to both parts of one question.
Q7. (a) Explain Mill’s view of the relationship between liberty and utility.                [10 marks]
      (b) To what extent are liberty and utility fundamentally conflicting concepts?        [15 marks]


Q9. (a)     Explain the view that morality has a clear and traceable genealogy.                   [10 marks]

      (b)   To what extent do you agree with the genealogy Nietzsche proposes?                    [15 marks]
                                                    –6–                  M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Scenario 1. Candidate answers parts from two different questions.
Example: Candidate answers 7(a) and 9(a) or answers 7(b) and 9(a)
Action:
Mark all of the candidates answers. The student will receive their best mark from one question.
In the second example this means the best mark for either 7(b) or 9(a).
This requires that examiners assigns each mark to the correct question part (i.e. gives the mark for 9(a) to
9(a) and not 7(a) – if question is QIGed this will happen automatically).

Scenario 2. Candidate does not split their answer according to the sub-parts.
Example: Candidate writes one answer which they label as question 7 or they indicate they have only
answered 9(a) but actually answer both 9(a) and 9(b) in that answer.
Action:
Examiner uses their best judgement to award marks for all sub-parts as if the candidate has correctly
labelled their answer.
In the example this means the candidate would be able to gain up to 25 marks despite only labelling the
answer as 9(a).
Exception – where the nature of the two parts of the question means it is important to differentiate between
the two answers, for example the first part should be done before the second part (in maths) or the
candidate needs to show they understand the difference between the two parts of the question then
examiners should use their judgement and only award marks if it is clear that the candidate has simply
made a mistake in numbering their answers.

Scenario 3. Candidate duplicates their answer to the first part in the second part.
Example: Candidate answers 7(a) and the repeats the same text as part of 7(b)
Action:
Only give credit for the answer once (in the first part of the question). The assessment criteria should
assess distinct skills when there are parts to a question so this problem should not occur.

Scenario 4. Candidate provides the wrong question number for their answer.
Example: Candidate states they are answering 7(a) and 7(b) but their response clearly talks about
Nietzsche (Q9) rather than Mills (Q7).
Action:
Mark the answer according to the mark scheme for the question that they should have indicated.
Exception – this only applies when there is no ambiguity as to which question the student has attempted,
for example if they have rephrased the question in their opening paragraph. It is not the role of the examiner
to identify which question is the best fit for their answer (i.e. which questions their answer would get most
marks for). If the given question number is a plausible match with their answer then the student should be
marked according to that question. Only in exceptional circumstances should this rule be applied to sub-
questions (i.e. assuming the candidate had mistakenly swapped their answers for Q7(a) and Q7(b).
                                                   –7–                  M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


How to use the Diploma Programme Philosophy markscheme

The assessment markbands constitute the formal tool for marking examination scripts, and in these
assessment markbands examiners can see the skills being assessed in the examinations. The
markschemes are designed to assist examiners in possible routes taken by candidates in terms of the
content of their answers when demonstrating their skills of doing philosophy through their responses.
The points listed are not compulsory points, and not necessarily the best possible points. They are a
framework to help examiners contextualize the requirements of the question, and to facilitate the
application of marks according to the assessment markbands listed on page 8 for part A responses, and
page 9 for part B responses.

It is important that examiners understand that the main idea of the course is to promote doing
philosophy, and this involves activity and engagement throughout a two-year programme, as opposed to
emphasizing the chance to display knowledge in a terminal set of examination papers. Even in the
examinations, responses should not be assessed on how much candidates know as much as how they
are able to use their knowledge in support of an argument, using the skills referred to in the various
assessment markbands published in the subject guide, reflecting an engagement with philosophical
activity throughout the course. As a tool intended to help examiners in assessing responses, the
following points should be kept in mind when using a markscheme:

• The Diploma Programme Philosophy course is designed to encourage the skills of doing philosophy
  in the candidates. These skills can be accessed through reading the assessment markbands in the
  subject guide
• The markscheme does not intend to outline a model/correct answer
• The markscheme has an introductory paragraph which contextualizes the emphasis of the question
  being asked
• The bullet points below the paragraph are suggested possible points of development that should not
  be considered a prescriptive list but rather an indicative list where they might appear in the answer
• If there are names of philosophers and references to their work incorporated into the markscheme,
  this should help to give context for the examiners and does not reflect a requirement that such
  philosophers and references should appear in an answer: They are possible lines of development.
• Candidates can legitimately select from a wide range of ideas, arguments and concepts in service of
  the question they are answering, and it is possible that candidates will use material effectively that is
  not mentioned in the markscheme
• Examiners should be aware of the command terms for Philosophy as published on page 54 of the
  Philosophy subject guide when assessing responses
• In markschemes for Paper 2 there is a greater requirement for specific content as the Paper requires
  the study of a text by the candidates and the questions set will derive from that text. The
  markscheme will show what is relevant for both part A and part B answers. In part B responses,
  candidates may select other material they deem as relevant
• Responses for part A and part B should be assessed using the distinct assessment markbands.


Note to examiners

Candidates at both Higher Level and Standard Level answer one question on the prescribed texts.
Each question consists of two parts, and candidates must answer both parts of the question
(a and b).
                                                –8–                 M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 2 part A markbands

 Marks                                         Level descriptor


   0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

          There is little relevant knowledge of the specified idea/argument/concept from the text.
  1–2     The explanation is minimal.
          Philosophical vocabulary is not used, or is consistently used inappropriately.

          Some knowledge of the specified idea/argument/concept from the text is demonstrated but
           this lacks accuracy, relevance and detail.
  3–4
          The explanation is basic and in need of development.
          Philosophical vocabulary is not used, or is consistently used inappropriately.

          Knowledge of the specified idea/argument/concept from the text is mostly accurate and
           relevant, but lacking in detail.
  5–6
          There is a satisfactory explanation.
          Philosophical vocabulary is used, sometimes appropriately.

          The response contains accurate and relevant knowledge of the specified idea/
           argument/concept from the text.
  7–8
          The explanation is clear, although may be in need of further development.
          Philosophical vocabulary is mostly used appropriately.

          The response contains relevant, accurate and detailed knowledge of the specified
           idea/argument/concept from the text.
 9–10
          The explanation is clear and well developed.
          There is appropriate use of philosophical vocabulary throughout the response.
                                                  –9–                 M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 2 part B markbands

 Marks                                           Level descriptor


   0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

            There is little relevant knowledge of the text.
            Philosophical vocabulary is not used, or is consistently used inappropriately.
  1–3
            The response is mostly descriptive with very little analysis.
            There is no discussion of alternative interpretations or points of view.

            Some knowledge of the text is demonstrated but this lacks accuracy and relevance.
            Philosophical vocabulary is used, sometimes appropriately.
  4–6       There is some limited analysis, but the response is more descriptive than analytical.
            There is little discussion of alternative interpretations or points of view.
            Some of the main points are justified.

            Knowledge of the text is mostly accurate and relevant.
            Philosophical vocabulary is used, sometimes appropriately.
  7–9       The response contains analysis, but this analysis lacks development.
            There is some discussion of alternative interpretations or points of view.
            Many of the main points are justified.

            The response contains accurate and relevant knowledge of the text.
            Philosophical vocabulary is mostly used appropriately.
 10–12      The response contains clear critical analysis.
            There is discussion and some assessment of alternative interpretations or points of view.
            Most of the main points are justified.

            The response contains relevant, accurate and detailed knowledge of the text.
            There is appropriate use of philosophical vocabulary throughout the response.
 13–15      The response contains clear and well developed critical analysis.
            There is discussion and assessment of alternative interpretations or points of view.
            All or nearly all of the main points are justified.
                                                     – 10 –               M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Simone de Beauvoir: The Second Sex, Vol. 1 part 1, Vol. 2 part 1 and Vol. 2 part 4

1.       (a)   Explain what de Beauvoir means when she claims that being female and being a
               woman are different.                                                                       [10]

         This question asks for an explanation of de Beauvoir’s distinction between being female and being
         a woman which rests upon her more fundamental notion of woman as Other. In Volumes 1 and 2
         of the text, de Beauvoir explores the biological, psychoanalytical, historical and social contexts of
         femininity and womanhood in order to develop her view of the woman as Other. In these contexts,
         she makes reference to the influence of Hegel, Marx, Engels, Freud and Kinsey amongst others.
         However, the greatest influence on de Beauvoir’s analysis of the female, woman and the Other
         comes from existentialism, existentialist phenomenology and the philosophical views of Sartre.
         Applying the central existentialist themes of freedom, existence before essence, transcendence,
         alienation and the project of making oneself, de Beauvoir explores what can be described as
         female embodiment. She concludes that a number of assumptions about femininity and
         womanhood alienate women from themselves, their self-definition and their possibilities forcing
         them to view themselves as the Other in the face of men who define themselves as the Subject.

      Candidates might explore:
     • Perspectives that view the feminine as the weaker, inferior sex
     • Biology is not destiny; nature versus nurture
     • Masculinity as the standard of being human; femininity as the exception or after-thought
     • Social, psychological, cultural and political experiences which enter into the definition of personal
       identity
     • Woman as passive; Men as activity; matriarchy versus patriarchy
     • Inability of psychoanalysis to explain femininity; it posits a self-loathing of women
     • The trauma of puberty for women
     • Women and a frustrated search for freedom, meaning and happiness
     • Existentialism and the re-definition of femininity and womanhood
     • The woman as Other; the man as Subject


         (b)   Evaluate the extent to which de Beauvoir is justified in this distinction.                 [15]

          Possible discussion points include:
     •    An example of the continuation of the “legitimacy” of a woman’s body through the values of men
          is the use of images of women in current advertising and media
     •    The importance of economic autonomy for women
     •    As the Other, woman finds herself returned to the world of the child, a world of bad faith where
          she does not have to assume responsibility for her choices
     •    The influence of the Church in western Europe has apparently declined in recent years; have any
          of the other oppressive forces de Beauvoir identifies either disappeared, or has their influence
          declined?
     •    Has the biological determination of sex as a defining property of femininity become irrelevant
          because of the concept of gender fluidity?
     •    The notion of the Other, which is wholly dependent on man for its meaning, constructs a context
          from which women are powerless to escape
     •    Oppressed Others may call on the resources of a common history and experiences of shared
          abusive situations to assert their subjectivity and identity in order to affirm recognition and
          demand reciprocity
     •    How relevant is de Beauvoir’s analysis in the modern world? Is her analysis influential in
          situations where women experience repression and alienation?
                                                 – 11 –               M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   (a)   Explain how Freudian psychoanalytic models deny freedom in the concept of the
           feminine.                                                                                 [10]

           For de Beauvoir, any analysis of the feminine must contain an acceptance of the basic
           principles of phenomenological existentialism: The subject is born free and within this
           freedom, makes itself. De Beauvoir makes a case for using historical materialism, ie to
           locate any analysis of woman within the historical conditions which are relevant. Biological
           explanations for femininity lack an explanation grounded in the psychic life of the subject,
           and any explanation for femininity found must treat the body-object as a subject. Though it
           treats woman as a subject (in a very narrow sense compared with the masculine), Freudian
           psychoanalytic theory denies this freedom to the subject as it perpetuates the definition of
           woman as non-masculine, and denies her conscious agency in actions apart from seeking
           pleasure. Her analysis finds that psychoanalysis fails for a number of reasons.

            Candidates might explore:
            •      The rejection of Freud’s psychoanalytic models for femininity due to its fundamentally
           male orientation
            •      The view of woman is a “mutilated” man
            •      The Freudian interpretation of the Oedipal and Electra complexes
            •      The deification of the father image based upon social factors rather than upon an
           interpretation of feminine libido
            •      de Beauvoir’s explanation of the prohibition of incest as a social phenomenon
            •      Freud’s attempt to explain human life exclusively by an appeal to sexuality versus de
           Beauvoir’s explanation of pleasure on the basis of internal motivation
            •      Psychoanalysis presents a negative estimation of free choice and of the values
           embedded in those choices. This jeopardizes the existential notions of subjectivity, self-
           definition, freedom and transcendence
            •      De Beauvoir explores the tensions that emerge between Subjects and Others when the
           Subject is the man and the Other is the woman
            •      The Other as an oppressed and alienated reality


     (b)   Evaluate the extent to which de Beauvoir’s critique of patriarchy can liberate
           women.                                                                                    [15]

           Possible discussion points include:
           • Liberation must be a woman’s work. It is not a matter of appealing to men to give women
             their freedom, but a matter of women discovering their solidarity, rejecting the temptation
             of bad faith and affirming the pleasures of freedom.
           • The goal of liberation, according to de Beauvoir, is our mutual recognition of each other as
             free and as Other.
           • If patriarchy determines the semantics and moral values of language, then is there a
             possibility of a wholly feminine understanding of abstract ideas such as compassion,
             honesty, justice?
           • Although de Beauvoir claims that liberation is possible through a collective effort, is
             liberation possible given the extent of patriarchy? Are there new cultural and social forces
             on the horizon that might reinforce women as “other” and threaten their rights (social,
             sexual, reproductive, economic)?
           • The historical record demonstrates her point of oppression, but many of the
             institutionalized forms of discrimination have not only been removed, but their practice
             prohibited by law. Does this weaken her argument?
                                                  – 12 –                M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


René Descartes: Meditations

3.   (a)   Explain how Descartes concludes that information acquired through our senses
           is unreliable.                                                                                [10]

           This question invites an explanation of how Descartes concludes that knowledge through the
           senses is an unreliable source of knowledge, and therefore it can be doubted. He would like
           to believe that corporal things (those that have been formed as thought) are more distinct
           and clear and reliable. This approach of questioning the senses means that in the beginning
           his quest is to find what is certain. Although we need senses to operate in the physical world
           all that we meet are uncertainties and uncertain truth. The physical objects might not be real
           in any sure sense. Descartes would accept that there are primary qualities within the
           physical world that we can have certainty about because they are mental abstractions of the
           physical world; such things as size and shape. He claims through the analogy of the piece of
           wax that we need mental acts to comprehend what our senses give us. There is need for a
           mental condition that interprets the primary qualities of the wax (the flexibility and mutability)
           that are non-sensory, and therefore need our imagination. It is therefore the mind that aids
           our understanding. He claims that sensual experiences of hearing, seeing, warmth etc are
           acts of thinking. He contrasts the uncertainty of the physical with the certainty of the mental
           world. The world of thinking he claims is certain and he claims that these certainties are
           what he calls “clear and distinct ideas”.

           Candidates might explore:
           • The role of imagination
           • The need and process of introspection
           • The analogy of the piece of wax
           • How the mind itself might be uncertain and can be fooled
           • The interaction between senses and reason; interactions between the mind and body
           • The difference between clear and distinct ideas and that which seems to exist in the
             physical world
           • The nature and role of Cartesian methodological doubt.


     (b)   Evaluate the claim that it is not through the senses that we know truth, but through the
           intellect.                                                                          [15]

           Possible discussion points include:
           • The intellect has clear and distinct ideas which are certain
           • In the Cartesian Circle the cogito is that which is certain
           • The difference between false reality, the physical world, and objective reality of that which
             is mental
           • Sense perception’s reliance on the mind as we can only know things properly through
             the mind
           • If the aim is truth then senses can give us little real understanding of the world around as
             our interpretation of the world can be deceptive
           • It might be the case that it is both senses and mental interpretation that clarify our
             perceptions of the world; interactions of experience, imagination and intuition that build a
             world picture.
                                                  – 13 –               M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   (a)   Explain Descartes’s theory of mind.                                                          [10]

           This question seeks an explanation of a central thesis within in the Meditations. The theory
           is based on an idea of dualism; body and mind being separate. The mind is where mental
           acts take place. Although Descartes claims to know that the mind is separate he has
           difficulties proving this or showing how the body and mind coexist. His “cogito ergo sum”
           creates 3 “I”’s. The “I” of that which is thinking, the “I” being observed and the “am” which is
           the “I” that exists (being, aiming). The mind is seen as the thing that thinks. The mind also
           understands, affirms, denies, will and desires. It creates images. It is not part of the physical
           world and can only be encountered by introspection. Descartes could well be confused
           between the two categorisations of substance dualism and property dualism. Traditionally
           Descartes’s theory is seen as substance dualism but is now more easily categorised as
           property dualism, where consciousness happens. The argument of indivisibility is used by
           him as the mind has no extension and this relies on Leibniz’s law of identity. His separation
           argument also establishes the body and mind being different and separate.

           Candidates might explore:
           • Methods of doubt resulting in surety of the mind and its existence
           • Activities that would be mental states; thinking, willing
           • The nature of clear and distinct ideas held by the mind
           • Challenges to the separateness of the mind and body
           • How the gap between mind and body might be bridged
           • The causal relationship between God and the mind
           • Is the relationship of the mind to body akin to pilot and vessel?
           • Whether Descartes’s purpose was to avoid the issue of trying to explain how the mind and
             body were linked.


     (b)   Evaluate the claim that by possessing a mind we can gain certainty.                          [15]

           Possible discussion points include:
           • The way Descartes arrives at certainty through his cogito ergo sum
           • The claim that the mind is created by God
           • His uncertainty of the physical world that is not encountered directly by the mind
           • The ‘will’, which God provided to humans, allows them to make cognitive judgements and
             within the realm of clear and distinct ideas these judgments are true and certain
           • The nature of cognitive error and the way Descartes separates primary and secondary
             qualities, the latter open to degrees of uncertainty
           • Whether “material falsity” is a result of a cognitive error or a misrepresentation.
                                                  – 14 –                M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


David Hume: Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion

5.   (a)   Explain Philo’s ideas about the relationship between “reasons” and “motives” for
           belief in God.                                                                   [10]

           The question focuses on the importance of having to consider reasons and motives to allow
           an understanding of why human beings believe in God. A motive takes into account the
           drive that causes us to act with a particular goal or objective in mind; a reason, on the other
           hand, provides the rational and/or logical explanation which justifies the motivation. The text
           presents a discussion amongst the interlocutors which describes and analyses why men
           support the idea of a divinity. Philo finds difficulties in maintaining a reasonable belief in God
           which could be supported in a rationally justifiable manner. This leaves him the option of
           assessing the motives that could underpin that belief. Philo's argument is interesting insofar
           as he claims that “the sources of these motives are not equal and may vary among men”.
           This conclusion allows Hume to take into consideration certain of the characteristics of
           human nature in terms of reasons and motives for belief in God. The conclusion reached by
           Demea is that it is ‘… that each man feels, in a manner, the truth of religion within his own
           breast; and from a consciousness of his imbecility and misery, rather than from any
           reasoning, is led to seek protection from that Being, on whom he and all nature is
           dependent.’ Thus, there are no good reasons a skeptic can bring forth that will persuade
           humans to ignore the motivation to believe in God.

           Candidates might explore:
           • “Reasons” as arguments that lead to solid conclusions
           • Philo’s position that there are no “reasons” to believe in God not even with probability
           • That “there are no reasons to believe in God” does not imply “that there may not be
             motives” to do so.
           • “Motives” to believe might not be rationally founded. Therefore, Philo suggests that
             foundations for motives can be quite variable
           • These sources/foundations can proceed from association with groups of people
             (philosophers, men of letters, poets, men of common sense, scientists, etc
           • A consideration of “the motives why most of men – beyond the reasons they may give –
             believe there is a God”
           • What are the true sources of belief in the face of the absence of convincing reasons?
           • Can ‘imbecility’ and ‘fear’ function as motives for authentic belief
           • Philo’s view that "it is required more the talent of eloquence and vivid imagination rather
             than reasoning and argumentation"
           • Skepticism does not persuade some men to abandon belief in God.


     (b)   Evaluate the relationship between “reasons” and “motives” for a belief in God.                [15]

           Possible discussion points include:
           • Is it possible to defend the existence of God from a rational perspective?
           • Is the distinction between ‘reasons’ and ‘motives’ raised by Hume clear and convincing?
           • The notions of “reasons” and “motives” as a crucial issue in the discussion
           • Could humans avoid the influence of ‘motives’ when facing belief in God despite reasons
             to the contrary?
           • An analysis of the non-rational attitude implied in our motives to believe in God
           • What are some of the reasons humans believe in the existence of a supernatural being?
           • The importance of ‘fear’ and ‘imbecility’ among the motives mentioned in the Dialogues;
             Twentieth century interpretations of the relationship between reasons and motives,
             eg Wittgenstein, Davidson
           • The impotence of skepticism to persuade men to abandon the belief in God when motives
             are the basis of their belief.
                                                  – 15 –               M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


6.   (a)   Explain the difficulty evil represents for human understanding of God.                       [10]

           Hume focuses attention upon the problem of evil in Parts X and XI of the text. Philo and
           Demea mount an intense, emotionally charged description of the extent of misery, disease,
           wickedness, of the corruption of human nature, and of a general dissatisfaction with life
           experienced by all humans. Ironically, this situation seems to be brought upon humans by
           the divinity we are all forced to try to appease. Philo observes that humans, who can
           overcome all real enemies, create imaginary enemies who turn all things natural in life into
           ills and evils. He goes on to ask why people complain so incessantly about the evils they
           experience in life. Does this tendency proceed from human nature itself preoccupied with evil
           and suffering in the world? This only begs the question of why, with so much evil present,
           would anyone wish to remain in this world? Against the counter-claim raised by Cleanthes
           that he, like many others, has not felt the weight of human misery, Demea cites several
           historical figures who have felt otherwise and resigned themselves to the presence of evil
           and suffering in the world. Philo finally poses the ultimate objection to a moral God citing
           Epicurus’s old questions about the existence of a good, loving and powerful God in the face
           of the continued existence of evil and suffering. Hence, any discussion about establishing
           natural attributes to assist in an understanding of God become entirely futile given that God’s
           moral attributes are place in extreme jeopardy as the result of the existence of evil. Some
           argue that a more careful assessment of the human condition would show that evil can and
           will be resolved in some future time and place and that this resolution will demonstrate the
           benevolence, infinite wisdom and providence of God. Philo counters claiming that pain,
           suffering and the experience of evil far outweigh any experiences of pleasure and happiness.
           In fact, the very nature of the universe seems to pose an insoluble confrontation of good and
           evil. Despite the argument that God is only ‘finitely’ perfect in his creation of the universe, a
           universe filled with the incontrovertible evidence of pain and suffering, governed by blind,
           mechanical and determined natural laws, filled with species each facing limitations and
           existing within a fragile balance amongst the powerful, violent natural forces leads inevitably
           to a scepticism within which one is not able to convincingly infer the moral goodness of a
           divinity.

           Candidates might explore:
           • The extent of pain, suffering and evil experienced by animals and humans
           • Religion and belief in a God can be sources of fear and anxiety
           • Epicurus’s dilemma of an omniscient, omnipotent, omnibenevolent God and the
              existence of evil and suffering
           • Evil and suffering proceeding from human nature
           • Evil and suffering as a temptation to suicide
           • God’s infinite wisdom and providence cannot be penetrated when it comes to
              understanding the presence of evil and suffering
           • The experience of evil as a source of skepticism
           • Examples of evil mentioned by Philo, Demea and Cleanthes
           • An infinitely perfect God versus a finitely perfect God
           • The nature of the universe entails physical evil
           • Evil is not a problem in an indifferent universe
           • The difficulties encountered in inferring the existence of a moral God
           • Parts X and XI present a type of theodicy.
                                            – 16 –               M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   To what extent does the existence of evil represent a significant problem for belief in
      God?                                                                                 [15]

      Possible discussion points include:
      • The strength of the catalogue of misery and suffering provided by Philo to support the idea
        that evil is a clear and present reality
      • An analysis of the idea that the presence of evil is a central challenge to the Christian
        conception of the deity
      • The connection of the debate to Epicurus’s “old questions”
      • An analysis of Demea’s position about not being able to understand the complex reality of
        the world as it is
      • An analysis of Philo´s challenge to the empirical theist's attempt to infer God’s nature from
        the universe
      • An analysis of causes enumerated by Philo in his speech
      • Philo’s position about the evident indifference of God faced with evil
      • An analysis of Philo’s final idea that God is neither good nor bad.
                                                    – 17 –                M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


John Stuart Mill: On Liberty

7.   (a)   Explain Mill’s denial of the right of people to exercise coercion over the opinion and
           expression of others.                                                                 [10]

           Mill denies the right of the people to exercise coercion controlling the expression of opinion
           (either by themselves or by their government) in his defense of liberty of thought and
           expression. For that purpose the power itself is illegitimate; the best government has no
           more title to it than the worst. It is as harmful or even more, when exerted in accordance with
           public opinion than when in opposition to it. In the second paragraph of Chapter 2 Mill
           states: “If all mankind minus one were of one opinion, mankind would be no more justified in
           silencing that one person than he, if he had the power, would be justified in silencing
           mankind.” He insists that there has to be the fullest liberty of professing and discussing, as a
           matter of ethical conviction, any doctrine, no matter how immoral it may be considered, and
           goes on explaining that “the peculiar evil of silencing the expression of an opinion is that it is
           robbing the human race, posterity as well as the existing generation – those who dissent
           from the opinion, still more than those who hold it. If the opinion is right, they are deprived of
           the opportunity of exchanging error for truth; if wrong, they lose, what is almost as great a
           benefit, the clearer perception and livelier impression of truth produced by its collision with
           error.” (Chapter 2)

           Candidates might explore:
           • All silencing of discussion is an assumption of infallibility. Those who desire to suppress
             an opinion are not infallible. They have no authority to decide the question for all
             mankind, and exclude every other person from the means of judging
           • For Mill, utilitarianism is subservient to liberty, so it is clearly a precondition of the greatest
             good for the greatest number that liberty be guaranteed
           • Complete liberty of contradicting and disproving our opinion is the very condition which
             justifies us in assuming its truth for purposes of action; and on no other terms can a being
             with human faculties have any rational assurance of being right
           • A quality of the human mind: It is capable of rectifying its mistakes by discussion and
             experience, not by experience alone. There must be discussion, to show how experience
             is to be interpreted.


     (b)   Evaluate Mill’s denial of people’s coercion of the opinion and expression of others. [15]

           Possible discussion points include:
           • The steady habit of correcting and completing our own opinion by collating it with those of
             others is the only stable foundation for a just reliance on it
           • The case of Socrates: a memorable collision between his teachings and the legal
             authorities and public opinion of his time
           • Liberty of the press as defense against corrupt or tyrannical government
           • To what extent do freedom of opinion and freedom of expression really contribute to the
             mental well-being of mankind (on which all their other well-being depends)? What about
             lying for humanity’s sake?
           • The respect for the beliefs of the other should not be a limit of the of liberty of expression
           • No political or social principle, except the very basic human rights, has to be held as
             absolute
           • Are liberty of thought and liberty of expression equivalent?
                                                  – 18 –               M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


8.   (a)   Explain Mill’s arguments in relation to the claim that his doctrine contains important
           lessons for modern multicultural societies.                                          [10]

           The reference to multicultural societies opens a wide understanding of what “multi-cultural”
           might mean. Hence, it allows for a variety of ways of approaching Mill’s text in order to find
           related arguments. Mill’s statement in chapter 1 “I regard utility as the ultimate appeal on all
           ethical questions; but it must be utility in the largest sense, grounded on the permanent
           interests of man as a progressive being” might serve as an initial way of tackling the issue.
           Mill has in mind the higher human nature, capable of development by self-culture, which he
           believes to be present in every human being. Self-culture opens access to higher forms of
           human happiness, but it has to be self-culture, first because human potentialities are diverse
           and best known to each human being itself, and second because only when human beings
           work to their own plans of life do they develop moral freedom, itself indispensable to a higher
           human nature. This puts at the forefront a flexible view on human nature where the possible
           diversity is constitutive. This view in turn provides a platform to explain and analyse the
           issues in relation to multi-cultural societies that might be identified in Mill’s text.

           Candidates might explore:
           • The importance that free self-culture assumes in Mill’s idea of human good: “the free
             development of individuality is one of the leading essentials of well-being” (Chapter 3)
           • The defense of liberty of thought and discussion
           • Some of Mill’s recommendations: plural voting, a public ballot, proportional representation
             of minorities
           • Mill’s protection of minorities
           • Mill’s advocacy of equal rights for women.


     (b)   Evaluate the claim that Mill’s doctrine contains important lessons for modern
           multicultural societies.                                                                    [15]

           Possible discussion points include:
           • Present multi-cultural approaches to social and political life stress ways of accommodating
             cultural diversity fairly
           • Public policies often have different consequences for members of different cultural groups.
             Eg given the importance of language to culture, and the role of the modern state in so
             many aspects of life, the choice of official languages will affect different people very
             differently. Similar issues arise concerning the content of education and the criminal law
           • Mill’s accent on liberty might be in many ways an attractive ideal, but there are reasons to
             doubt that it provides a realistic model for organizing social and political life, eg it might
             conflict with security
           • Criticism of Mill’s basic conception and some radicalized positions: The radical Mill,
             spouting nonsense about individual licence, abrasive feminism and socialism
           • A sympathetic view: At any rate, in political philosophy from Plato’s Republic to the
             present day, Mill’s discussion of democracy has few rivals – for its open-mindedness, its
             historical and psychological awareness, and its underlying ethical power; all of which
             constitutes a solid basis for multicultural approaches.
                                                  – 19 –               M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Friedrich Nietzsche: The Genealogy of Morals

9.   (a)   Explain the account of the development of morality from the earliest period to
           Nietzsche’s own time.                                                                        [10]

           Nietzsche sees his work as explaining the state that civilisation has reached in Europe with
           its Judeo-Christian heritage at a time when the foundations of that heritage were being
           replaced by a modern form of nihilism. Nietzsche seeks to re-examine the values that have
           shaped the development of western history, as he then goes on to offer a new insight for the
           way forward at a transitional period of history. Prominently in Essay 1, Nietzsche
           characterises the understanding of contemporary moral life as one of “slave morality” and he
           says this is the case because of historical features of social development. Nietzsche offers
           an account of the historical development of the moral life, but warns us not to confuse the
           origins of an idea with its current use in society. Nietzsche’s main claim about contemporary
           moral matters is the division between master and slave morality, which has arisen due to the
           influence of Christianity which replaced the pre-moral and the moral periods from the earliest
           times. In his distinction between master and slave morality Nietzsche draws a distinction
           between social classes. He ascribes the master morality to the aristocratic traits of self-
           affirmation and freedom to choose what one will. In his time, men and women were
           influenced both by the aristocratic morality and also the slave morality which is typified by a
           feeling of suffering and suppression. The slave morality thinking looks towards the virtues of
           compassion, humility and hard work in contrast to the powerful virtues of the aristocratic
           master.

           Candidates might explore:
           • The psychological account of the types of morality displayed up to the modern period
           • The account and analysis of social class
           • The account and analysis of religion’s influence on the development of morality to the
             modern day
           • The slave revolt insists on turning its eyes on the master morality and describing it as ‘evil’
             or “bad” in that there is an intention of revenge, whereas the master morality only uses the
             term “bad” to denote something inferior
           • The master morality does not fit in with the modern world with its emphasis of looking after
             only one’s own kind and not having duties to those of a lower class
           • In the end we are defined more by the revolt of slave morality in directing resentment
             towards the noble, master class, but we are also made aware of ourselves as agents with
             the possibility of free action.


     (b)   Evaluate the account of the slave revolt as being the defining event for modern
           morality.                                                                                    [15]

           Possible discussion points include:
           • The nature of slave morality and its origins in the Judeo-Christian tradition
           • The revolt against the dominance of aristocratic, noble, supremacy
           • The slave revolt is the “great politics of revenge”
           • The slave revolt is parasitic on what it must attack, unable to affirm itself, but condemns
             self-affirmation
           • The slave revolt invents the idea of the free subject and develops a vocabulary making
             virtues of weakness (sin, guilt, pity, compassion) in order to attack what it resents in the
             masters
           • The defining attitude is one of resentment
           • Yet Nietzsche sees how the priestly form of existence makes humans interesting building
             on the idea of humans being capable of free action, which came from the slave morality
             encouraged in the Judeo-Christina tradition
           • How effective is Nietzsche’s method philosophically?
                                      – 20 –               M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


• Is the conception of slave and master morality pure speculative reading into history?
• Is the separation of the act from the agent, achieved through this reading of moral history,
  convincing?
                                                   – 21 –               M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


10.   (a)   Explain Nietzsche’s account of the role of guilt in the development of human
            culture.                                                                                     [10]

            In the second essay Nietzsche develops a psychological account of the development of
            humans under the influence of the Judeo-Christian moral tradition and culture. The process
            by which the human animal becomes a moral agent is not through gentle methods but by
            deployment of the harsh instruments of punishment and discipline. “Conscience” is both a
            moral faculty and an internal method of control that primitive humans gained in the process
            of being civilised, but once disciplined the human is able to live beyond morality
            autonomously. However, this process gets deformed by the influence of Christianity with its
            repression of natural human instincts. Principally the ancient debtors’ notion of guilt has
            been transformed into a moral sense of shame from sin. The failing is one of moral shame,
            not a missed legal contract. Bad conscience arises as a break with the old understanding of
            guilt and Nietzsche says it as fundamental a leap for humans as for fish when they evolved
            from sea to land. Bad conscience involves an internalisation of human instincts which would
            before have roamed free. Humans become entrapped by the internalisation and by the
            limitations of society, and this causes the bad conscience to arise. This occurs before the
            slave revolt but the psychological impact of this turn makes the slave revolt possible with its
            emphasis on moral guilt.

            Candidates might explore:
            • The role of guilt and its change from a legal to a moral account
            • The account of pre-moral human psychological life and how it develops prior to the
              influence of Christianity
            • The influence of Christianity in developing the bad conscience into the slave revolt
            • The account of the construction of society in nomadic times.


      (b)   Evaluate Nietzsche’s account of guilt.                                                       [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • The method employed to speculate about man’s psychological development
            • Conscience as a moral faculty developed in ancient humankind
            • The initial role of violence in cultivating conscience prior to the influence of Christianity
            • Conscience as a method of social control
            • The role of guilt and Nietzsche’s account of the influence of Christianity transferring guilt
              from a legal to a moral concept
            • Debt as a constituent of guilt
            • Is Nietzsche’s psychological account convincing?
            • Can such an account count as Philosophy?
                                                  – 22 –                M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Martha Nussbaum: Creating Capabilities: The Human Development Approach

11.   (a)   Explain Nussbaum’s argument that the best way to achieve your own well-being is
            understood in terms of capabilities.                                            [10]

            This question asks for an explanation of Nussbaum’s central concept, which focuses on
            freedom and human dignity. Particularly, Nussbaum’s notion of human dignity is shaped by
            Aristotle, Stoicism, Smith, Kant, Mill, Marx, and Rawls; the common approach was to
            determine the conditions under which humans can choose to make their life flourish. Implicit
            in this formulation is that people can rationally assess what is best for them, and that they
            can realistically achieve these goals (functioning). To achieve both functioning and ensuring
            capabilities is the duty of social policy. Capabilities are spheres of freedom; areas of social
            and personal existence, without which our human dignity is compromised. For Nussbaum,
            freedom of affiliation, practical reason, are the two that appear the most important, but others
            are bodily integrity, sexual reproduction rights, religious/spiritual freedom, and education.

            Candidates might explore:
            • The nation state is the vehicle for the expression of people’s autonomy
            • Capabilities approach can also be applied to non-human animals
            • The equal level of respect afforded to each individual is a fundamental principle in framing
              a capability
            • Capabilities are not “tradeable” commodities, ie reaching a threshold level in one
              capability does not and cannot come at the expense of another capability, but in situations
              where there is conflict between capabilities, it is still possible to rank them
            • Capabilities offer a better way to measure individual satisfaction in social life rather than
              GDP, utility, resource and distributive approaches, as these measurements are often too
              crude to accurately reflect levels of satisfaction
            • Nussbaum’s claim that holding any set of values that hold human dignity as central is the
              best way to deliver social justice.


      (b)   Evaluate the concept of a capability as the best approach to improving the well-being
            of individuals.                                                                    [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • Nussbaum’s defense against the claim that the concept of human dignity and respect for
              the individual rights are western values that are relevant and meaningful in democracies;
              many other traditions have similar values
            • A possible contrast with other models: Maslow’s List of Needs, Universal Declaration of
              Human Rights, religious views on human dignity
            • If human dignity is the basis for the Capabilities approach, then is it readily applicable to
              non-human animals, as Nussbaum claims?
            • Nussbaum devotes a great deal of her argument outlining entitlements of individuals; what
              responsibilities and duties are required of the individual under a Capabilities approach?
                                                    – 23 –                M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


12.   (a)   Explain Nussbaum’s moral case for extending the scope of the capabilities approach
            from successful nations to other nations.                                       [10]

            In Chapter 6, Nussbaum asserts that nations have a duty to ensure global equality and
            justice. Candidates could take a broad or narrow approach in discussing Nussbaum’s moral
            case. Because of inequalities in basic life chances, and because of serendipity, or
            otherwise, those suffering from these inequalities should also be entitled to reaching the
            threshold levels for capabilities. If basic justice requires that a person’s entitlements not be
            curtailed by arbitrary features, then equality is ubiquitously violated in the current world order.
            Some problems of nations were caused by earlier colonization, and some form of reparation
            or redistribution is appropriate. Earlier approaches to global justice were very inadequate as
            they claimed that beyond peace treaties, states had no other duties to other nation states.

            Candidates might explore:
            • “Differences of history and culture have a legitimate bearing on a nation’s interpretations
              of the capability threshold for specific capabilities”
            • Globalization has made consumers complicit in any injustice or exploitation, so there is a
              duty to redress this
            • The only efficient way for redistribution is through the institutions of nations; NGOs are not
              accountable like democratic governments, and private philanthropy simply does not work
            • A single world government is impractical as it is too culturally crude to identify specific
              needs, and a utilitarian response to the problem of global justice by obligating people to
              donate money to NGOs highlights the deficiency of utilitarianism: It cannot make sense of
              personal freedom and integrity. My life and actions are my own.


      (b)   Evaluate the argument that a nation state has the duty to promote the happiness of
            citizens other than its own.                                                      [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • What type of other arbitrary features, like nationality or gender, would entitle others to
              consideration for redistribution?
            • The views that foreign aid fosters a culture of dependency, while the market encourages
              entrepreneurship, and is the most moral way to improve other nations, as it respects the
              abilities of individuals
            • Do nations that aid other nations have an entitlement to ask for changes in traditions that
              inhibit other capabilities? Ie insist on universal suffrage, or sexual reproduction rights
            • Is it appropriate for current generations to assume responsibility for past wrongs? Is there
              a time limit to moral responsibility?
            • One of the practical realities of international politics is a nation’s self-interest is a primary
              and morally justifiable approach to global justice.
                                                   – 24 –               M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Ortega y Gasset: The Origins of Philosophy

13.   (a)   Explain Ortega’s claim that skepticism is not a state of mind, but an acquisition that
            has been formed with effort, as the most demanding of philosophies.                  [10]

            The question focuses on a central issue raised by Ortega in the first part of his work. The
            importance of skepticism as a vital part of the work of philosophy is worked with some detail
            by the author. Beyond referring to a philosophical approach, skepticism involves a general
            attitude of doubting, included what is trusted to be an undoubtable truth or a common belief.
            Maybe it is because of this that the skeptic is not always well received in a debate. It is, of
            course, not the same thing as cynicism – the view that we can never come to an appropriate
            understanding of what is right and wrong. One important issue in the skeptic attitude is “to
            avoid appeals to authority”. Ortega y Gasset observes “that from time immemorial men have
            bent themselves to conform to ideals” and it has not always been easy to question what is
            believed. The vision of questioning, challenging, and criticizing for the sake of deepened,
            purified, and renewed answers always implies an effort for the individual. Today we need a
            “constantly questioning consciousness”. The question then invites the analysis of this
            “acquisition” and its importance in any true philosophical activity.

            Candidates might explore:
            • The idea that skepticism implies a change of attitude and that is not necessarily
              something natural
            • The idea that the skeptic goes even beyond the extraordinary effort of searching that the
              philosopher faces in the quest for the truth
            • The importance of not accepting things as natural or unquestionable
            • The importance of the skeptic who has not enough with that search of truth because he
              goes on thinking and analyzing the truth found till it is proven invalid
            • The idea that the skeptic scrutinizes truths to further limits than other people questioning
              things beyond the point where philosophers believe they are unquestionable
            • The distinction between a fair skeptical attitude and a negative attitude of merely
              questioning things
            • The relevant role that some individuals offer to society when doubting and questioning
              established ideas
            • The idea that the skepticism of the true skeptic is something acquired, the result of a long
              and laborious process and not something simply or mechanically applied.


      (b)   Evaluate the extent to which skepticism is a demanding philosophy.                           [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • Reference to the importance of skepticism in different philosophers and philosophies
            • Analysis of the role that skepticism plays in the philosophical analysis of reality
            • Analysis of the importance of skepticism in changing views and opening new roads
            • Importance of considering skepticism not as something anecdotal or rhetorical but as
              something vital and truly connected to the discipline
            • The chance of offering a critique to the idea that skepticism is a sort of easy attitude that
              requires no effort, no particular method
            • To what extent each and all philosophies need a skeptic spirit and methodology
            • Analysis of some obstacles to the skeptical attitude
            • The connection between skepticism and the development of knowledge from Greece
              onwards.
                                                  – 25 –               M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


14.   (a)   Explain Ortega’s claim that the “thinker” should resort to certain precautionary
            defences as a social figure, because of the negative reaction of the populace.            [10]

            The question focuses “on the particular profession developed by the first philosophers and
            how this way of thinking and living is not attached to the Greek period but finally became
            something associated to the discipline from then onwards”. Ortega y Gasset reflects “on the
            importance of the thinker in society”. He shows how dangerous it could become to the
            society where he is born as the individual or concrete thinker “may question beliefs and
            ideals that are usually shared by that society”. In a way the thinker becomes something
            apart from the group where he was raised. “There is not always a clear understanding of his
            role” and could be attacked for his intellectual attitude. Fear to change is something to be
            taken into account in this answer society may offer. Ortega y Gasset mentions concrete
            cases of “our western tradition to show that life is in danger if you question common or
            accepted ideas”. Responses may offer an analysis of the main challenging characteristics
            connected to philosophy and the danger that philosophers faced through time. Ortega y
            Gasset mentions “the exile of Anaxagoras or the death of Socrates as the first concrete
            proofs” of this clear and present danger.

            Candidates might explore:
            • The idea that a new type of individual was emerging as a social figure
            • The idea that this social figure was reacted to by society
            • The idea that a religious attitude as predominant was something that was present when
              the first philosophers began developing and sharing their work
            • Religion in general as one of the most traditional elements in society that may be affected
              by a thinker
            • The sentiment of uneasiness that philosophers seemed to have raised among common
              people
            • Fear to change as one important reason to avoid change and particularly to reject the role
              developed by those who want to develop a thinking attitude
            • The idea “that philosophers know too much” and then became “extravagant and even
              sacrilegious”
            • The very name “philosopher” is connected to the difficult public position found by the first
              thinkers.


      (b)   Evaluate the role of the philosopher as a dangerous one.                                  [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • Comparison with the dangerous reality faced by different philosophers along time
            • An analysis of the cases mentioned by Ortega (eg Socrates)
            • The importance of individuals in questioning as opposed to the idea of collective
              agreement in traditional ideas and beliefs
            • An analysis of the idea given by Ortega that in Greece it was felt that there was a
              connection between the new discipline and atheism
            • The idea that the philosophical attitude could be petulant and insolent
            • The new role proposed to philosophy in the Greek world and the difficulty to understand
              its nature
            • An analysis of the different contents associated to the new discipline and its connection to
              the origin of the word “philosophy”
            • The difficulty to measure the levels and directions that the discipline called philosophy
              could reach.
                                                   – 26 –                M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Plato: The Republic, Books IV – IX

15.   (a)   Explain the account of the Form of the Good given in the Simile of the Sun.                  [10]

            At no point does Plato argue for the existence of the world of the Forms, their existence is
            assumed. The supreme Form is that of the Form of the Good, given all Forms must
            participate in that Form in order to be a Form at all – all Forms must represent the perfect
            “good” of the thing of which they are a Form. Plato does not directly describe the Form of the
            Good, but instead offers a simile during a passage discussing what good is not. After being
            asked what the good actually is, Plato responds with three similes, the first of which is that of
            the Sun where a developed analogy is established between the sun and the Form of the
            Good. The Sun’s action in supporting life and in offering light is compared with the role of the
            Form of Good in sustaining all reality and in conferring true knowledge. The analogy with
            light-giving properties is especially central. The simile follows the discussion Socrates has
            which again underlines the way the Forms offer a distinction between things or
            examples/particulars and the property in itself.

            Candidates might explore:
            • The Form of the Good as the ultimate grounding for truth and knowledge of that truth –
              just as the sun confers both the colours on things that are seen and our ability to see them
              in the first place
            • The sun enables both life to exist and our ability to see what life consists of
            • The link between moral goodness and functional goodness – the Form of the Good being
              able to confer the “most good" quality onto all other forms, as well as being the source of
              moral goodness
            • The simile of the sun’s position in the dialogue, building Plato’s account of the Form of
              the Good up
            • The issue of the difficulty for Socrates of finding the definition of the Good
            • The similes of the Divided Line and of the Cave as other examples of Plato’s theory of
              the Forms.


      (b)   Evaluate Plato’s account of the Form of the Good.                                            [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • For Plato, things are good for us, as well as good in themselves, so his account of the
              good includes a teleological aspect
            • How is the Good related to our interests?
            • Is Socrates’s inability to define the Form of the Good a weakness in his epistemological
              account of the Form’s centrality to the gaining of true knowledge?
            • What is the precise relationship between the Form of the Good and other Forms? Does
              the Form of the Good somehow exist in a different way/on a different plane? Does this
              raise questions about the coherence of Plato’s treatment of the Forms?
            • Knowledge of the Good and knowledge of truth – is there a difference?
            • How does the Form of the Good have any influence on the world of human affairs?
            • What is the relationship between moral goodness and the goodness of things in terms of
              their function?
            • How does the Form of the Good relate to the question of knowledge (see the simile of the
              Divided Line in discussion of this, as well as, perhaps, the simile of the Cave)?
            • The use of analogy and simile in philosophical activity.
                                                    – 27 –                M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


16.   (a)   Explain the desirability of the state being run by the philosopher-ruler.                      [10]

            Plato proclaims the desirability of rule by philosophers as a central tenet of the political
            treatise he asserts in the Republic. The philosophy-ruler has a love of wisdom which
            detaches him or her from the self-interest characteristic of rule in democracy, or other
            systems like the recent oligarchy in Plato’s time. The key ability of the philosopher is to
            understand the world of the Forms, which leads to a knowledge of justice and truth. In
            possessing wisdom the philosopher has a clear advantage for proper rule, but there are
            other qualities, like a dispassionate temperament, that qualify the philosopher to rule.
            Philosophers possess the natural virtues and excellences of character and skill that make
            him or her best-suited to rule. Plato asserts that in the philosopher the proper hierarchy of
            reason in the soul is established with the desiring and instinct parts subjugated to the
            reasoning part that seeks after truth. There is a central section with a list of qualities, besides
            the educational and epistemological advantages that the philosopher possesses.

            Candidates might explore:
            • The qualities possessed by the philosopher
            • The hierarchy of the soul of the philosopher
            • The simile of the Ship in explaining the desirability of the ruler possessing proper
              knowledge/training
            • The issue of the people not recognizing the true virtues of the philosopher to rule
            • The question of the philosopher’s possession of true knowledge – see the simile of the
              Cave
            • The extent of the training of the philosopher
            • The portrayal of democracy as a setting for the mob where the manipulator of the mob
              succeeds
            • The philosopher’s ability to know the universal and distinguish it from particulars, and thus
              establish true justice in the state.


      (b)   Evaluate the desirability of rule by the philosopher.                                          [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • The simile of the Ship – does it set up an effective analogy for rule by philosophers?
            • The simile of the untamed beast
            • The qualities of the ruler and why disinterested philosophers may not be the best to lead
              other humans in a state
            • Why is knowledge of the Forms desirable for rule?
            • Can rule be accepted if exercised by completely different people, with no connection to
              the ruled?
            • The difficulty Socrates has in answering Adeimantus’s objection that most people see
              philosophers as useless.
                                                   – 28 –                M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Peter Singer: The Life You Can Save

17.   (a)   Explain the claim that there is a moral demand in the practice of giving.                    [10]

            This question asks for an overall explanation of what, for Singer, constitutes a person of
            moral worth. Singer’s argument found in chapter 1 is, a) suffering and death from lack of
            food or medicine is bad; b) if it is your power to prevent something bad from happening
            without sacrificing anything nearly as important, it is wrong not to do so; c) donating to aid
            agencies prevents this level of suffering without sacrificing anything nearly as important;
            therefore, d) if you do not donate to aid organizations you are doing something wrong.

            Candidates might explore:
            • The second premise determines the limit of what should be given
            • The practice of giving is enhanced by a culture of giving. Simple things like, eg the public
              acknowledgment of who and how much is given, and promoting associations like the 50%
              League, encourages others to give more
            • Donations best directed via aid organizations that invest money in projects that generate
              work and other benefits for the recipients
            • A further moral obligation is, because of globalization, those in the affluent world have a
              duty to help those exploited by its worst excesses
            • Inequity in social capital places poor countries at a disadvantage
            • Nations also have a duty to assist other nations and groups of individuals
            • The partly false assumption that the ‘norm’ of giving is based on self-interest.


      (b)   Evaluate the claim that there is a moral demand in the practice of giving.                   [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • Singer calls donations to the art morally dubious because you cannot compare a child’s
              life to listening to an orchestra, or viewing a painting. What of cultural practices and
              institutions that are seen as essential elements in national or personal identity, like
              museum collections, ballet, etc?
            • Singer claims that in regards to work, that unemployment is not the fault of the poor.
              Whose fault is it? Is it worth donating money where government inaction or corruption
              prevents positive development?
            • It is no fault of my own that I was born in a nation where the principles of rule by law, and
              the possession of an infrastructure that supports and promotes economic development.
              This was paid for by taxes and with the continual vigilance of rights. Is this an advantage I
              should be morally concerned about possessing, when others do not?
            • My moral obligation to others because of the effects of globalization is indirect at best, and
              technically, non-existent, if I institute a boycott of all relevant products and benefits.
                                                   – 29 –               M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


18.   (a)   Explain the distinction Singer makes between necessary and unnecessary personal
            spending.                                                                     [10]

            In this question, candidates are asked to explain the threshold of sacrifice that Singer
            determines ought to be considered the minimum for it to be of moral value. It is best
            summarized by his second premise in his overall argument that if it is within your power to
            prevent something bad from happening without sacrificing anything nearly as important, it is
            wrong not to do so. Necessary spending needs to fall within this premise, and the limits of
            necessity is a central point for discussion.

            Candidates might explore:
            • We give to the point of running significant risk to our lives (Miller)
            • We give to the point at which further contributions undermine our pursuit of intrinsically life
              enhancing goods (Cullity)
            • We give to the point of a personal significant cost to achieve the best outcome (Hooker).
            • Singer claims that these three views do not go as far as his own in their demands for
              personal sacrifice
            • Living in a “midst of an emergency in which 27,000 children die…every day.” Is Singer’s
              justification for rejecting these more moderate thresholds convincing?
            • Spending resources on family/friends as a priority is, in most circumstances a natural
              response, but the principle of a level of commensurate sacrifice applies
            • Singer also claims that giving money to the arts is morally dubious
            • A sense of a flourishing life due to charity.


      (b)   Evaluate the distinction Singer makes between necessary and unnecessary personal
            spending.                                                                     [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • The value of sustaining cultural institutions for cultural identity, like museums, art
              collections, symphony orchestras
            • If the value of the life of an innocent child is always going to be more important than
              virtually any other instance, is Singer primarily using our morally intuitive response to
              convince us?
            • What moral obligations do we have when pursuing a flourishing or contented life?
            • Singer’s principle of sacrifice does allow some degree of personal judgment, but the world
              he wants us to inhabit is too austere.
                                                   – 30 –                M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Charles Taylor: The Ethics of Authenticity

19.   (a)   Explain Taylor’s claim that authenticity is a justifiable moral ideal.                        [10]

            This question invites candidates to explain Taylor’s case for authenticity, particularly in the
            face of the criticisms made by the “knockers” and the excesses of the “boosters” in chapters
            1 and 2. If authenticity is to be taken seriously as a moral ideal, one has to believe three
            things, a) that authenticity is a valid idea; b) that one can argue with reason about ideals and
            about the conformity of practices to these ideals; and c) that these arguments can make a
            difference. Authentic life is an ethical goal and peculiar to modern culture, stemming from
            individualism. Individualism comes from Descartes instituting the primacy of the individual
            bearing responsibility for finding the truth. This morality is also anchored in Romanticism. It
            is a “voice within” or “the intimate contact with oneself”. As long as the project of authenticity
            is grounded on a horizon of significance, so it finds some of its points of reference outside of
            the individual and in the communal, then it is a morally worthwhile pursuit.

            Candidates might explore:
            • The growth and role of instrumental reason as a solution to questions of value
            • The alienation and atomization of the individual
            • The tendency in modern culture to move from a justified sense of individualism into a self-
              referential and self-regarding subjectivity and narcissism
            • The lack of a common ‘objective’ set of values and language, understood and participated
              in by all
            • The selection of horizons of significance
            • The essentially dialogic nature of authenticity, according to Taylor
            • For Taylor, choice is the sine qua non of freedom, but it cannot become the standard by
              which to judge the worth of ideas and actions. Choice in itself is not enough. This is the
              slide that relativism makes in confusing an exercise in choice with authenticity.


      (b)   Evaluate Taylor’s justification that authenticity is a worthy moral ideal.                    [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • Although Taylor states that moral authenticity is fundamentally dialogical in character, his
              view on authenticity, which is a main way to overcome instrumental reason, is still
              individualistic
            • Taylor contends that currently, there is a value which claims that all lives are equal not
              merely in terms of their values as human beings, but in their individuality, their personal
              experiences. Taylor believes this causes people to become self-absorbed, and can bring
              about a loss of meaning in their lives
            • What is really at stake is a balanced judgment on modernity; on the one hand the modern
              search for authenticity is grounded in the belief of its nobility and ethical allure (the
              Boosters); on the other, the modern search for authenticity is grounded in the beliefs of
              self-destructiveness, self-flattening and narcissistic tendencies (the Knockers)
            • Though Taylor’s defends the search for authenticity as a noble tradition made possible by
              the Enlightenment, is it a search only possible for those in modern democratic and
              technological societies with the means to do so?
            • Is Taylor being disingenuous when he at once acknowledges and celebrates the plurality
              of the modern world, but argues against even a soft version of relativism?
                                                   – 31 –               M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


20.   (a)   Explain the parallels between art and the concept of the self in Taylor’s argument
            on authenticity.                                                                   [10]

            Taylor draws a parallel between the shift in concepts of the self and individualism and the
            movement in art from mimesis to creation in chapter 6. The language of poets and the
            images of artists had previously drawn on common understandings and mythologies; art was
            a mimesis of the world in its content and its manner, and was accessible to most of the
            public. Like art, the idea of the self changed from one that was defined by external moral
            obligations, to an internal one built upon notions of originality, imagination, and inspiration.
            The result of the change in reference for art resulted in a subjectivation (Taylor’s term) of
            meaning; previously, the external references for art meant that all had access to its
            symbolism and meaning. Now, the meaning must be mediated through the language of the
            particular artist. This makes meaning more difficult to access. Art became less public and
            more personal in interpreting its meaning. Similarly, the shift in the definition of the
            individual, cut the individual free from long held definitions, and the need for a replacement
            set of definitions, saw the birth of the modern concept of authenticity.

            Candidates might explore:
            • Modern art highlights the criticism of narcissism made against the search for authenticity:
              The personal language now found in art and the manner in which it is conveyed collapses
              art into a subjective exercise without an external reference point. Similarly, for the self
            • Art also serves as an example of how the subjectivation of the self does not mean that this
              subjectivation leads to narcissism and egoism
            • Taylor makes a distinction between the manner in which art express itself (personal) and
              its content (public)
            • The shift in emphasis in the definition of the individual, divorced from the medieval chain
              of being was contemporary with the Romantic Movement that changed the view of art and
              beauty from the mimetic to the actions and original idea the artist. The move was
              essentially from external definitions to an internal one based on feeling
            • Great art still engages with common and universal human experiences; with the self,
              though the personal is now of primary importance, it can only avoid narcissism if it seeks
              external, common reference points for its definition; a new chain of being for meaning.


      (b)   Evaluate the parallel between art and the concept of the self in Taylor’s argument
            for authenticity.                                                                  [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • If the concept of art is a parallel to the concept of the self, then what does this mean about
              non-western cultures that have different artistic ideologies and practices? Do they have a
              need for authenticity?
            • In the context of a parallel to the concept of the individual, how can anyone understand
              my art if I use my own private symbols? Furthermore, Taylor assumes an easy separation
              between the content and manner of art. Is it as clear as he implies?
            • Does Taylor successfully answer the criticism of those who maintain that the collapse of
              external points of self-reference must necessarily lead to a false search for authenticity?
            • Can self-fulfillment ever be authentic according to Taylor?
            • Can the tension between the individual and the public be resolved?
                                                   – 32 –                M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Lao Tzu: Tao Te Ching

21.   (a)   Explain the relationship between Heaven and Earth.                                            [10]

            This question invites an explanation of the relationship between Heaven and Earth and the
            role of the Tao within this relationship. The analogy of the flute and the flute player is used to
            demonstrate the interaction between Heaven and Earth. The Earth is the object, the flute,
            and the musician is Heaven. It is the Tao that is the breath; the air that transforms the flute
            from a static object to a producer of various sounds. The more it is played the more mature
            the sounds become, ie the more encounters with Tao the better. Heaven is eternal and
            Earth lasting. Consequently when the imaginary is untangled the Tao breathing is the source
            of ideas that can be materialised in space and time. Heaven evolves from what exists and is
            driven by the “non-existent” Tao. The real world, the world of phenomena, the world of
            things, arises out of these ideas. The Earth “things” gain names and are something that
            have arisen out of nothing. It is the “non-existence”, the nothing, that should be focused on,
            the breath not the sound or the instrument or the player. The essence of “things” on Earth
            should be sought. Similarities to Confucian ideas where Heaven is constructed from primal
            ideas and Platonic Form Theory might be developed. It is on Earth that we see glimpses of
            the Tao. Heaven and Earth do not live of themselves.

            Candidates might explore:
            • Essences can be discerned through primary qualities
            • The way names change but the essence is eternal
            • The way absolutes are defined by their opposites and therefore our understandings
              acquired through relativistic interactions
            • Yin and Yang are understood as complimentary to each as Heaven and Earth are
            • The way Heaven and Earth relate to nature and treat creatures as “straw dogs”.


      (b)   To what extent is awareness of the breath of life on Earth essential to our
            harmonious existence?                                                                         [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • How knowledge of things comes about through naming
            • The valuelessness of naming as names do not lead to the Tao
            • The way awaiting the coming of the breath is important, as in seeking the breath, the Tao,
              will result in it not being found. The activity of wu wei is how the Tao can be encountered
            • How the essence of phenomena can be seen between Heaven and Earth
            • The breath matures by being expelled often and can affect the behaviour of things but not
              the essence
            • Knowledge is seen as of less value than enlightenment
            • The nature of enlightenment is feeling the breath which is between Heaven and Earth
            • The way to experience the breath is through wu wei, non-action
            • The harmony and the symmetry of Heaven and Earth is seen and felt in the breath, the
              Tao
            • The aim of Taoism is harmony with and in Earth in all its forms.
                                                    – 33 –                 M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


22.   (a)   Explain why learning should be banished and knowledge discarded.                                 [10]

            This question invites an explanation of the valuelessness of knowledge and the
            ineffectiveness of active learning as they are not routes to enlightenment and the
            appreciation of the Tao. Theoretical knowledge is learnt from a teacher and the teacher is
            not necessary as the Tao can be discovered through wu wei. Knowledge results in the
            naming of things and the acquisition of a false wisdom. Knowing too much, claiming to know
            the world, is not true understanding of the essence of “things”. Cleverness and knowledge
            lead to a flourishing of lies. Wu wei will allow the person to encounter the Tao in things.
            This is done by non-action, by seeking nothing.

            Candidates might explore:
            • The nature of wu wei as an effective behaviour towards enlightenment
            • The growth of spiritual awareness
            • Ways to reach the nameless things and non-conceptual reality
            • The effects of lies and false wisdom leading to interference in the ways of the world
            • Wisdom as a behavior.


      (b)   Evaluate the claim that cognition is “the original sin”.                                        [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • Original sin of cognition is a desire for ever increasing knowledge
            • Original sin of cognition is seen as pointless, fruitless, as it will not bear the fruit of the Tao
            • The limitations of taught knowledge which is concern with things not essences
            • The ways in which worldly knowledge is not the route to the Tao
            • A desire for more information and investigating and seeking results is a loss of sight of the
              essence of things
            • A comparison with Greek traditions and the contrast between sophists and the “true”
              philosophical approach founded in Plato
            • The appreciation of essences and the Tao can lead to an expansion of duty and
              compassion
            • The applicability of wu wei and a rejection of knowledge in a modern world which is driven
              by knowledge and information
            • Does the sin of cognition recognize that knowing is the easy part but understanding,
              application and evaluation are the hard parts which might reflect a somewhat modern
              approach to education making education worthwhile?
                                                    – 34 –                 M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Zhuangzi: Zhuangzi

23.   (a)   Explain Zhuangzi’s use of nature to teach the art of living.                                    [10]

            “Wandering Beyond” (Chapter 1) has been translated as journeying without a destination,
            implying the need to empty one’s life of distraction or goals in order to achieve true
            appreciation of the nature of things. In this way, the person can go beyond familiar things
            and thus achieve personal freedom. Such things as being focused on our place in society,
            or, worrying about the expected roles we should be fulfilling, exemplify the kind of distraction
            that “Wandering Beyond” encourages us to shed. In looking anew at things, without
            preconceptions or normal restraints, we can realise the truth of the nature of things around
            us – hence a strong use of the natural world to illustrate this in the chapter. Wandering
            encourages the sense of wu – a centrally important concept of emptying, nothingness and
            being without. This encourages the proper ordering of things which lead to the true
            flourishing of the individual. Achieving the natural way of doing things is achieving the Tao.
            There is encouragement not to be distracted by comparison of the vast and the petty, and
            encouragement not to be taken in by the petty when – naturally – the vast, by dint of its size
            incorporates the petty. Zhuangzi uses natural metaphors and changes in nature to
            encourage this personal journey, including the transformation of the fish into the bird, and the
            natural behaviour of the elements, which underline the need to avoid fixed outlooks and
            expectations as you take up the challenge of “wandering beyond”. This leads to flourishing –
            even if not a life of immediate pleasure or success, but one of true fulfilment according to
            one’s natural potential.

            Candidates might explore:
            • The use of natural metaphors
            • The concept of wu
            • The social message in the chapter – how interaction in society can suffocate proper living
            • Journeying without a fixed goal or route
            • The conception of the flourishing individual.


      (b)   Evaluate the role of nature for the flourishing of the individual.                              [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • The individual flourishing is covered in Chapter 1
            • The individual is in nature and part of nature
            • Flourishing as not dependent on social recognition or social status – is this achievable or
              realistic?
            • Flourishing not in line with social, traditional views of ‘success’ – is this a realistic picture
              of flourishing?
            • Why should flourishing be so cut off from others?
            • Is the emphasis too ascetic to be of practical use in the modern world?
            • Can the concept of wu do the work towards flourishing that the book asserts?
                                                 – 35 –               M18/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


24.   (a)   Explain the account of the genuine human being (sage – sheng ren).                       [10]

            In Chapter 6, Zhuangzi brings into play the notion of the ideal life as instantiated in the
            zhenren, or “genuine human being”. Here there is a continued discussion of the nature of
            humanity and its relationship with the divine, as expressed in the concepts ren and tian.
            The greatest wisdom lies in accommodating both and not forcing a false distinction between
            the human and the divine, thus echoing earlier passages on being natural and being human
            at the same time. Nature features in the picture of the sage with the zhenren being in
            harmony with nature and its cycles, though not dominated by anything – just like being both
            unified with and not bound by things in life. The zhenren exemplifies moderation and an
            ability not to be affected by extremes – indeed he cannot be drowned by the ocean or burnt
            by fire.

            Candidates might explore:
            • The relation between tian and ren
            • The relationship between the zhenren and nature
            • The relationship between the zhenren and worldly things
            • The zhenren’s attitude to life and death and our ancestral roots
            • The place and use of techniques to help develop harmonious, real humanity.


      (b)   Evaluate the account of the genuine human being (sage – sheng ren).                      [15]

            Possible discussion points include:
            • Discussion of tian and ren and their relationship
            • The role of practices and disciplines in which humans cultivate the ancestral foundation
              inside everyone – is this a realistic or coherent idea?
            • In clinging to our ancestral nature humans are able to avoid being overcome by the busy-
              ness and the change of ordinary life, giving humans a stability that is not affected by
              unpredictable events – is this a convincing idea?
            • Inevitable opposites are mentioned – light and darkness, happiness and sadness, and life
              and death – this is descriptive of the transformation humans experience
            • Humans are caught in an inevitable process of change and natural circumstances that the
              Tao helps them navigate – to be genuine humans are not to avoid suffering or challenge,
              but accept them as inevitable – is this fatalistic?
            • The analogy of the potter bringing into reality a creation of things which get reshaped and
              respond to their natural environment before re-entering the unformed state from which
              they emerged
            • Can this human being operate successfully in the modern world?
