M18/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                       Markscheme


                               May 2018


          Social and cultural anthropology


                           Higher level


                               Paper 1




7 pages
                           –2–             M18/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use
of examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Global Centre, Cardiff.
                                                    –3–           M18/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The following are the annotations available to use when marking responses.

          Annotation                          Explanation              Associated shortcut

                          Caret - Omission


                          CKS - Clear knowledge shown


                          DES - Descriptive


                          diff - Difference


                          EE - Effective evaluation


                          GA - Good analysis


                          GD - Good definition

              GEN         GEN – Generalisation

                          GEXA - Good example


                          GEXP - Good explanation

              GP          GP - Good point


                          Highlight - Highlight tool


                          IR - Irrelevant


                          IU - Inappropriate use


                          ND - No definition

              NEX         NEX - No explanation given
                                               –4–                M18/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



                        NExa - No examples


                        On Page Comment - On page comment tool


                        SEEN_Small - Seen


                        sim - Similarity


                        Good Response/Good Point


                        U - Understanding


                        WARG - Well argued


You must make sure you have looked at all pages. Please put the      annotation on any blank page,
to indicate that you have seen it.
                                                  –5–                M18/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.   Describe how Hospiceños challenge power through their use of social media.                        [6]

     Candidates should show an understanding of how social media becomes for the Hospiceños a
     mechanism for challenging larger power issues. Their responses should describe how social
     media, as a cultural practice, is an instrument by which the residents of Alto Hospicio make visible
     their cultural, political and ideological stances.

     The peripheral location of Alto Hospicio within the nation serves as a context for the ways in which
     Hospiceños curate self-representations. In doing so, they imagine their marginalization to be the
     quality that makes them authentically Chilean. Being working class and economically
     disenfranchised marks the “true” national identity, thus reversing the logic of power, contesting
     hegemonic representations. They contrast their perceived homogeneity and class solidarity with
     the cosmopolitanism and political power they associate with the Chilean government and residents
     of more central metropolitan areas, specifically the national capital of Santiago.

     Candidates may refer to Nicole’s post or Francisco’s humorous post to express views critical of the
     political and economic situation in Chile. Both examples illustrate and describe Hospiceños’
     political use of social media. Some answers will take notice of how Hospiceños use a global
     means to serve their local interests.

     High achieving responses do not need to be fully comprehensive but do need to justify the
     selections made from the text and develop these into a reasoned, coherent and focused response
     to the question. References to concepts related to power, such as hegemony or resistance may
     indicate relevant generalizations.




     Marks      Level descriptor

        0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

                There is an attempt to organize the response and identify relevant points or
      1–2       examples, but the response relies too heavily on quotations from the text and/or
                limited generalizations are offered.
                The response is organized, identifies and explains relevant points or examples, and
      3–4
                offers generalizations.
                The response is organized, identifies and explains detailed relevant points or
      5–6       examples, and links them to generalizations, demonstrating good anthropological
                understanding.
                                                  –6–                 M18/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   Using theoretical perspectives, explain how the author understands the relationship
     between Hospiceños’ use of social media and morality.                                               [6]

     There are several points in the text which can be drawn on to answer this question, but higher
     achieving responses will incorporate concepts and knowledge from social and cultural
     anthropology that are relevant to the analysis and interpretation of the passage.

     In Alto Hospicio the kinds of identifications that are made visible on social media correspond to
     community values which guide behaviour. Candidates should show an awareness of how the
     author focuses on social media in order to make visible broader local cultural expectations and
     norms, as a window for understanding the Hospiceño’s world view: what is expected and what is
     not. Social media acts as an arena in which conforming modes of citizenship are not only
     performed, but also reinforced as important social values. Hospiceños use social media to express
     solidarity and maintain conformity. This concept is key to the author’s understanding of the
     residents’ practices.

     The author understands that this use of social media reinforces group morality – as a conservative
     force – by enabling and constraining behaviour, regulating the lives of the Hospiceños, policing
     individual practices – as in the example of Vicky’s comments. According to the author,
     Hospiceños’ use of social media tends to reinforce ways of identifying that are highlighted in other
     arenas of social life, for instance family connections or regional affiliation and to erase those that
     are less important to the community, including ethnicity. The concept of marginality also includes a
     moral dimension, closely associated with their identification as workers. Rather than consumption,
     it is labour, that provides a foundation for their core self-representations, values and their sense of
     solidarity.

     Candidates may approach this question from general anthropological concepts and terms related
     to different themes (such as 2.1 individuals, groups and society; 2.4 political organization;
     2.8 moral systems). Topics and concepts such as social and group identity, classification systems,
     conformity and social control, inequality, community, ideology, interaction, media and
     communication, agency, culture, social reproduction and ethics can be explored.

     The author highlights local categories, and understands them not as a separate domain but in their
     relation to the larger social structure. The author’s use of residents’ quotations demonstrates how
     the author makes sense of online social practices from the local point of view. Global media is
     always appropriated to local understandings and needs.

     (HL) The question can be approached from different theoretical perspectives. Answers can focus
     on agency-centred and structure-centred perspectives. Particularistic, cohesion-centred,
     conflict-centred or idealist perspectives are also possible choices of explanation.




     Marks      Level descriptor

        0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

                The response is mainly descriptive and relies on quotations, but may demonstrate
      1–2
                limited understanding of relevant anthropological issues and concepts.
                The response demonstrates some understanding of relevant anthropological issues
      3–4       and concepts or theory, or the response recognizes the viewpoint of the
                anthropologist, but not all of these.
                The response demonstrates a critical understanding of relevant anthropological
      5–6
                issues, concepts and theory, and recognizes the viewpoint of the anthropologist.
                                                    –7–                 M18/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   Compare and contrast the ways in which Hospiceños construct their collective identity
     through their use of social media with the ways in which any other group you have
     studied constructs its own identity.                                                                    [8]

     The target societies for this comparative question are varied and many. The question requires
     candidates to compare how another group constructs its own identity: while this text focuses on
     social media as a way through which identity is constructed, other means of constructing identity
     may focus on clothing, shared morality or religious belief and practices, gender performances,
     consumption practices and other indicators of group membership.

     As an active process, Hospiceños’ local identity is constructed by contrasting their own lived
     experiences with those of their image of populations in the nation’s capital. Candidates should
     show an understanding of the ways in which people use social media in order to identify as a
     particular kind of people, claim certain kinds of affiliation and place themselves locally within the
     nation.

     (HL) Students may choose to use theoretical perspectives, (ideally introduced in their question 2
     response) to help frame their comparison.

     (All) In order to obtain full marks, answers must be organized in a clear manner, highlighting
     similarities, differences and generalizations. Candidates must situate the comparative case in
     terms of group, place, author and historical context to gain more than 4 marks.


     Marks      Level descriptor

        0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

                Comparative ethnography is presented in limited detail and its relevance is only
      1–2       partly established. It is not identified in terms of place, author or historical context.
                The response may not be structured as a comparison.
                Comparative ethnography is presented in limited detail but its relevance is
      3–4       established. The comparative ethnography is identified in terms of place, author and
                historical context, or the response is clearly structured as a comparison.
                Comparative ethnography is presented and its relevance is successfully established.
                The comparative ethnography is identified in terms of place, author and historical
      5–6
                context, and the response is clearly structured as a comparison. Either similarities
                or differences are discussed in detail, but not both.
                Comparative ethnography is presented and its relevance is successfully established.
                The comparative ethnography is identified in terms of place, author and historical
      7–8       context, and the response is clearly structured as a comparison. Similarities and
                differences are discussed in detail. The response demonstrates good
                anthropological understanding.
