M18/3/SOCAN/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




Social and cultural anthropology
Standard level
Paper 1


Thursday 3 May 2018 (afternoon)


1 hour


Instructions to candidates
yy Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
yy Read the passage carefully and then answer all the questions.
yy The maximum mark for this examination paper is [20 marks].




                                                                                              2218 – 5804
     3 pages                                              © International Baccalaureate Organization 2018
                                                   –2–                  M18/3/SOCAN/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Texts in this examination paper have been edited: word additions or explanations are shown in
square brackets [ ]; substantive deletions of text are indicated by ellipses in square brackets […];
minor changes are not indicated.

Extract adapted from Haynes, N. (2016), “Introduction: Online and on the margins in Alto Hospicio,
Chile”, Social Media in Northern Chile (Why We Post).

         On Chile’s national day, Nicole, in Alto Hospicio*, grabbed her second-hand iPhone 4 to send
         her boyfriend a message and skim through Facebook. After reading posts wishing everyone
         a fun-filled holiday, she wrote her own: “First I am HOSPICEÑA [from the city of Alto Hospicio],
         next I am NORTHERN and finally I am Chilean… so Hooray Alto Hospicio! Hooray the North!!”

    5    Social media is associated with global networks, free from nation-states, geographical
         differences or cultural variation. Yet Nicole used this medium to declare her local identity
         and her loyalties—first to her city, next to the region and only then to her country. This post
         established how she imagines her position in the world in relation to various larger communities
         to which she belongs.

   10    The wealth and prestige of Chile depends on the northern region’s copper exports. However,
         most Hospiceños are low-paid manual labourers, who do not receive much economic benefit
         from the mines. They regard themselves as marginalized and exploited by the international
         companies and national government who extract most of the profits.

         While the southern capital, Santiago, appears as a cosmopolitan city, Alto Hospicio looks and
   15    feels like another world. To Hospiceños, Santiago symbolizes the economic exploitation of the
         region, and the nation’s economic inequalities. Hospiceños identify themselves as peripheral,
         as representatives of the country’s inequalities.

         Identification is an active process, which involves highlighting certain aspects of the self.
         In looking at Hospiceños’ use of online media, it is clear that rather than aiming to distinguish
   20    themselves, many individuals highlight their desire for conformity. This is to say, they seek to
         reduce the differences between themselves and other Hospiceños through shared assumptions,
         which they consider to be natural, determining what is considered appropriate or inappropriate,
         right or wrong.

         Hospiceños know what their neighbours consider to be appropriate, and they generally follow
   25    those guidelines rather than challenge them. They reject attempts to distinguish themselves
         from others, identifying in ways that highlight local affiliation connected to family, work and
         community politics. Hospiceños express these identifications through social media, reinforcing
         their values of conformity.

         Social media is used to suppress claims to individuality, as well as other identities such as
   30    ethnicity, in order to express communal solidarity. Class distinctions in Alto Hospicio are also
         downplayed to emphasize class homogeneity. Key to this sense of class uniformity is a group
         rejection of showing off what you have. One Hospiceño, Vicky, spoke about an acquaintance,
         “I see her Facebook posts and she’s always buying expensive clothing, wearing jewellery,
         new shoes. It seems like a waste of money to me, always posting pictures, always showing
   35    off.” Vicky thus clarified the boundaries of what was acceptable in terms of self-presentation.
         Behaviour that does not conform to shared values has social consequences as reflected in
         Vicky’s gossip.
                                                           –3–                     M18/3/SOCAN/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

            Like many Hospiceños, Francisco does not post much original content on Facebook. However,
            he does share multiple messages on marginality and difference. One post he shared portrays
     40     Adam and Eve. Eve asks, “Adam, where do you think we are?” Adam responds, “We are in
            Chile, Eve. Don’t you see that we’re without clothing, without food, without a house, without
            education and without hospitals? And they still tell us we’re in paradise!”

            Through actions that portray all Hospiceños as similar, and apart from Santiago, they construct
            a binary opposition between the good, hard-working but exploited and marginalized population
     45     of Alto Hospicio and the imagined superficial, consumerist, exploitative residents of Santiago.
            When Hospiceños make themselves different to their image of Santiago residents, they claim
            being marginalized as the norm, the condition of the “real” Chile. Hospiceños reverse the logic
            of power and link this to morality. They want to be seen as the “real” Chileans.

            In Alto Hospicio most social media posts are connected to the performance, maintenance or
     50     examination of what it means to be a good Hospiceño.
                 [Source: Extract adapted from Haynes, N. (2016) Social Media in Northern Chile (Why We Post).
                 Used with permission of UCL Press and Nell Haynes. This book is free to download from UCL Press
                    http://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/1495966/1/Social-Media-in-Northern-Chile.pdf. © 2016 Nell Haynes]




* Alto Hospicio: a city of 100,000 people in the north of Chile, South America, which produces almost
  one-third of the world’s copper


1.        Describe how Hospiceños challenge power through their use of social media.                               [6]



2.        Explain how the author understands the relationship between Hospiceños’ use of social
          media and morality.                                                                                      [6]


3.        Compare and contrast the ways in which Hospiceños construct their collective identity
          through their use of social media with the ways in which any other group you have studied
          constructs its own identity.                                                                             [8]
