N14/3/ECONO/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX




       88145104

ECONOMICS
HIGHER LEVEL
PAPER 2

Wednesday 5 November 2014 (morning)

1 hour 30 minutes


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

   Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
   You are not permitted access to any calculator for this paper.
   Section A: answer one question.
   Section B: answer one question.
   Use fully labelled diagrams and references to the text/data where appropriate.
   The maximum mark for this examination paper is [40 marks].




8814-5104                                                                                            9 pages
                                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2014
                                                                 –2–                       N14/3/ECONO/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                                            SECTION A

Answer one question from this section.

1.       Study the extract below and answer the questions that follow.


                                                     Indian exchange rates

           In 1991, India moved from following an import substitution policy to one of export promotion.
            There was a significant current account deficit and there were not even enough reserve assets
            to buy three weeks’ worth of required imported goods and services. Emergency measures
            were needed along with a strategy to ensure it did not happen again. The strategy was trade
            liberalization and the economy was to be opened up to increase domestic competition.

           This would be achieved through both foreign direct investment (FDI) as well as greater
            imports of goods and services. It was hoped that these measures would ultimately increase
            exports so easing the pressure on the balance of payments. The new companies that emerged
            would attract portfolio investment, further easing the pressures on the balance of payments.

           Twenty-one years later, in 2012, it is clear that elements of this strategy have done well.
            The lowering of tariff and other barriers did increase the availability of imported products and
            contributed to the growth of the export sector. Trade now accounts for a major share of gross
            domestic product (GDP). Growth in trade and other services has been self-sustaining and
            contributed to the high growth rates that Indian officials are proud of.

           However, the present crisis in Europe is hurting stock markets across the world and raises
            the possibility of an outflow of portfolio investment from the Indian stock markets. At the
            same time, recessions in Europe and the United States will have an impact on Indian exports.
            This pressure on the balance of payments is already being felt on the exchange rate
            of the Indian rupee (India’s currency), which is weakening and has fallen by about
            20 % in the period January 2011 to January 2012. The falling rupee has also created
            inflationary pressures, which has led the government to keep interest rates high.

           Currently, India has a large current account deficit which the depreciation of the rupee would
            be expected to correct. However, recent trade data suggest that this has not happened.
            Exports have been falling on a month-on-month basis from July 2011, with the slowing demand
            for Indian goods in Europe and the United States. Some economists say that many exporters
            rely heavily on imported inputs, so depreciation may increase the cost of inputs more than it
            lowers the price of the exports.

           Exchange rate policy should not aim at export promotion alone, but should balance both
            export and import growth.


     [Sources: adapted from “Europe crisis can unravel the growth strategy of the Indian economy”, Mail Online India, 24 January 2012
                           and “Trade data defies traditional view”, Business Standard India, 23 January 2012]



                                                                           (This question continues on the following page)

8814-5104
                                                   –3–                 N14/3/ECONO/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

(Question 1 continued)

      (a)   (i)    Define the term foreign direct investment (FDI), indicated in bold in the
                   text (paragraph ).                                                          [2 marks]

		          (ii)   Define the term exchange rate, indicated in bold in the text
                   (paragraph ).                                                               [2 marks]

      (b)   Using an appropriate diagram, explain one reason why the rupee may have
            fallen in value “by about 20 % in the period January 2011 to January 2012”
            (paragraph ).                                                                      [4 marks]

      (c)   Using an AD/AS diagram, explain why “the falling rupee has also created
            inflationary pressures” (paragraph ).                                              [4 marks]

      (d)   Using information from the text/data and your knowledge of economics,
            evaluate the possible economic consequences of the fall in the value of the rupee
            on the Indian economy.                                                              [8 marks]




8814-5104                                                                                       Turn over
                                                          –4–                      N14/3/ECONO/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

2.       Study the extract below and answer the questions that follow.


                                       Increase tariff on foreign chicken

           In the country of Trinidad and Tobago, it has been reported that the price of domestic chicken
            (poultry) will not increase in the near future, even if the government introduces a higher tariff
            on imported whole chicken from the United States.

           The Poultry Association of Trinidad and Tobago (PATT) hosted a news conference to reduce
            public concerns about reports of an increase in poultry prices. The association says that
            there will be an increase in prices, but this will only be on imported chicken. However,
            economists know that this will not be the case.

           The association is insisting that the current 40 % tariff on imported chicken be increased
            to 80 % to make things fairer between domestic and imported chicken. They argue that
            Trinidad and Tobago’s poultry industry has been operating at a major disadvantage in
            comparison with other Caribbean nations. For instance, Barbados has a 180 % tariff on
            imported chicken, Jamaica 280 % and Guatemala 257 %.

           The President of PATT said imported chicken was hurting the local industry, with some firms
            in danger of shutting down. “Chickens are remaining longer on farms, and it’s not because we
            want to keep them as pets, it’s because they are not selling,” he said.

           A domestic poultry producer said the local industry had to compete with goods that came
            from the United States, the European Union and Brazil, which were heavily subsidized by
            their governments. “We don’t need subsidies and the government cannot afford to pay
            us any. We want the tariff. We don’t want to ban imported chicken; once the tariff is on,
            everything will be fine.”

           Trinidad and Tobago imports two types of chicken. The first type, “mechanically deboned
            meat (MDM)”, is used to make processed meat products, such as chicken sausages and chicken
            burgers. The second type is whole chickens. There is a quota on MDM chickens at 0 % tariff
            because domestic producers have accepted that they cannot meet the local demand by firms.

           However, there is a concern that the importers are abusing this tariff-free access to bring
            whole chicken into the domestic market. Data from customs show that 3.29 million kilograms
            of chicken was imported in August, but almost 75 % was brought in duty-free.

           Local chicken sells for approximately $4.50 per kilogram while imported chicken, according to
            PATT’s information from Customs, is about $1 to $2 per kilogram. “That just covers the cost
            of shipping the chicken. If these figures are correct, there is something very wrong,” said the
            domestic producer.

           The poultry industry makes up 60 % of the agriculture sector in Trinidad and Tobago and
            generates over 10 000 jobs and $1 billion in revenue.


                                     [Source: ©Trinidad Express. Used with permission.]
                                                                    (This question continues on the following page)


8814-5104
                                                  –5–                 N14/3/ECONO/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

(Question 2 continued)

      (a)   (i)   Define the term quota indicated in bold in the text (paragraph ).       [2 marks]

		(ii)            List two reasons why the government might wish to protect the domestic
                  poultry industry.                                                        [2 marks]

      (b)   Using an appropriate diagram, explain the likely effect that the suggested
            increase in the tariff (paragraph ) would have on the domestic production
            of poultry.                                                                    [4 marks]

      (c)   Using an AD/AS diagram, suggest what will happen to employment if imports
            continue to damage the domestic poultry industry.                              [4 marks]

      (d)   Using information from the text/data and your knowledge of economics,
            discuss the arguments for and against the protection of the domestic poultry
            market.                                                                        [8 marks]




8814-5104                                                                                  Turn over
                                                     –6–                 N14/3/ECONO/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                                 SECTION B

Answer one question from this section.

3.       Study the extract below and answer the questions that follow.


                                Ethiopia: country’s partnership with China

           During his recent trip to China, the Ethiopian Prime Minister visited the Pearl River Delta,
            where higher costs are driving Chinese manufacturers out of the country. He invited
            a Chinese delegation to visit Ethiopia to look at a leather project Ethiopia is developing to
            better use its large cattle population.

           Within weeks, the delegation had arrived in Addis Ababa, the capital of Ethiopia. Among them
            was the privately owned Huajian Group, which produces 16 million pairs of leather shoes
            per year. Huajian Group decided to invest in Ethiopia, hired 50 Ethiopian technical school
            graduates, and sent them to China for training.

           In 1972, China financed a road across Ethiopia’s Rift Valley. Between 1998 and 2004,
            the Chinese contributed 15 % of the cost of Addis Ababa’s ring road (Ethiopia paid the rest).
            When Ethiopia’s economic growth reached the same high levels as Asian rates, the Chinese
            saw increased opportunities.

           An industrial zone is being built and run by a private Chinese company, with subsidies from
            China’s economic co-operation fund. Chinese telecommunications firm ZTE teamed up with
            Chinese banks to provide a $1.5 billion commercial loan to provide cellular and 3G service
            across the country. Another loan is paying more than half of the $612 million cost of a toll
            road that will cut travel time between Addis Ababa and Djibouti (a small country bordering
            Ethiopia), whose port now provides landlocked Ethiopia access to the sea. The tolls will raise
            money to help repay the loan over 20 years.

           China’s Eximbank has provided commercial loans for infrastructure such as electricity
            distribution lines, to be repaid from Ethiopia’s exports to China: these exports are mainly
            sesame seeds. These loans are known as “mutual benefit loans”. A Chinese company gets the
            business, Ethiopia gets finance for development. To the Chinese, Ethiopia, with a fast growing
            economy and 90 million consumers, looks like good business.

           In 2002, Chinese companies building the ring road complained they couldn’t find enough
            local skilled workers. The Ethiopian government asked China to establish a college that
            would focus on construction and industrial skills. The fully-equipped Ethio-China Polytechnic
            College opened in late 2009, funded by Chinese aid. Chinese companies are waiting to hire
            their first group of graduates.




                                                             (This question continues on the following page)


8814-5104
                                                        –7–                     N14/3/ECONO/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

(Question 3 continued)


            Of course, there are downsides to China’s engagement. For example, Chinese banks
             continue to show interest in financing large hydro-power projects in Ethiopia with worrying
             negative externalities and social challenges.


                                   [Source: Copyright Guardian News & Media Ltd 2011]



       (a)     (i)   Define the term subsidies indicated in bold in the text (paragraph ).       [2 marks]

		(ii)               Define the term negative externalities indicated in bold in the text
                     (paragraph ).                                                               [2 marks]

       (b)     Using an externalities diagram, explain the benefits of the Ethio-China
               Polytechnic College (paragraph ).                                                 [4 marks]

       (c)     Explain two economic reasons why China may benefit from its involvement in
               the Ethiopian economy.                                                             [4 marks]

       (d)     Using information from the text/data and your knowledge of economics,
               discuss the possible effects of Chinese involvement in Ethiopia on economic
               growth and development in the Ethiopian economy.                                   [8 marks]




8814-5104                                                                                         Turn over
                                                                     –8–                       N14/3/ECONO/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

4.        Study the extracts and data below and answer the questions that follow.


                                                                   Nigeria

             Nigeria is the largest country in Africa and accounts for 47 % of West Africa’s population.
              It is also the biggest oil exporter in Africa. With these large reserves of human
              and natural resources, Nigeria is in a position to build a healthy economy, significantly
              reduce poverty, and provide health, education and infrastructure services to its population.

             Resources from saved oil-export revenues proved important to Nigeria during the global
              financial crisis of 2008–2009, and financed a fiscal stimulus that maintained strong growth in
              domestic demand and gross domestic product (GDP) throughout this period, but can also be
              associated with Nigeria’s high inflation of 13.8 %.

             Despite Nigeria’s strong economic performance, poverty is significant, and reducing it will
              require strong non-oil growth and a focus on human development. Challenges to growth
              and development have been identified, and include the investment climate; infrastructure;
              incentives and policies affecting agricultural productivity; and the quality of
              university education. Perhaps the greatest challenge is the core issue of governance.
              Despite some successful initiatives in human development, Nigeria may not be on track
              for meeting most of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).



                                                                   Senegal

             Senegal is part of the West African Economic and Monetary Union, and its economy is
              dominated by a few strategic sectors, including groundnuts, fisheries and services. High rural
              poverty and limited access to rural infrastructure and basic services have encouraged
              migration to urban areas. The capital city, Dakar, accounts for one-quarter of the population
              of Senegal and over 60 % of the country’s economic activity. The country’s informal sector
              accounts for about 60 % of GDP.

             Senegal’s economy has started to recover from the economic slowdown of the past few years,
              with real GDP growth of 4.25 % in 2010. All the main sectors, agriculture, construction,
              telecommunication, and transport, contributed positively to the GDP growth. Growth was
              expected to further improve to 4.5 % in 2011. However, this may not be achieved due to a
              crisis in the electricity sector, and weak performance in the services sector. Export volume
              declined somewhat in the first half of 2011, but this was more than compensated for by higher
              world prices for Senegal’s main exports. Current transfers and tourism have grown in 2011.


     [Source: ©The World Bank: The World Bank authorizes the use of this material subject to the terms and conditions on its website, http://
                                                      www.worldbank.org/terms.]




                                                                                (This question continues on the following page)

8814-5104
                                                                  –9–                       N14/3/ECONO/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

(Question 4 continued)


                              Figure 1: Economic data for Nigeria and Senegal – 2011

                                                                                          Nigeria             Senegal
              Human Development Index (HDI) ranking (value)                             156 (0.459)         155 (0.459)
              Population                                                                158 million         13.7 million
              Gross national income (GNI) per capita in purchasing
                                                                                            2069                 1708
              power parity (PPP) terms ($)
              Life expectancy at birth (years)                                               51.9                59.3
              Expenditure on health, public (% of GDP)                                        1.7                 3.2
              Expenditure on education, public (% of GDP)                                     0.8                 5.8
              Gini coefficient                                                                0.43                0.39
              Population living below $1.25 PPP per day (%)                                  64.4                33.5


  [Source: ©The World Bank: The World Bank authorizes the use of this material subject to the terms and conditions on its website, http://
                                                   www.worldbank.org/terms.]


       (a)     (i)    Define the term infrastructure indicated in bold in the text (paragraph ).                              [2 marks]

		(ii)                List two of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) (paragraph ).                                       [2 marks]

       (b)     Using a Lorenz curve diagram, explain the meaning of the difference in the
               Gini coefficient figures for Nigeria and Senegal (Figure 1).                                                    [4 marks]

       (c)     Using an AD/AS diagram, explain why “a fiscal stimulus that maintained strong
               growth ... can also be associated with Nigeria’s high inflation” (paragraph ).                                 [4 marks]

       (d)     Using information from the text/data and your knowledge of economics,
               discuss the extent to which economic development is likely to be achieved in
               Nigeria in comparison to Senegal.                                                                               [8 marks]




8814-5104
