N14/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/T




      88145514

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN A GLOBAL SOCIETY
HIGHER LEVEL AND STANDARD LEVEL
PAPER 2

Tuesday 18 November 2014 (morning)

1 hour 15 minutes


                                 ARTICLE
INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

 Do not open this booklet until instructed to do so.
 This booklet contains the article required for information technology in a global society
  higher level and standard level paper 2.




8814-5514                                                                                       3 pages
                                                        © International Baccalaureate Organization 2014
                                                  –2–               N14/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

                                   Theme: Education and training

IT system: Using mobile technologies and WiFi in schools




                                    Photo removed for copyright reasons




      The increasing demand for access to mobile technologies by teachers and students has caused
      schools to consider implementing BYOD programmes. BYOD means “Bring Your Own Device”,
      whereby students bring their own personal mobile computing devices from home to use in school.
      The above image illustrates the wide range of devices that students may choose to use: laptop
 5    computers, tablet devices and smart phones.

      Some schools have already implemented BYOD programmes. One of the biggest challenges has
      been providing a well-defined step-by-step process that allows students to connect their mobile
      devices to the school’s WiFi network. Students are required to register their device with the
      IT manager in order to access the WiFi network. The school also requires that the device must have
10    certain applications installed on it, such as a calendar, mapping tool, and note-taking capability.

      In some schools, BYOD programmes have been quite successful and popular leading to significant
      advantages for teachers and students. However, students’ access to mobile computing technologies
      in the classroom and around the school has led to concerns from teachers, IT managers and
      school administrators. For example, one teacher did not understand how “syncing” devices
15    could have allowed their private files to be accidentally shared with other personal devices and
      the school network. Moreover, some students have been caught using their devices inappropriately.




8814-5514
                                                                   –3–                      N14/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

       Students are using a wide range of different mobile devices, which makes it difficult for teachers
       when planning and delivering lessons. Technical problems may arise during lessons that some
       teachers do not understand and cannot resolve. Moreover, IT managers are seriously concerned
20     about maintaining the security of the school network and restricting student access to certain websites.

       However, some schools have developed effective ways of overcoming these challenges.

 [Source: This article originally appeared on Cult of Mac, a technology and lifestyle publication centered on Apple products and the culture
                                                   they invigorate, www.cultofmac.com]




8814-5514
