No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic
or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without written permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of
any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties,
including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study
services, preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping
services or teacher resource digital platforms and app developers, is not
permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license. More
information on how to request a license can be obtained from http://
www.ibo.org/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-
third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni
par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation
écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation
commerciale de tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit.
L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs,
des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou d’aide aux études,
des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des
gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs
d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations
sur la procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à
l’adresse http://www.ibo.org/fr/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni
por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin que medie la
autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines
comerciales de todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El
uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales,
profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o ayuda para el
estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan
recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del
IB. En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una
licencia: http://www.ibo.org/es/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.
M19/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




Business management
Higher level
Paper 1


Friday 3 May 2019 (afternoon)


2 hours 15 minutes


Instructions to candidates
yyDo not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
yyA clean copy of the business management case study is required for this examination paper.
yyRead the case study carefully.
yyA clean copy of the business management formulae sheet is required for this examination
  paper.
yySection A: a
              nswer two questions.
yySection B: a
              nswer question 4.
yySection C: a
              nswer question 5.
yyA calculator is required for this examination paper.
yyThe maximum mark for this examination paper is [60 marks].




                                                                                           2219 – 5011
     5 pages                                           © International Baccalaureate Organization 2019
                                                  –2–                 M19/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                             Section A
Answer two questions from this section.

1.   (a)	With reference to RDM, describe how changes in operations management altered its
          relationship with two other business functions.                                             [4]

     (b)   Explain how RDM’s transformation of its manufacturing process from traditional mass
           production to highly automated production affected the interests of internal stakeholders. [6]


2.   (a)	With reference to RDM, outline one advantage and one disadvantage of Jan’s
          leadership style (lines 88–89).                                                             [4]

     (b)   Explain how innovation at RDM may have influenced their marketing practices.               [6]


3.   (a)   Describe two changes in the external environment that have affected RDM.[4]

     (b)   Explain how the methods used to motivate employees could have changed when RDM
           transformed from traditional mass production to highly automated production.               [6]
                                                       –3–                    M19/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                                  Section B

Answer the following question.

4.   If RDM builds a new production facility in Europe, an immediate consequence will be an increase
     in capacity. At current levels of output this would lead to a reduction in capacity utilization. The
     current output of RDM’s factory is 20 000 units a year, with a productive capacity of 21 000 units a
     year before the new facility is built. If the new production facility is built, the greater capacity for the
     whole business will, at current levels of output, result in the capacity utilization falling to 50 % until
     production at the new facility starts.

     Xi, the marketing manager, suggests that this increased capacity provides the opportunity for
     market development to be achieved by entering the United States (US) market.

     The US market has similarities with Europe, with an aging population and low birth rate. Demand
     for customized healthcare devices is high. However, the healthcare system in the US is very
     different, with a much greater role for private sector healthcare compared to Europe, where much
     of the healthcare is state funded. In the US, 18 % of gross domestic product (GDP) is spent on
     healthcare compared with an average of 11 % in Europe. Advertising spend in the US is very high
     for the typical healthcare equipment business, which uses TV and the internet to reach individuals,
     whereas in Europe healthcare equipment businesses typically negotiate with government
     organizations. Average incomes in the US are higher than in Europe. Competition in the US is
     very high, although some major healthcare equipment businesses dominate the market. Industrial/
     employee relations in the US are generally more decentralized than in Europe, with a lower level of
     unionization.

     To assess the best way to enter the US market, some senior managers may have to move to the
     US and Xi may need to recruit some new staff in the US with specialized knowledge of US laws
     and regulations, as well as some additional marketing employees. Xi is aware that industrial/
     employee relations are different in the US.

     Existing staff will have to get used to new ways of working and are concerned about having to work
     with new staff in the US.

                                 [Source: © International Baccalaureate Organization 2019]



     (a)   Describe one industrial/employee relations method used by employers.                               [2]

     (b)   (i)	Using the information above, calculate the current capacity utilization rate at
                RDM’s factory.                                                                                [1]

           (ii)   Calculate the increase in capacity at RDM if the company builds a new
                  production facility (show all your working).[3]

     (c)   Explain two possible reasons for RDM employees’ resistance to change if RDM enters
           the US market.                                                                                     [4]

     (d)   Using information from the case study and the additional information above, discuss
           the opportunities and threats for RDM of entering the US market.                                 [10]




                                                                                                      Turn over
                                                       –4–                    M19/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                                  Section C
Answer the following question.
5.   Jan is considering two options for the long-term development of the business: market
     development and diversification.
     Option 1: Market development
     Although Jan, with his strong associations with the US, likes the idea of developing the
     US market, he has concerns about it. Over the last four years, the exchange rate has
     fluctuated between €1 = $1.40 and €1 = $1.03. There is some evidence that the US wants
     to discourage imports and prefers foreign businesses to invest directly in the US. Jan thinks
     there are other markets in and closer to Europe that could be developed more easily without
     significant changes to the distribution channels or the culture of the business. He has
     suggested the United Kingdom (UK) market as an alternative, which has a health service
     similar to those in other European countries. In most other respects the UK market is similar
     to other European markets. The main worry is that the UK market would be difficult to enter,
     as established suppliers are likely to be preferred by the health service and there may be
     financial constraints on the health service.
     Option 2: Diversification
     Jan is also considering a proposal by Heinrik Langer, a business analyst. Heinrik’s idea is
     for diversification. He thinks that RDM should develop a service role. RDM’s directors and
     workforce have all of the skills and experience needed to help other businesses convert
     from traditional production methods to automated robotic production processes. This service
     (known as a consultancy) would require recruitment of more engineers and computer
     specialists as well as highly skilled and experienced consultants. Heinrik’s proposal is based on:
     yy the likely low long-term growth prospects for RDM’s healthcare products. Population trends
        in Europe due to the low birth rates (Table 1) will lead to an aging population in the short and
        medium term. However, in the long term there could be economic and demographic problems
        arising from the eventual decline in population that is predicted to occur when the birth rate is
        less than 2.1
     yy his view that every business should have a service role
     yy possible financial pressures on European governments, potentially reducing healthcare
        spending
     yy his data market research results on robots and robotics (Table 2).
                                 [Source: © International Baccalaureate Organization 2019]

                                          Table 1: Population birth rates

                                 Country                    Birth rate (births per female)
                              Germany                                       1.3
                                 Poland                                     1.3
                                  Italy                                     1.4
                                  Spain                                     1.4
                                 Russia                                     1.4
                                   US                                       1.8
                                   UK                                       1.8
                                 [Source: © International Baccalaureate Organization 2019]
(This question continues on the following page)
                                                               –5–                    M19/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

(Question 5 continued)

                                              Table 2: Market research on robotics


    Growth in industrial sales of collaborative robots is expected to triple between 2015 and 2025.

    By 2020, 1.7 million new industrial robots will be installed worldwide.

    Industries affected by robotics include:
    • unmanned air, land and sea vehicles
    • health care
    • manufacturing.

    Worldwide spending on robots in 2019: $135 billion.

                                         [Source: © International Baccalaureate Organization 2019]

     Nikita, RDM’s director of corporate strategy, has asked both Jan and Xi to provide data on
     each option to help her construct a decision tree to present at the next board meeting. The
     decision tree below summarizes the issues involved in the decision.

                                        Decision tree based on Jan’s and Xi’s estimates

                                                                                                                Likely
                                                                                                               outcome

                                                                                           favourable 0.6      $20 m
                                                                                                  rate
                                                                                        exchange
                                                                   et                     unfavo
                                                            m   ark m                   exchangeurable
                                                                                                 rate 0.4      $10 m
                                                         US = $5
                                                              t
                                                          cos
                                    t
                              a rke
                            m nt                         UK
                     n 1:       e                       cos mark
                ti o         pm                                                                      wth 0.5   $18 m
              p
             O ev      e l o                               t=    e
                                                              $3 t                       strong gro
                 d                                              m
          Op                                                                             weak grow
                                                                                                      th 0.5
             tion
                 2:                                                                                            $8 m
               cos dive
                  t = rsifi                                                                                    $16 m
                     $2 cat                                              successful 0.8
                        m   ion

                                                                        unsuccessful
                                                                                       0.2
                                                                                                               $6 m


                                         [Source: © International Baccalaureate Organization 2019]

     Using the case study and the additional information on pages 4 and 5, recommend whether
     RDM should choose Option 1 or Option 2.[20]
