No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic
or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without written permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of
any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties,
including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study
services, preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping
services or teacher resource digital platforms and app developers, is not
permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license. More
information on how to request a license can be obtained from http://
www.ibo.org/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-
third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni
par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation
écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation
commerciale de tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit.
L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs,
des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou d’aide aux études,
des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des
gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs
d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations
sur la procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à
l’adresse http://www.ibo.org/fr/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni
por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin que medie la
autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines
comerciales de todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El
uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales,
profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o ayuda para el
estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan
recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del
IB. En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una
licencia: http://www.ibo.org/es/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.
M19/3/ITGSX/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




Information technology in a global society
Higher level
Paper 1


Friday 10 May 2019 (afternoon)


2 hours 15 minutes


Instructions to candidates
yyDo not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
yySection A: a
              nswer two questions.
yySection B: a
              nswer one question.
yyEach question is worth [20 marks].
yyThe maximum mark for this examination paper is [60 marks].




                                                                                             2219 – 5511
     10 pages                                            © International Baccalaureate Organization 2019
                                                               –2–                              M19/3/ITGSX/H P1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                                            Section A

Answer two questions. Each question is worth [20 marks].

1.   Parents “cyber-spying” on their children

     The New York Times reports that an increasing number of parents use technology to protect their
     children and keep track of their online activities.

     Many companies are developing cell/mobile phone apps* to sell to parents who want to keep
     an eye on their child’s online activities. Some apps operate as a simple global positioning
     system (GPS) tracking device, but others are much more advanced. For example:
     • Qustodio restricts internet browsing and monitors for signs of cyber-bullying by detecting
        keywords in social media.
     • TeenSafe lets parents see all the texts, web history and apps on the child’s phone, tablet or
        computer. With one of its options, the parents can receive copies of all the messages that the
        child sends and receives. Parents can also receive weekly activity reports, similar to the one
        in Figure 1.

                 Figure 1: Example of a weekly report that can be sent to parents

                     Alexander’s Activity Summary
                    Last 30 days
                    10 h

                      0h
                           T F S S M T W T F S S M T W T F S S M T W T F S S M T W T F
                   Filter by           All activity           Questionable activity 8           Blocked activity 3



                        22% Surf on Social Networks                        46:11 Total Usage Time
                                                                                22:39 Hours of Web Activity
                        15% Surf on Games websites
                                                                                   2:26 Hours of Social Activity
                         13% Surf on Entertainment websites
                                                                                42:15 Hours of Apps Usage


                         Search activity
                               nicki minaj     myxer        chat roulette          friv       american idol
                       justin bieber           craigslist    rugby       rubycon          top gun    wikileads


                        Apps usage                          Web browsing                     Social activity
                           Google Chrome                     Facebook.com                     Johana Smith

                           Snapchat                          Google.com                       Edward Wilson

                           Skype                             YouTube                          Rosy Moore



                                        [Source: with kind permission from Qustodio]




(This question continues on the following page)
                                                   –3–                  M19/3/ITGSX/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

(Question 1 continued)

     Some of the apps are invisible to the children, so they do not always know they are being
     monitored by their parents. Some child psychologists believe that this approach to parenting is
     wrong. They argue that parents should develop trust with their children, rather than using spyware
     and engaging in online surveillance.



* apps: an app (application software) is typically a small, specialized program
  downloaded onto mobile devices; apps can also run on the internet, on a
  computer, or on a cell/mobile phone or other electronic device


     (a)   (i)    Identify two features of spyware.                                                 [2]

           (ii)   Identify the steps taken by a GPS device to determine its location.               [4]

     (b)   The developers of Qustodio decided to use automated keyword detection to monitor for
           signs of cyber-bullying.

           Analyse this decision.                                                                   [6]

     (c)   To what extent is it acceptable for parents to use apps such as Qustodio and TeenSafe
           to monitor their child’s online activities?                                              [8]




                                                                                              Turn over
                                                     –4–                        M19/3/ITGSX/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

2.     Braille keyboards

       According to the World Health Organization, over 250 million people worldwide are blind or visually
       impaired. Many of them use a tactile writing system called Braille, which they read with their hands
       by touching patterns of raised dots with their fingertips.

       Several companies have recently developed Braille keyboards, such as the one shown in
       Figure 2. Braille keyboards use different combinations of the nine main keys to form characters.

                                       Figure 2: A Braille keyboard




                                   [Source: with the permission of HumanWare]


       Braille keyboards are usually very expensive. They can cost twenty or thirty times more than
       standard keyboards. They are always protected by patents and cannot be cheaply reproduced.

       Umair Osman, a young teacher in Pakistan, has invented a system that uses a flexible plastic
       overlay1 to imitate the layout of a Braille keyboard.

       Umair has also developed software that converts the combinations of keys pressed on the overlay
       to the corresponding ASCII2 character. The overlay, together with the software, enables visually
       impaired students to convert a standard keyboard into a Braille keyboard.

       Umair has decided to release his software as open source software and is considering using
       crowdfunding3 for future projects.



1    overlay: a flexible plastic cover that is placed over the keyboard to allow
     combinations of keys to be pressed by the user
2    ASCII: American Standard Code for Information Interchange
3    crowdfunding: funding projects from donations made by a large number of people
     via the internet



(This question continues on the following page)
                                                    –5–                 M19/3/ITGSX/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

(Question 2 continued)

     (a)   (i)	Identify two features of American Standard Code for Information
                Interchange (ASCII).                                                                  [2]

           (ii)   Describe two methods that Umair could have used to gather information from
                  visually impaired people during the development of his system.                      [4]

     (b)   Umair has decided to release his Braille software as open source software, rather
           than proprietary software.

           Explain why Umair took this decision.                                                      [6]

     (c)   Umair has two options:
           • Option 1: he could continue to develop his software and Braille keyboard by using
             crowdfunding.
           • Option 2: he could sell the intellectual property rights to AssistivIT, a large company
             that develops software.

           Evaluate these two options.                                                                [8]




                                                                                                Turn over
                                                 –6–                   M19/3/ITGSX/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

3.   Hurricane warning systems

     In 2017, Hurricane Irma was a catastrophic disaster. Unfortunately the computer models did not
     accurately predict its track (course) in time to warn residents in the areas affected. Accurately
     predicting the track of a hurricane is critical for protecting life and property.

     The potential tracks that Hurricane Irma could have taken are shown in Figure 3.

                            Figure 3: Potential tracks of Hurricane Irma




     The European computer model, run by the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather
     Forecasts, performed far better than the American model, known as the Global Forecast System.
     However a new model created by the electronics company Panasonic, called PWS, performed
     best.

     The American and European models depend on data gathered from weather balloons. Panasonic,
     on the other hand, creates systems that collect real-time weather data from over 3500 aircraft
     every day.

     The PWS model resulted in accurate simulations of the track of the hurricane four to seven days
     in advance.



(This question continues on the following page)
                                                    –7–                    M19/3/ITGSX/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

(Question 3 continued)

     (a)   (i)	Identify two file types that could be used for the image in Figure 3, which shows
                the potential tracks of Hurricane Irma.                                                [2]

           (ii)    Outline the difference between data and information.                                [2]

           (iii)   Outline why visualization is used to present data.                                  [2]

     (b)   (i)	Distinguish between a model and a simulation.                                          [2]

           (ii)    Different weather variables, such as wind speed and temperature, need to be
                   collected in order to predict the track of a hurricane. Wind speed data is sampled
                   more frequently than temperature data in a hurricane.

                   Explain one reason why wind speed data would be sampled more frequently than
                   temperature data in a hurricane.                                                    [2]

           (iii)   Explain why the data collected about Hurricane Irma was not encrypted prior to
                   being transmitted.                                                                  [2]

     (c)   Panasonic does not make its PWS model available to governments, as the company
           says that doing so would compromise its commercial interests.

           Discuss whether governments should be able to make private companies such as
           Panasonic share their data.                                                                 [8]




                                                                                                 Turn over
                                                    –8–                  M19/3/ITGSX/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                               Section B

Answer one question. Each question is worth [20 marks].

4.   Automated journalism software

     Some of the news articles that you read are written by automated journalism software. This
     software uses algorithms and natural language generators to turn facts and trends into
     news stories.

     At present, these stories are restricted to topics based on facts and trends that can be represented
     and stored as data. These stories always have a very clear structure and must be published very
     quickly in order to be relevant to the reader.

     The Washington Post, for example, updated their reports about the 2016 Summer Olympics in
     Rio de Janiero using automated journalism software. The Washington Post also used this software
     to cover the elections taking place in all 50 states of the United States in 2016. This meant the
     newspaper could produce articles that were available to the large number of different audiences
     much more quickly.

     The manager of the Washington Post argues that using automated journalism software frees
     human journalists for more important work. Other people disagree and think that all news stories
     should be written by humans.

     Narrative Science, a company that produces automated journalism software, predicts that by 2026
     up to 90 % of news articles could be generated by algorithms.

     (a)   (i)	Identify two characteristics of an algorithm.                                          [2]

           (ii)    Identify two types of logic that would be used in a machine learning algorithm.     [2]

           (iii)   Outline why human testers are required during the testing phase of the
                   automated journalism software.                                                      [2]

     (b)   Developers of automated journalism software need to understand how human
           journalists work. Two methods of gathering this information from journalists are:
           • Interviews
           • Literature searches of existing work

           Analyse these two methods of gathering information about how human
           journalists work.                                                                           [6]

     (c)   To what extent should newspapers rely on automated journalism software to
           create stories?                                                                             [8]
                                                    –9–                   M19/3/ITGSX/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

5.   Sentencing criminals using artificial intelligence (AI)

     In 10 states in the United States, artificial intelligence (AI) software is used for sentencing criminals.
     Once criminals are found guilty, judges need to determine the lengths of their prison sentences.
     One factor used by judges is the likelihood of the criminal re-offending*.

     The AI software uses machine learning to determine how likely it is that a criminal will re-offend.
     This result is presented as a percentage; for example, the criminal has a 90 % chance of
     re-offending. Research has indicated that AI software is often, but not always, more reliable than
     human judges in predicting who is likely to re-offend.

     There is general support for identifying people who are unlikely to re-offend, as they do not need
     to be sent to prisons that are already overcrowded.

     Recently, Eric Loomis was sentenced by the state of Wisconsin using proprietary AI software.
     Eric had to answer over 100 questions to provide the AI software with enough information for it
     to decide the length of his sentence. When Eric was given a six-year sentence he appealed and
     wanted to see the algorithms that led to this sentence. Eric lost the appeal.

     On the other hand, the European Union (EU) has passed a law that allows citizens to challenge
     decisions made by algorithms in the criminal justice system.



* re-offending: committing another crime in the future


     (a)   (i)	Identify two characteristics of artificial intelligence (AI) systems.                      [2]

           (ii)    The developers of the AI software created a data flow diagram as part of the
                   development process.

                   Identify two features of a data flow diagram.                                           [2]

           (iii)   The developers of the AI software carried out an economic feasibility study.

                   Identify two other feasibility studies that should have been carried out at
                   this time.                                                                              [2]

     (b)   The developers of the AI software decided to use machine learning instead of an
           expert system.

           Explain why this decision was taken.                                                            [6]

     (c)   To what extent should the decisions of judges be based on algorithms rather than their
           knowledge and experience?                                                                       [8]




                                                                                                    Turn over
                                                    – 10 –                 M19/3/ITGSX/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

6.   Robots in restaurants

     Bruce Vellison is very interested in the latest developments in technology, so he has purchased a
     robot called Sally (version 1.0) for use in his 5000 fast food restaurants worldwide.

     Sally can cook the burgers, toast the buns and add tomatoes, onions and pickles before
     assembling the hamburger.

     Sally has a user interface that lets customers choose what they want in their hamburger. Sally can
     also clean the cookery utensils so there will be no food contamination, and can use a scraper to
     clean the grill.

     Bruce Velison is already thinking about the second version of Sally (version 2.0) that has more
     functionality and uses machine learning.

     (a)   (i)	Sally uses pattern recognition to tell the difference between the burgers
                and the buns.

                   Identify two characteristics of pattern recognition.                               [2]

           (ii)    Identify two characteristics of machine learning.                                  [2]

           (iii)   Prototypes will be created during the development of Sally 2.0.

                   Identify two reasons why a prototype would be used.                                [2]

     (b)   The developers of Sally 2.0 can choose to use a Pert chart or a Gantt chart to guide
           the project.

           Analyse these two options.                                                                 [6]

     (c)   The initial version of Sally follows a fixed set of procedures, and can only make
           hamburgers. Bruce Velison is already thinking about the second version of Sally
           (version 2.0). He would like Sally 2.0 to make a variety of foods. He would also like
           to use machine learning to create these foods and cloud computing to connect all
           5000 Sallys with each other.

           Evaluate Bruce’s decision to improve Sally.                                                [8]




