No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic
or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without written permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of
any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties,
including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study
services, preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping
services or teacher resource digital platforms and app developers, is not
permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license. More
information on how to request a license can be obtained from http://
www.ibo.org/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-
third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni
par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation
écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation
commerciale de tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit.
L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs,
des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou d’aide aux études,
des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des
gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs
d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations
sur la procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à
l’adresse http://www.ibo.org/fr/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni
por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin que medie la
autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines
comerciales de todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El
uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales,
profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o ayuda para el
estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan
recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del
IB. En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una
licencia: http://www.ibo.org/es/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.
M19/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/T




Information technology in a global society
Higher level and standard level
Paper 2 – article


Monday 13 May 2019 (morning)


1 hour 15 minutes


Instructions to candidates
yyDo not open this booklet until instructed to do so.
yyThis booklet contains the article required for information technology in a global society higher
  level and standard level paper 2.




                                                                                                2219 – 5514
     3 pages                                                © International Baccalaureate Organization 2019
                                                   –2–               M19/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

                             Theme: Business and employment

IT system: Radio frequency identification (RFID) chip implants for employees

        Employees working at the company headquarters of Three Square Market in Wisconsin, USA,
        do not have to carry their company identification (ID) cards any more. They can now have a
        radio frequency identification (RFID) chip containing their personal information implanted under
        their skin.

    5   The RFID chip is placed inside an unbreakable glass capsule that is slightly smaller than a
        fingertip (Figure 1). The capsule is inserted under the skin between the thumb and foreﬁnger of
        one hand. The procedure to insert the implant under the skin is quick and medically safe.

                                       Figure 1: The RFID chip




                                           [Source: Vetkit/iStock]


        Employees at Three Square Market can use their implanted chips to unlock doors, log in to
        computers, use office equipment – such as photocopiers – and even pay for their lunch simply
   10   by waving their hand near an RFID scanner (Figure 2). Once the scanner has read the data
        from the chip, the IT system authenticates the employee and confirms that they are authorized
        to perform the requested action.
                                                     –3–                    M19/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

                     Figure 2: A typical RFID scanner connected to a door lock




                            [Source: © International Baccalaureate Organization 2019]


         The technology itself is not new, but having RFID chips implanted in humans raises a number of
         social and ethical concerns.

    15   “The [potential issues with this] kind of technology are enormous,” says Vincent Conitzer,
         professor of computer science at Duke University. As these chips can store a significant amount
         of personal data, experts such as Conitzer are concerned that people might be expected to
         have RFID implants for an increasing range of uses.




