M19/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                                May 2019


                               Philosophy


                               Higher level


                                 Paper 3




6 pages
                                      –2–                  M19/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic
or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without written permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of
any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties,
including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study
services, preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping
services or teacher resource digital platforms and app developers, is not
permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license. More
information on how to request a license can be obtained from http://
www.ibo.org/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-
third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni
par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation
écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation
commerciale de tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit.
L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs,
des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou d’aide aux études,
des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des
gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs
d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations
sur la procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à
l’adresse http://www.ibo.org/fr/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni
por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin que medie la
autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines
comerciales de todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El
uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales,
profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o ayuda para el
estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan
recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del
IB. En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una
licencia: http://www.ibo.org/es/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.
                                                   –3–                 M19/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


How to use the Diploma Programme Philosophy markscheme

The assessment markbands constitute the formal tool for marking examination scripts, and in these
assessment markbands examiners can see the skills being assessed in the examinations. The
markschemes are designed to assist examiners in possible routes taken by candidates in terms of the
content of their answers when demonstrating their skills of doing philosophy through their responses.
The points listed are not compulsory points, and not necessarily the best possible points. They are a
framework to help examiners contextualize the requirements of the question, and to facilitate the
application of marks according to the assessment markbands listed on pages 6 and 7.

It is important that examiners understand that the main idea of the course is to promote doing
philosophy, and this involves activity and engagement throughout a two-year programme, as opposed to
emphasizing the chance to display knowledge in a terminal set of examination papers. Even in the
examinations, responses should not be assessed on how much candidates know as much as how they
are able to use their knowledge in support of an argument, using the skills referred to in the various
assessment markbands published in the subject guide, reflecting an engagement with philosophical
activity throughout the course. As a tool intended to help examiners in assessing responses, the
following points should be kept in mind when using a markscheme:

• The Diploma Programme Philosophy course is designed to encourage the skills of doing philosophy
  in the candidates. These skills can be accessed through reading the assessment markbands in the
  subject guide
• The markscheme does not intend to outline a model/correct answer
• The markscheme has an introductory paragraph which contextualizes the emphasis of the question
  being asked
• The bullet points below the paragraph are suggested possible points of development that should not
  be considered a prescriptive list but rather an indicative list where they might appear in the answer
• If there are names of philosophers and references to their work incorporated into the markscheme,
  this should help to give context for the examiners and does not reflect a requirement that such
  philosophers and references should appear in an answer: They are possible lines of development.
• Candidates can legitimately select from a wide range of ideas, arguments and concepts in service of
  the question they are answering, and it is possible that candidates will use material effectively that is
  not mentioned in the markscheme
• Examiners should be aware of the command terms for Philosophy as published on page 54 of the
  Philosophy subject guide when assessing responses
• In markschemes for Paper 3, there are suggested pertinent points found in the text extract relating to
  philosophical activity. The markschemes include suggested questions that might stimulate analysis of
  those points. It is not intended that all possible points raised by the text are to be covered by the
  candidates. The markbands direct examiners to rewarding the responses accordingly
• The markscheme bullet points cannot and are not intended to predict how a candidate will relate his
  or her personal experience of the DP HL Philosophy course to the text extract, so the examiner must
  be aware that much of the response of the candidate will not be covered by material in the
  markscheme, but the candidate’s response must relate to the text extract.
                                                  –4–                 M19/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 3 markbands

 Marks                                          Level descriptor


   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.


          The response is poorly structured, or where there is a recognizable structure there is
           minimal focus on the task. Philosophical vocabulary is not used, or is consistently used
           inappropriately.
          There is a very basic understanding of the view of philosophical activity raised by the
  1–5
           unseen text. Few, if any, references are made to the text.
          There is limited reference to the student’s personal experience of philosophical activity but
           no comparison or contrast of this experience with the view(s) raised by the text.
          The essay is descriptive and lacking in analysis. Few of the main points are justified.

          There is some attempt to follow a structured approach although it is not always clear what
           the answer is trying to convey.
          There is a limited understanding of the view(s) of philosophical activity raised by the text.
           Few, if any, references are made to the text.
          There is some evidence that the student has drawn on their personal experience of
 6–10      philosophical activity.
          The response identifies similarities and differences between the student’s personal
           experience of philosophical activity and the view(s) of philosophical activity presented in the
           text, although the analysis of these similarities and differences is superficial.
          The response contains some analysis but is more descriptive than analytical. Some of the
           main points are justified.

        There is a clear attempt to structure the response, although there may be some repetition
         or a lack of clarity in places. Philosophical vocabulary is used, sometimes appropriately.
        There is a satisfactory understanding of the view(s) of philosophical activity raised by the
         text. Some references are made to the text.
        There is some evidence that the student has drawn on their personal experience of
 11–15   philosophical activity, with examples or illustrations used to support their points.
        There is some analysis of the similarities and differences between the student’s personal
         experience of philosophical activity and the view(s) of philosophical activity presented in the
         text, although this analysis needs further development.
        The response contains critical analysis rather than just description. Many of the main
         points are justified.

        The response is well organized and can be easily followed. Philosophical vocabulary is
         used, mostly appropriately.
        There is clear identification of the view(s) of philosophical activity presented in the unseen
         text. Some references are made to the text.
        The student draws on their personal experience of philosophical activity, using examples or
 16–20   illustrations to support their points.
        There is clear analysis of both similarities and differences between the student’s personal
         experience of philosophical activity and the view(s) of philosophical activity presented in the
         text, although this analysis needs further development.
        The response contains critical analysis rather than just description. Most of the main points
         are justified. The response argues to a reasoned conclusion.

 21–25  The response is well structured, focused and effectively organized. There is appropriate
         use of philosophical vocabulary throughout the response.
                                         –5–                  M19/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



 There is clear identification of the view(s) of philosophical activity presented in the unseen
  text. Effective references are made to the text.
 The student draws explicitly on their personal experience of philosophical activity, using
  well-chosen examples or illustrations to support their points.
 There is clear analysis of both similarities and differences between the student’s personal
  experience of philosophical activity and the view(s) of philosophical activity presented.
 The response contains well developed critical analysis. All or nearly all of the main points
  are justified. The response argues to a reasoned conclusion.
                                                  –6–                  M19/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Unseen text – exploring philosophical activity

When responding to this extract, candidates should focus on the activity of philosophy. In the course of
analysing and evaluating the ideas in the extract candidates should reflect on their own experience of
doing philosophy, and should therefore make explicit comparisons/contrasts between their experience of
studying the HL Philosophy course and what the extract is saying about doing philosophy. Candidates
should make explicit reference to the ideas and arguments in the text in their response.              [25]

Candidates might consider the following:
• “No shallow end”; in what sense is “doing philosophy” something that requires an immediately
  challenging process like diving straight into the deep end of a pool? What are the “struggles” referred
  to that a philosopher might have to experience?
• Why is reading “the works of great philosophers” the “best way to learn philosophy”? Candidates may
  use their experience of studying a philosophical text as part of the HL programme. Candidates may
  also refer to the works of philosophers they have come across in their coverage of the Core Theme
  and Optional Themes
• “Topics” of philosophy and “methods” – what is the difference? Examples from personal study of the
  HL course
• The role played by the method of a philosopher in reaching a conclusion – the shape and type of
  reasoning and philosophical argumentation encountered in the HL course by different philosophers
• The pitfalls of “parroting” a philosopher’s text/ideas for true understanding; see, for example, the
  dialogic method for uncovering ideas and their implications
• Examples of doing “battle” with philosophers in an attempt to understand, criticize and learn; critically
  explore the metaphor of “battling” with someone’s thought as a way of doing philosophy and critical
  evaluation
• “..[L]earn from strengths and weaknesses” – is this the best or only way to evaluate philosophical
  argumentation; examples of different ways to read and evaluate philosophical work
• “Philosophy is…the broadest of disciplines”; how is this? In what way is this “exciting”?
• What makes a concept “basic”? Examples of the level of conceptual understanding offered by
  experience of the HL course
• Why can philosophy (considered a difficult subject by many) be “undertaken without any special
  preliminary training or instruction”? See the counter to this in Plato’s programme as envisaged in
  Republic. What might the role of the teacher be in the HL programme?
• Philosophy and its relationship to “information”, “knowledge” and “understanding”; see in comparison
  to science and the social sciences
• See the methodologies of different fields of human enquiry; what is distinctive about the methodology
  of philosophy? Candidates might reflect on their experience through the completion of their IA piece in
  their coverage of the HL programme
• The difficulty of articulating a “complete and coherent vision” of questions including “the language we
  use to think our simplest thoughts” eg neuroscience versus philosophy of mind, language philosophy,
  attempts to draw a metaphysical explanation of the universe, rationalism
• Whether a complete and coherent vision is possible, or incoherent in itself
• Philosophy as a revealer of ignorance, or as a revealer of questions rather than answers
• The particular history of the development of thought, from religious roots, through philosophical
  speculation, to a coverage by empirical science, meaning the range of philosophy diminishes as it
  gives way to fresh scientific discovery
• “The drawing of relevant distinctions” as a philosophical contribution to understanding
• See examples of conceptual problems arising in philosophy that can only be solved, clarified or
  approached by the philosophical method. What is it about these areas that make the questions
  unsusceptible to non-philosophical methods?
