M19/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                               May 2019


                               Philosophy


           Higher level and standard level


                                Paper 1




22 pages
                                      –2–                  M19/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic
or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without written permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of
any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties,
including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study
services, preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping
services or teacher resource digital platforms and app developers, is not
permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license. More
information on how to request a license can be obtained from http://
www.ibo.org/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-
third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni
par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation
écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation
commerciale de tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit.
L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs,
des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou d’aide aux études,
des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des
gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs
d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations
sur la procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à
l’adresse http://www.ibo.org/fr/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni
por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin que medie la
autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines
comerciales de todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El
uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales,
profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o ayuda para el
estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan
recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del
IB. En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una
licencia: http://www.ibo.org/es/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.
                                                   –3–                 M19/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


How to use the Diploma Programme Philosophy markscheme

The assessment markbands constitute the formal tool for marking examination scripts, and in these
assessment markbands examiners can see the skills being assessed in the examinations. The
markschemes are designed to assist examiners in possible routes taken by candidates in terms of the
content of their answers when demonstrating their skills of doing philosophy through their responses.
The points listed are not compulsory points, and not necessarily the best possible points. They are a
framework to help examiners contextualize the requirements of the question, and to facilitate the
application of marks according to the assessment markbands listed on page 7 for the core theme and
page 10 for the optional themes.

It is important that examiners understand that the main idea of the course is to promote doing
philosophy, and this involves activity and engagement throughout a two-year programme, as opposed to
emphasizing the chance to display knowledge in a terminal set of examination papers. Even in the
examinations, responses should not be assessed on how much candidates know as much as how they
are able to use their knowledge in support of an argument, using the skills referred to in the various
assessment markbands published in the subject guide, reflecting an engagement with philosophical
activity throughout the course. As a tool intended to help examiners in assessing responses, the
following points should be kept in mind when using a markscheme:

• The Diploma Programme Philosophy course is designed to encourage the skills of doing philosophy
  in the candidates. These skills can be accessed through reading the assessment markbands in the
  subject guide
• The markscheme does not intend to outline a model/correct answer
• The markscheme has an introductory paragraph which contextualizes the emphasis of the question
  being asked
• The bullet points below the paragraph are suggested possible points of development that should not
  be considered a prescriptive list but rather an indicative list where they might appear in the answer
• If there are names of philosophers and references to their work incorporated into the markscheme,
  this should help to give context for the examiners and does not reflect a requirement that such
  philosophers and references should appear in an answer: They are possible lines of development.
• Candidates can legitimately select from a wide range of ideas, arguments and concepts in service of
  the question they are answering, and it is possible that candidates will use material effectively that is
  not mentioned in the markscheme
• Examiners should be aware of the command terms for Philosophy as published on page 54 of the
  Philosophy subject guide when assessing responses
• In Paper 1, examiners must be aware that a variety of types of answers and approaches, as well as a
  freedom to choose a variety of themes, is expected. Thus, examiners should not penalize different
  styles of answers or different selections of content when candidates develop their response to the
  questions. The markscheme should not imply that a uniform response is expected
• In markschemes for the core theme questions in Paper 1 (section A) the bullet points suggest
  possible routes of response to the stimulus, but it is critical for examiners to understand that the
  selection of the philosophical issue raised by the stimulus, is entirely at the choice of the candidate so
  it is possible for material to gain credit from the examiner even if none of the material features in the
  markscheme.
                                               –4–                M19/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Note to examiners

Candidates at both Higher Level and Standard Level answer one question on the core theme (Section
A). Candidates at Higher Level answer two questions on the optional themes (Section B), each
based on a different optional theme.
Candidates at Standard Level answer one question on the optional themes (Section B).
                                                  –5–                  M19/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 1 Section A markbands

 Marks                                            Level descriptor

   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

          The response is poorly structured, or where there is a recognizable essay structure there
           is minimal focus on the task.
          The philosophical issue raised by the stimulus material is implied but not explicitly
           identified. There is minimal or no explanation of how the issue relates to the stimulus
  1–5
           material or links to the question of what it is to be human.
          There is little relevant knowledge demonstrated, and the explanation is superficial.
           Philosophical vocabulary is not used, or is consistently used inappropriately.
          The essay is descriptive and lacking in analysis.
          There is some attempt to follow a structured approach although it is not always clear what
           the answer is trying to convey.
          The philosophical issue raised by the stimulus material is implied but not explicitly identified.
           There is some limited explanation of how the issue relates to the stimulus material or links
           to the question of what it is to be human.
  6–10
          Knowledge is demonstrated but lacks accuracy and relevance, and there is a basic
           explanation of the issue. Philosophical vocabulary is used, sometimes appropriately.
          There is some limited analysis but the response is more descriptive than analytical. There
           is little discussion of alternative interpretations or points of view. Few of the main points
           are justified.
        There is a clear attempt to structure the response, although there may be some repetition
         or a lack of clarity in places.
        The philosophical issue raised by the stimulus material is explicitly identified. There is a
         basic explanation of how the issue relates to the stimulus material and to the question of
         what it is to be human.
 11–15
        Knowledge is mostly accurate and relevant, and there is a satisfactory explanation of the
         issue. Philosophical vocabulary is used, sometimes appropriately.
        The response contains analysis, but this analysis lacks development. There is some
         discussion of alternative interpretations or points of view. Many of the main points
         are justified.
        The response is structured and generally organised, and can be easily followed.
        The philosophical issue raised by the stimulus material is explicitly identified. There is
         good justification of how the issue relates to the stimulus material and to the question of
         what it is to be human.
 16–20
        The response contains accurate and relevant knowledge. There is a good explanation
         of the issue. Philosophical vocabulary is mostly used appropriately.
        The response contains critical analysis. There is discussion and some assessment of
         alternative interpretations or points of view. Most of the main points are justified.
        The response is well structured, focused and effectively organised.
        The philosophical issue raised by the stimulus material is explicitly identified. There is a
         well-developed justification of how the issue relates to the stimulus material and to the
         question of what it is to be human.
        The response contains relevant, accurate and detailed knowledge. There is a
 21–25
         well-developed explanation of the issue. There is appropriate use of philosophical
         vocabulary throughout the response.
        The response contains well developed critical analysis. There is discussion and
         assessment of alternative interpretations or points of view. All or nearly all of the main
         points are justified. The response argues from a consistently held position about the issue.
                                                 –6–                 M19/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                               Section A

Core theme: Being human

1.   Passage on the human condition
     With explicit reference to the stimulus and your own knowledge, discuss a philosophical
     issue related to the question of what it means to be human.                                     [25]
     The following paragraphs provide only a framework to help examiners in their assessment of
     responses to this question. Examiners should be responsive to a variety of philosophical
     perspectives and approaches. Examiners should be aware that candidates might respond to this
     passage in a variety of ways including ones not mentioned in the summary below.
     This question invites candidates to identify and discuss philosophical issues and/or concepts
     associated with the human condition or human nature. The passage implies that pain and toil are
     not just necessary elements in life, but essential for making meaning and providing a purpose in
     life.
     In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
     • The similarities between Arendt’s view and religious ones as to the meaning and purpose of the
        human condition
     • When does suffering become intolerable and hence, to be actively avoided? Does this
        somehow diminish the “quality” of my life?
     • Arendt’s suggestion that “for mortals, the ‘easy life of the gods’ would be a lifeless life”
     • The role of striving in philosophical discourse: Plato, Aristotle, Aquinas and Nussbaum all
        comment that results and success are not necessarily the most important aspects of a good life,
        but the attempts in finding and making one
     • The role of suffering and toil as an indicator of a life of meaning and integrity, eg Nietzsche,
        Augustine, Irenaeus, Kierkegaard, Camus
     • Other considerations such as: altruism, love, authenticity, material success
     • What role does happiness have as part of the human condition?
     • Does suffering make one a better person, or just miserable?
     • How might suffering and toil enhance one’s life? Is it the case that when they cease, life can be
        appreciated?
     • Should we actively pursue difficulties and burdens to enhance the quality of our lives?
     • Modern life and the attempt to avoid physical and psychological pain
     • Social media and the “sharing” of pain and success and markers of identity and a fulfilled life
     • The role of suffering in non-western traditions: eg as a consequence of desire (Buddhism);
        Karma (Hinduism).
                                                  –7–                  M19/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   Slide of discussion points from conference on human identity

     With explicit reference to the stimulus and your own knowledge, discuss a philosophical
     issue related to the question of what it means to be human.                            [25]

     The following paragraphs provide only a framework to help examiners in their assessment of
     responses to this question. Examiners should be responsive to a variety of philosophical
     perspectives and approaches. Examiners should be aware that candidates might respond to this
     passage in a variety of ways including ones not mentioned in the summary below.

     This question requires candidates to identify and discuss philosophical issues and/or concepts of
     human identity, or the self. The slide could lead to the inference that our identity is defined by
     material considerations either exclusively, or above all other considerations such as language,
     religion, nationality, gender, historical context, sexuality, etc.

     In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
     • Is the concept of personal identity the same as the concept of the self?
     • What accounts of the mind are possible under a purely materialist concept of personal identity?
     • Dualism, monism, idealism, phenomenological explanations of mind and identity
     • What concepts of identity are possible under a non-materialist view of the mind?
     • How do theories of human experience and behaviour, eg behaviourism, or functionalism,
        support or contradict materialist views of personal identity?
     • What makes a human person unique if our biology is practically the same?
     • How does my biology define my personal identity? Which biological fact is the most important:
        my racial DNA profile, my blood type?
     • If our biology is our identity, then is our future “determined” like any other biological system? If
        so, is our sense of personal freedom merely an illusion?
     • Non-western accounts of the person and the concept of personal identity and authenticity
     • The roles of gender, language, religion, function etc in defining personal identity in comparison
        to the biological
     • Can the material definition of identity be equally applied to non-human identities? If so, does this
        entitle them to equal moral consideration?
     • The view that gender, sexuality, culture, language, etc can be fluid and a human construction,
        so identity is also fluid
     • Is the concept of identity a concept not available to empirical investigation?
     • What are the foundations for our moral values and actions if my identity is biologically
        determined: should it be based on the laws of nature, and ultimately, a matter of self-interest
        and survival?
                                                 –8–                 M19/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 1 Section B markbands

 Mark                                           Level descriptor

   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

          The response is poorly structured, or where there is a recognizable essay structure there
           is minimal focus on the task. The response lacks coherence and is often unclear.
          The student demonstrates little relevant knowledge of philosophical issues arising from the
  1–5
           optional theme. Philosophical vocabulary is not used, or is consistently used
           inappropriately.
          The essay is mostly descriptive. There is no discussion of alternative interpretations or
           points of view. Few of the main points are justified.

          There is some attempt to follow a structured approach although it is not always clear
           what the answer is trying to convey.
          The student demonstrates knowledge of philosophical issues arising from the optional
 6–10      theme, but this knowledge lacks accuracy and relevance. Philosophical vocabulary is
           used, sometimes appropriately.
          There is limited analysis but the response is more descriptive than analytical. There is
           little discussion of alternative interpretations or points of view. Some of the main
           points are justified.

        There is a clear attempt to structure the response although there may be some repetition
         or a lack of clarity in places.
        Knowledge of philosophical issues arising from the optional theme is mostly accurate and
 11–15
         relevant. Philosophical vocabulary is used, sometimes appropriately.
        The response contains analysis, but this analysis lacks development. There is some
         discussion of alternative interpretations or points of view. Many of the main points are
         justified.
        The response is structured and generally organised, and can be easily followed.
        The response contains accurate and relevant knowledge of philosophical issues arising
 16–20   from the optional theme. Philosophical vocabulary is mostly used appropriately.
        The response contains critical analysis. There is discussion and some assessment of
         alternative interpretations or points of view. Most of the main points are justified.

        The response is well structured, focused and effectively organised.
        The response contains relevant, accurate and detailed knowledge of philosophical
         issues arising from the optional theme. There is appropriate use of philosophical
 21–25   vocabulary throughout the response.
        The response contains well-developed critical analysis. There is discussion and
         assessment of alternative interpretations or points of view. All or nearly all of the main
         points are justified. The response argues from a consistently held position about the
         issue.
                                                 –9–                  M19/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                                Section B

Optional theme 1: Aesthetics

3.   Explain and discuss the role of emotions in art.
     [25] The question asks for an explanation and discussion of the role of emotions in art. It opens a
     broad spectrum for consideration, since it might be approached in relation to the main topics
     presented in the programme: the nature of art, the artist and the artistic process, aesthetic
     experience and judgment. Plato and Aristotle provide a source of discussion about the artistic
     process and emotions. Plato taught that the artists engaged our emotions, a lower part of our soul,
     and thereby demoted reason from its rightful place, weakening its capacity for knowledge and
     virtue. Aristotle then came to the defence of artists, arguing, for example, that poets know what is
     possible, in particular, how different characters might react to certain circumstances. Poets thus
     show a deep knowledge of human emotions. Moreover, Aristotle claimed that poetry had a cathartic
     effect, which allows exercising reason in our daily lives. Art is thus something useful with a view to
     virtue, purifying the irrational part of the soul as well as providing us with a sharper insight into
     human nature. Further, one might recall Plato’s analysis via the painting example of beauty in
     Republic. Here, Plato is using visual art rather than poetry and he cuts off any emotional or
     perception appreciation from the true knowledge of Beauty in the painting.
     In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
     • What kind or type of emotions are had in response to works of art?
     • It has been suggested that in our appreciation of art works, the emotions function cognitively.
         This is a development of the idea of catharsis of pity and fear; nowadays it is usually thought to
         imply that the evocation of pity and fear is an aid to understanding, not just a fortuitous
         accompaniment of the tragedy
     • “The paradox of fiction”: how can we intelligibly have emotions for fictional persons or situations,
         given that we do not believe in their existence?
     • In the literary case our emotions may also help us to understand not just the works of art
         themselves but also something of life itself
     • The role of art as a moral educator: Iris Murdoch argued that one learns about transcendence
         from an experience of beauty; Martha Nussbaum argues that one learns empathy/sympathy
         from a study of literature
     • Why and how do abstract works of art, especially musical ones, generate emotions in
         audiences, and to where do audiences direct these emotions?
     • How can we make sense of the interest appreciators have in empathetically experiencing art
         that is expressive of negative emotions?
     • Is there a specific aesthetic emotion, raised only in the context of experiencing art?
     • The insight that judgments of the beautiful are based on subjective feelings of pleasure
     • Relations between an emotional response to art and the demands of aesthetic appreciation
     • Approaches to art and emotion, eg psychoanalysis
     • The notion of the “sublime”
     • Emotions and the different art forms, eg the extent to which architecture expresses emotions
     • Modernist art/music at the start of the 20th century tried to strip down emotions to pure
         communication via rejection of representation/colour and traditional harmonies.
     • A distinction between the role of emotion in the production of Art and the role of emotion (or lack
         of emotion) in judging works of art eg Kant’s disinterestedness.
                                                    – 10 –                M19/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



4.   Explain and discuss what kinds of entities in the world are works of art.                              [25]

     The question asks for an explanation and discussion on what might be identified as a work of art
     and the criteria that might be employed in justifying it. The issues open to discussion show
     historical continuity within the reflection on aesthetics but also show a line of inquiry which did
     emerge in aesthetics in the 20th century: the ontology of artworks. These issues might be related
     in different ways with various topics presented in the programme: what is art and what is the nature
     of art? Work on the definition of art in the past several decades has been dominated by views that
     either defend some sort of broadly institutional definition, or are skeptical about the definitional
     project. Institutionalist definitions of art hold that being a work of art consists in standing in the right
     relation to either art institutions or the history of art. They deny that anything substantive and more
     fundamental—say, a commitment to aesthetic or creative values—unifies the nature of the art
     institution or the history of art. On the other hand, definitions have, since Aristotle, been connected
     with explanations, which are closely related to essences, and this might involve proposing sets of
     individually necessary and jointly sufficient conditions, which identify artworks as different from
     other kinds of entities.

     In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
     • Can we define art? Is there a philosophical consensus about the definition of art? Should we
        define art?
     • Classical and traditional approaches to the works of art: Plato and Kant
     • The artwork as an idea: B Croce and R G Collingwood suggested that the artwork is in fact an
        idea in the mind of the artist
     • Most artworks are simply a subset of the physical objects in the world; however physical objects
        cannot possess representational or expressive properties, whereas artworks do possess such
        properties
     • The artwork as embodied in the physical object: artworks as physically embodied and culturally
        emergent entities
     • The institutionalist approach: the attempt to unearth and make explicit the assumptions about
        ontological status built into the relevant practices and beliefs of those dealing with works of art,
        to systematize these, and to put them into philosophical terms
     • If the artwork is identical neither to a concrete physical object nor to some abstract
        representational content, perhaps it is some sort of complex structure picked out by the artist.
        The structure might have a physical object as its part; A. Danto holds that the artwork may be
        thought of as a two-part structure including a physical object plus an interpretation
     • The view that the artwork is to be identified not with the artist’s product, but with a particular sort
        of event: the artist’s activity in producing it
     • The notion of the work of art as arising purely in the reception of it, as opposed to the specific
        intent of the artist
     • The discussion whether art can be a natural kind; real definitions of something require that
        something be a natural kind
     • The view of artworks as ontologically diverse: it can explain why some works in a particular art
        form are singular while others are multiple (such as printmaking). It accounts for the intimate
        relation of the artwork’s characteristics to a generative act by the artist. It respects the
        ontological intuitions expressed in the critical practice of the art community, according to which
        works are thought to have varying kinds and degrees of connection to physical objects.
                                                  – 11 –               M19/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Optional Theme 2: Epistemology

5.   To what extent do you agree with the claim that a priori knowledge is totally independent
     of experience?                                                                                     [25]

     This question, based on a claim made by Kant, invites an evaluation of the stringent view that a
     priori knowledge is totally independent from experience, and hence is totally analytic in nature and
     in its justification. It is a common view that a priori justifications rest on rational intuitions and
     insights, but what these are precisely is the cause of much dispute, hence some students might
     concentrate on the nature of innate ideas and their origin and its epistemological value and roles.
     The question may also lead to a focused discussion on the nature of what constitutes an
     experience as a contrast to innate ideas or intuition.

     In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
     • The distinction between a priori and a posteriori propositions
     • The certainty of a priori knowledge compared with the contingent claims from experience gained
        a posteriori
     • The common view that a priori knowledge is supported by a priori justifications
     • A view that a priori justifications and knowledge are tautological, and so are not really
        knowledge in a constructive or progressive sense
     • The progress of science (empiricism) and its influence on a priori knowledge and justifications;
        eg prior to sub-atomic physics, there was a given a priori belief in causality, now many
        physicists believe in random sub-atomic events
     • The counter position of a posteriori knowledge and justifications: what do we mean by an
        experience? Is it only the data obtained strictly via the 5 senses, or do memory, introspection,
        and the kinetic sense of the movement and position of our own body (proprioception) also
        count? eg “I had a steak dinner last night”, “I feel fatigued”, “my arm is resting on the table”
     • Are the examples, immediately above, examples of innate ideas? Other examples of innate
        knowledge: the ideas of identity, perfection, the ideas of God, and branches of Mathematics.
        These examples can also serve as a priori justifications for such knowledge. This gives a priori
        knowledge and justification a heuristic character
     • If innate ideas are intuitive, then what constitutes an intuition? Is it a mental state where a
        proposition is true but not on the basis of an inference?
     • The significance of the phrase “independent from experience”: does this have the same
        meaning as “apart from experience”? Is this latter meaning possible? How can an a priori
        justification be made without experience? One needs to learn from experience what a bachelor
        is before any a priori propositions about bachelors can be understood and made
     • Examples of innate knowledge from Plato, Descartes, Leibnitz, etc and the varying nature and
        limits of what constitutes such knowledge. These views are often accompanied by a deep
        scepticism of knowledge based on sensory experience.
                                                    – 12 –                 M19/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


6.   Evaluate whether there is a difference between having knowledge about X compared to
     having a true belief about X.                                                       [25]

     This question is a paraphrasing of the Meno problem where Socrates asks why knowledge is more
     valuable than true belief. Commonly, the addition of a justification is the necessary requirement for
     knowledge, which distinguishes it from true belief. The question invites students to engage with the
     general topic of epistemic value and possibly to discuss the Gettier problem of the inadequacy of
     justified true belief as a definition for knowledge. Further, students might discuss and evaluate
     what exactly is the extra value that knowledge possesses over true belief, whether with a
     justification or not. Other possibilities might be a defence of the idea there is no extra benefit or
     value in knowledge over true belief.

     In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
     • The value of knowledge: psychological security that comes with being certain or having
        knowledge, the obvious pragmatic/scientific application. Are these benefits any different to
        possessing a true belief, justified or not?
     • The extra requirement for a justification for a true belief to promote it to the category of
        knowledge. What does such a justification signify: understanding, application of knowledge,
        etc?
     • Is the only benefit of knowledge over true belief an instrumental value?
     • Where do you find a justification: external to, or independent from the terms of the true belief?
     • Examples of where justified true belief is not knowledge: Gettier examples where Smith knows
        (told by the interviewer) Jones will get a job, and that Jones has 10 coins in his pocket; Smith
        concludes that a person with 10 coins in their pocket will get the job. Unknown to Smith, he also
        has 10 coins in his pocket. Smith gets the job
     • Challenges to the Gettier problem: Smith is not justified in having his belief, or his belief is not
        true in the first instance, etc
     • A more general question is why is knowledge seen as more valuable than any of its constituent
        parts?
     • Does justified true belief fall short of knowledge, yet is no less valuable?
     • Does the reliability of the process by which something is produced add value to this thing? Even
        if the process were the least reliable method for producing a true belief, once a true belief is
        formed, does the process add anything extra?
     • Does the reliabilist rely on a notion that if the cause/processes of establishing a true belief is
        intrinsically good in itself, independent of its reliability, then is this intrinsic goodness transferred
        to its effect?
     • Virtue epistemology: knowledge is more valuable than mere true belief, eg independently from
        the outcome of a true belief that an agent can bring about
     • Is understanding, and hence confidence in knowledge, (eg as evident in Plato) a useful way to
        answer the value problem?
     • What counts as a justification? And do good justifications increase the value of statement than
        any (potentially unfounded) justification?
                                                – 13 –               M19/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Optional Theme 3: Ethics

7.   To what extent do you agree with the claim that wherever the adjective “good” (or “bad”)
     is linked with an object it means that this object is useful (or harmful)?              [25]

     The question invites an analysis on meta-ethics and, whether moral principles exist, are universal,
     and on the meaning of the words “good”, “bad”, “useful”, and “harmful”, although other approaches
     are possible. The claim, which is from P. Rée, The Origin of Moral Sentiments, had deeply
     influenced Nietzsche’s philosophy and focuses on the link between “good” and “useful”.
     Candidates might explore the origin and meaning of the word “good”, with reference to past
     philosophies and/or non-western traditions. Responses might also compare the concepts “good”
     and “right” (and their opposites) and the related ethical approaches, eg legalism or casuistry.
     Candidates might refer to the concept of “useful” by analysing the related ethical views, eg
     utilitarianism and its different variations. Another possible path of analysis might include
     conventionalism and a discussion on the origin of ethical principles and values: whether these be
     grounded in social agreements, innate in human nature, or linked to one or more religious,
     metaphysical entities. Candidates might also refer to social ontology in exploring the conventional
     origin of morals, or to evolutionism in explaining how moral principles and values tend to be
     adjusted according to natural and cultural changes. Moreover, candidates might mention
     empiricism, eg Locke’s and Hume’s views on primary and secondary qualities, as a means to refer
     to the “pathetic fallacy” argument. Finally, candidates might also explore some views within
     analytical philosophy and the possibilities/impossibilities to say something about the meaning of
     the words “good” and “bad”, eg in Wittgenstein’s theory.

     In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
     • Are moral principles and values universal and/or objective?
     • Are the “good” and the “bad” linked to the “useful” and the “harmful”?
     • Metaphysical traditions interpreting the concept of “good”
     • Philosophical views that link the “good” to the “useful”, eg utilitarianism, Nietzsche
     • Do the “good” and the “right” involve the same moral principles? Views that focus on this
        relation, eg legalism, casuistry
     • Is moral sense founded in human nature, grounded in social agreements, or linked to a religious
        entity?
     • The argument from sentience
     • Conventionalism versus innatism
     • Evolutionary ethics
     • Moral values as a human creation; the “pathetic fallacy” argument (ie the human tendency to
        attribute human qualities to external, particularly inanimate, objects), eg Locke, Hume
     • Impossibility to explain the meaning of the words “good” and “bad”, as in some approaches
        within analytical philosophy, eg Wittgenstein, Hare.
                                                 – 14 –                M19/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


8.   Evaluate, with reference to an area of applied ethics that you have studied, the claim that
     responsibility is the fundamental imperative in modern civilization.                       [25]

     This question invites an exploration of a claim that focuses on the concept of responsibility.
     Different areas of applied ethics can be used in addressing the question. Candidates might explore
     Jonas’s principle of responsibility, or explore issues like the relation to our position in the world,
     how human progress affects nature and its fragile balance, and the possible consequences for
     future generations. Candidates might discuss other contributions in applied ethics, eg Leopold’s or
     Passmore’s theories about the environment, Rawls’s Theory of Justice, Singer’s work on animal
     rights and his work on global equality, the Gaia hypothesis, euthanasia and medical ethics more
     generally, or deep ecology approaches. Responses might include an analysis of the recent debate
     on the climate changes: candidates might discuss on how or whether persistent severe weather
     conditions, global warming, Arctic ice melting, or global water crisis, etc relate to pollution,
     uncontrolled land exploitation, deforestation, and the like. Candidates might also focus on the
     relationship between ethics and politics, with relation to the concepts of responsibility, values, and
     duties. Another path of analysis might refer to anthropocentrism and its several approaches:
     candidates might mention any possible traditional, religious, or cultural source sustaining
     anthropocentric views and how these affect the relationship between the human being and nature.
     Particularly, candidates might consider the specific role that animals play within anthropocentrism
     and how and whether our consideration of them has recently changed. Responses might also
     consider the theme of the species extinction and the modern ethical theories bearing the existence
     of animal rights, eg Singer’s theory. Other areas that might be explored include issues like
     technological aspects in medicine, research in life sciences, global economic equality.

     In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
     • Jonas’s principle of responsibility
     • Deep ecology approaches
     • Leopold’s and Passmore’s theories
     • Gaia hypothesis
     • Anthropocentrism and its possible cultural justifications
     • Animal rights, eg Singer’s view
     • Economic distribution
     • Medical ethics
     • Euthanasia
     • Relationship between climate change and pollution; ethical and political debate
     • Non-western traditions on the balance between the human being and nature.
                                                 – 15 –               M19/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Optional Theme 4: Philosophy and contemporary society

9.   Evaluate the claim that social media leads to cultural impoverishment (for example, a
     more limited cultural diversity).                                                               [25]

     Some view technology as an instrument for improving society. Critics such as Horkheimer, Adorno
     and Habermas point to ways in which it might damage society. Some view technology as
     influencing culture, where technology plays a constructivist role in conjunction with culture. A
     related claim is that technology influences how people experience the world, and thus alters
     culture. Social media is a case in point because it colours people’s experiences of life and their
     understanding of culture. This can be problematic, as in the case of “echo chambers” created by
     only encountering like-minded individuals. Alternatively, social media might be seen as enhancing
     culture by providing a richer variety of voices and a transparent platform for different cultural
     groups.

     In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
     • Whether social media is a useful instrument or tool
     • Social media and constructivism, where technology and society are constructions of one
        another
     • Technology as influencing people’s experience of culture, particularly the role of social media to
        this effect
     • Phenomenological analyses of technology such as those provided by Adorno or Habermas
     • How social media changes and influences culture
     • The impact of social media on society
     • New phenomena which have come about as a result of social media, for example digital
        legacies
     • Social media and its influence on reporting “news”
     • Definitions of culture and whether culture can decline, or whether it just changes
     • A discussion of whether social media mirrors culture or changes culture
     • The role of social media as a commercial enterprise
     • The extent to which social media can manipulate and mislead people.
                                                   – 16 –               M19/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


10.   Evaluate, in relation to multiculturalism, the claim that democracy encourages a “tyranny
      of the majority”.                                                                        [25]

      A democracy makes decisions collectively, so that everyone who is part of the electorate has an
      equal say in how the state will be run. In theory, this ought to allow members of different cultures to
      represent themselves and stand up for what is important to them. However, the requirement that
      each individual has an equal say means that minority cultures have fewer people representing
      them and so can be out-voted, even over issues, which are crucial to them. If democracies are to
      be compatible with multiculturalism, some solution must be offered to wed the aim of promoting the
      rights of minority groups with the aim of respecting the will of the majority. Whether multiculturalism
      is a realistic or desirable aim within a society is another side of the question.

      In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
      • Does the government have a role in protecting minority groups?
      • Definitions of culture in relation to democratic societies
      • The value and meaning of tolerance
      • De Tocqueville’s view of “the tyranny of the majority”
      • Rousseau’s concept of “the general will”
      • Ortega y Gasset’s conception of “the rebellion of the masses”
      • The balance between liberty and human rights
      • Berlin’s distinction between positive and negative liberty
      • Candidates might go into detail about the work of Mill in On Liberty
      • Rawls’s view that democratic rules should be reasonable and based on principles on which
         there is an overlapping consensus
      • Locke’s view that all members of a state are part of a social contract which implies consent to
         majority rule
      • Alternatives to democracy which might better support multiculturalism, for example anarchism
      • The value and pitfalls of democracy
      • Whether multiculturalism is possible or desirable
      • References to other philosophers providing counter-arguments.
                                                   – 17 –                M19/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Optional Theme 5: Philosophy of religion

11.   To what extent does suffering disprove the existence of God?                                       [25]

      This question enables an exploration of the most widely-stated argument counting against the
      existence of God. In this argument there can be a logical approach, whereby the very definition of
      God is stated as being in contradiction with the experience of suffering in creation, or there can be
      a more probabilistic approach where the objection comes from the amount of observed suffering
      leading to a conclusion that the existence of God is less likely than likely. In defence of God’s
      existence various responses have been articulated, including appeal to the notion of free will
      (which raises the issue of God’s intervention or non-intervention) and the inability of humankind to
      see the full picture of God’s existence until the establishment of the eschatological future which will
      show the suffering of the present world in its true, eternal light.

      In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
      • The responsibility for suffering – is the cause of suffering – evil – a “thing” for which God can
         take responsibility?
      • The “inconsistent triad” and Mackie’s statement of the logical problem of evil
      • The evidential problem of suffering, where on observation of the extent of suffering in the world,
         and its apparent meaninglessness and randomness, the existence of God seems less probable
      • Defences of God’s existence – theodicies – include versions of the Free Will argument
      • Augustine’s theodicy, termed “soul-deciding” where human free will created the conditions for
         suffering and God, as a just God, does not intervene maintaining a position of justice; human
         response to the consequences of disobedience offer the chance of heaven to come
      • Irenaeus’s theodicy, where the experience of suffering contributes to “soul-making” so that
         humans can enjoy a mature relationship with God, carved from growth and development,
         spurred by the experience of suffering
      • Hick’s restatement of Irenaeus, highlighting the need for God to preserve freedom by not
         intervening to stop suffering, the consequences of which would be to lessen human moral worth
         and independence
      • Swinburne’s Free Will Defence where he maintains that humans must take freedom seriously
         and not expect second chances or the minimising of suffering, in order to take our moral
         responsibility seriously
      • Discussion of the way suffering produces certain kinds of goods “second order goods”, like
         compassion, empathy, kindness, understanding, none of which could be developed without
         experience of suffering
      • The eschatological defence that this is the best of all possible worlds and it will be shown in the
         new dispensation in heaven that the suffering was not only worthwhile, but necessary for the
         future to come.
                                                  – 18 –               M19/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


12.   Evaluate the claim that the content of religious experience is incommunicable.                   [25]

      This question enables a broad approach to the question of communicating about religious
      experience. If religious experience is ineffable, then it may not be spoken about in language used
      to describe the world outside the speaker. Some empiricists believed that any description of
      religious experience would have to be “meaningless” in terms of language propositions. However,
      “meaningless” was also explored as a means of clarifying its relation to empirical factual language,
      while still reserving purpose for religious language. Candidates might explore the responses to
      verification that have left a space for religious language to reflect the values and worldview of the
      speaker, as opposed to a discrete empirical domain the language describes.

      In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
      • The history of religious language from Aquinas to the present day
      • The impact of empiricism and the scientific enlightenment on the understanding of religious
         experience and language
      • James’s The Varieties of Religious Experience
      • Mysticism in world religions, eg Sufism, Kabbalism, Orthodox mysticism
      • Monasticism and the hermit tradition
      • Art contributions to communicating religious experience eg art, music, literature
      • Verificationism and the work of the Logical Positivists
      • Falsificationism and Flew (Wisdom’s Parable of the Gardner)
      • Hare’s “bliks” offering an alternative view of meaningfulness and religious language
      • Mitchell and the story of the partisan
      • Braithwaite and religious language as moral discourse
      • Tillich’s work on symbolism and religious language
      • Wittgenstein’s language games.
                                                  – 19 –               M19/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Optional Theme 6: Philosophy of science

13.   Evaluate the nature of scientific explanations.                                                 [25]

      This question invites an evaluation of the role of explanations through the scientific method.
      Explanations can give reasonable rationales for observed natural phenomena. The scientific
      method might be seen as an over simplification of the processes that are involved in scientific
      investigations into natural phenomena. The distinction between a hypothesis and an explanation
      could be explored. The construction of a hypothesis arises out of observation and testing through
      experimentation, which lead to scientific theories and laws that rest on the ability to predict.
      Consequently, it is possible that the process of constructing a scientific explanation uses both
      inductive and deductive thinking to arrive at a reasonable explanation. Candidates might refer to
      Popper questioning whether a scientific process involves induction preferring to describe the
      process as hypothetical deduction. Therefore, an explanation might arise from deductive
      statements about other known conditions that surround the observed phenomena. It could be seen
      as a complex web of inactive laws and assumptions. This process might avoid reliance on
      inductive steps as the explanation is established through deduction from general laws. A counter
      position challenging and defending inductive conclusions might be put forward suggesting that
      explanations by the hypothetical deductive process might not be secure in the sense that examples
      might arise to contradict them. These examples would come about by constantly seeking
      falsification and/or paradigm shifts in thinking. Other developments might also arise questioning the
      overall nature of scientific laws and theories and the degree to which they might be true or certain.

      In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
      • The nature and status of a hypothesis relative to an explanation, eg Hempel
      • The difference between hypotheses, theories and explanations
      • The contributions of thinkers like Kuhn, Feyerabend, Nagel
      • Related problems to both inductive and deductive thinking in science
      • The status and nature of scientific laws and theories upon which the hypothetical deductive
         process rests
      • The consequence of paradigm shifts on accepted scientific explanations
      • The degree to which assumption about a scientific explanation can be applied to non-natural
         sciences, eg the social sciences
      • How far confirmation bias might influence the construction of scientific explanations: thinking
         “within” the box.
                                                  – 20 –               M19/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


14.   To what extent is science guided by societal pressures and values?                               [25]

      This question seeks an evaluation as to whether scientists can work in isolation of their social
      environment or whether their investigations into nature reflect the values of their time and social
      milieu. Candidates might present examples of how the aims and objectives of scientific work
      changes with time and the expectations of society. Equally, questions could be asked about the
      degree to which scientists work independently or whether they are directed by economic and
      political pressures of their time. Could scientists ignore these pressures? Discussion might take
      place about the nature of the scientific community and the expectations, morally and/or politically,
      that arise from this. Similarly, to what extent are scientists accountable to the social, economic and
      political forces? Or are they under obligations to pursue the needs of society and inevitably share
      their findings with their supposed political or economic drivers? Examples might be presented that
      relate to nuclear research during the Second World War, gene research to address genetically
      transmitted diseases or environmental science research at the beginning of the 21st century. A
      counter position might be developed as to the degree to which scientists can and should do
      research which is socially/economically valueless; science for science’s sake.

      In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
      • The degree to which scientists are politically accountable
      • The view that science is an objective discipline unaffected by societal mores
      • What if any moral responsibilities do scientists have?
      • Whether scientists pursuing the same problems but in differing social environments might arrive
         at the same outcomes; examples might come from the Cold War pursuit of supersonic flight or
         the space race
      • Exploration of historical examples such as Louis XIV’s perfect artists painting the same picture
         which could be applied to science in that scientists in different social settings produce the same
         answers, producing exactly the same picture
      • How religion formulated and/or limited scientific thinking
      • The issue of theory-ladenness
      • The hypothetical examples of scientists from different worlds asking the same questions of their
         nature as earthly humans
      • A tangential position might include the argument as to whether nature is constructed by humans
         or is independent of human thought/activity. Therefore, in the former case scientific constructs
         of nature are reflective of their society yet might change when social changes happen
      • Climate change denial, alternative medicines
      • The nature of funding and resources as drivers of scientific research, eg the pharmaceutical
         industry, the oil industry, the arms industry.
                                                   – 21 –                M19/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Optional Theme 7: Political philosophy

15.   To what extent do you agree with the claim that in modern democratic states the dual aims
      of freedom and equality cannot be sustained?                                           [25]

      This question invites candidates to discuss and evaluate a basic tension found within democratic
      states. Often the view from neo-liberal economists and libertarians is that the pursuit of one
      precludes the environment to achieve the other, or that it compromises the more important moral
      value of personal autonomy. Moreover, the question of the tension between freedom and equality
      takes place within the specific concept of distributive justice in a political society. As such,
      candidates might discuss Egalitarianism, or analyse other principles of distributive justice such as
      Rawls’s Difference Principle, welfare-based principles, feminist principles, libertarian/anarchist
      principles, etc.

      In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
      • Equality in the contemporary state might cover categories such as: income, access to
         employment and education, welfare, utility, wealth
      • To whom should the distribution be made: individuals, groups, gender?
      • What should be the principles of how the distribution should be made: maximization, equality,
         individual needs?
      • Strict egalitarianism argues that each individual should have the same level of material goods,
         services and burdens. The basis of this claim is that all individuals are morally equal and that
         the best way to fulfil this moral ideal is through equality of material goods
      • Similarly, Rawls’s Difference Principle values the moral equality of individuals and each is
         entitled to equal basic rights and liberties, but in modern societies, inequalities are unavoidable.
         To mitigate against this, the social and economic inequalities are allowed to persist if they are
         attached to positions with opportunity open to all to attain these offices, and secondly, any
         measure to ameliorate the inequality must be of greatest benefit to the least advantaged, or
         cause the least disadvantage to the most disadvantaged
      • The debate between Rawls and Nozick
      • Mill’s treatment of liberty as a means of achieving greater utility
      • Critics of this approach above point out that inequality still persists
      • Welfare-based principles (also known as consequentialist principles) are motivated by the idea
         that what is of primary moral importance is the level of welfare of people. Other principles for
         distribution such as freedom or equality, are secondary to the welfare of an individual
      • Libertarian views on distributive justice range from a minimal amount to none at all. Freedom of
         the individual held as an absolute moral value maintains that any attempt at equality brought
         about by economic distribution, or affirmative action, or any other means is, in itself, necessarily
         unfair to individuals and violates their moral worth. For these libertarians, the smaller the
         government intervention into people’s lives and pay packets, the better. In contrast to the
         principles above, Libertarians also see that transactions in free markets need no regulation or
         supervision if freely entered into by individuals
      • Different kinds of freedom, eg positive versus negative
      • Rather than viewed as a set of principles that maximize an outcome, should distributive justice
         be seen as a virtue?
                                                   – 22 –               M19/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


16.   To what extent should a citizen of a state be held accountable under international law? [25]

      The aim of this question is to allow candidates an opportunity to analyse several political concepts:
      sovereignty and its limits, international law and how to apply it, the relationships between justice
      and law, and human rights, amongst others. Candidates could evaluate the need and difficulties of
      a universal moral standard of justice, eg human rights, that goes beyond the particular legal
      systems of each nation. They could also assess the opposition between the traditional concept of
      sovereignty and the contemporary need of putting this traditional notion aside in extreme cases, ie
      in the case of crimes against humanity. Candidates could also raise the question of who is to police
      such an international system, and under what set of moral and legal values?

      In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
      • The traditional notion of sovereignty of a nation: it originally precludes the possibility of judging
         its citizens under laws other than the law of the sovereign nation. It has some important
         advantages, eg it impedes the interferences of one power into the internal affairs of another
         country, so recognizing the autonomy of the country
      • How far should international jurisdiction reach? Only to crimes against humanity, or to civil rights
         of minorities within sovereign nations? Cosmopolitanism and nationalism could be discussed in
         this context
      • Some recent experiences, eg genocides in Europe and Asia have made it necessary to
         recognize an international standard of justice over each nation’s standards. This is especially in
         cases in which the legal system of a nation does not fulfil some minimum requirements of
         human justice, or actually legalises such actions. It makes it necessary to re-think the
         relationship between law and justice
      • To what extent do political notions such as social contract apply to the case of an international
         law?
      • The notion of human rights is a part of this international standard, and a legal expression of
         some minimum requirements of justice for all human beings. Those national rulers who
         seriously damage these human rights can be accused of crimes against humanity. But what are
         universal human rights: the right to shelter, or food, or protection, or work, or health care, etc?
      • However, international law is also a positive legal system, and thus this law might hypothetically
         differ in some cases from a proper notion of justice within a sovereign nation. International laws
         monitor the justice of national laws, but who monitors the justice of international law?
      • Is the international law system democratic in nature, or could it be deemed as an oligarchic or
         totalitarian rule like a “one world government”?
      • Who must enforce the application of international law and human rights? A super-power? A
         coalition of nations? The UN? Should members of the UN who are non-democratic, judge other
         nations regarding their actions? Being realistic, who could in fact enforce this application
         nowadays?
