No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic
or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without written permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of
any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties,
including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study
services, preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping
services or teacher resource digital platforms and app developers, is not
permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license. More
information on how to request a license can be obtained from http://
www.ibo.org/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-
third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni
par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation
écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation
commerciale de tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit.
L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs,
des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou d’aide aux études,
des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des
gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs
d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations
sur la procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à
l’adresse http://www.ibo.org/fr/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni
por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin que medie la
autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines
comerciales de todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El
uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales,
profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o ayuda para el
estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan
recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del
IB. En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una
licencia: http://www.ibo.org/es/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.
M19/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




Social and cultural anthropology
Higher level
Paper 1


Wednesday 8 May 2019 (afternoon)


2 hours


Instructions to candidates
yy Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
yy Section A: read the passage and answer questions 1 and 2. Choose either question 3 or 4.
   Answer question 5.
yy Section B: answer the question.
yy The maximum mark for this examination paper is [40 marks].




                                                                                             2219 – 5801
     5 pages                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2019
                                                   –2–                  M19/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                               Section A

Read the passage.

Passage adapted from Greenhalgh, S. (2012), “Weighty subjects: The biopolitics of the U.S. war on fat”,
American Ethnologist, 39: 471–487.

        The United States has declared a war on fat, expanding the number of weight-obsessed,
        self-identified “fat subjects”, whose efforts to lower their weight endanger their health, bringing
        socioemotional suffering. A fat subject is not the same as an overweight person but is someone
        who identifies as fat and takes on the fat subject’s characteristics.

    5   “Fat talk” has long been a moralizing discourse in which thinness is desirable. The discourse
        on fat today is a scientifically based biopolitical discourse. Fat talk is a discourse – a complex,
        historically specific body of knowledge that structures how weight and weight-related behavior can
        be talked about and that produces effects on subjectivity. No longer are fat people merely “lazy”
        (and “ugly”); they are also “at risk of disease” and “in need of medical treatment”. Fat talk draws on
   10   the cultural authority of medicine. Experts, such as doctors, speak in the name of “the truth”.

        For years I taught a course at the University of California. The course became an ethnographic
        field site for this topic. Weight evokes feelings of shame and personal failure, feelings too
        humiliating to share. Classic anthropological methods – personal interviews,
        participant-observation – are not effective at bringing out such feelings. I asked my students to
   15   write essays on issues of diet and weight in the life of a person they knew well. The majority
        wrote auto ethnographies [accounts about their own experiences].

        In Margaret’s story, her brother began criticizing her weight in middle school. Taking him as the
        authority on her body’s appeal to boys, Margaret began to see herself as fat.

        “While my parents never spoke about my weight, my brother did. He constantly told me that I
   20   ate too much and that I was going to be fat… I became scared and started dieting… I remember
        looking in the mirror and imagining ripping [the excess fat] from my body.”

        She documents how she internalized society’s message that, for girls, a beautiful body is the
        source of happiness and sexual power, and that beauty comes from being thin.

        “When I saw that all my friends had ‘crushes’ and ‘boyfriends’, I almost felt obligated to get a
   25   boy to like me – but was never successful. That’s when I learned that body image played a large
        [role] in attracting the opposite sex… Realizing this, I became incredibly depressed… Society’s
        standard punched me in the face.”

        Throughout her life, Margaret has heard that a thin body is essential to social acceptance.

        “When there is so much talk about obesity, you feel bad about yourself. Even if you are a kind
   30   person, you feel down because the whole nation is saying that excessive weight is bad… It
        makes you think that there is something wrong with you.”

        John is 22. In his story a doctor plays a crucial role, warning John about his “borderline
        condition.” His essay relates his profound sadness.

        “I was what a person would call ‘fat’ or ‘chubby’. My mother took me to see a doctor for a check-up.
   35   I was afraid the doctor would measure my weight. He told my mother that I was just over the
                                                           –3–                    M19/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

            borderline… My mother had not thought so of me until she heard this from the doctor, and since
            then she has taken every moment to remind me to exercise and to lose weight.”

            Nowadays, his dormmates act as bio-police, constantly encouraging him to work out, criticizing
            his eating habits, labeling his mindset “weak”.

     40     “Currently I live with four other guys who are all athletic. They always talk about how hard they
            work out or have fun playing sport. They ask me why I don’t exercise, and I reply because of my
            busy schedule. When I have time, I like to spend it relaxing and doing nothing. They tell me that
            my way of thinking is weak and I come up with excuses…”

            Fat subjects see themselves as biologically flawed, morally unworthy, or unattractive. Their
     45     perception of their bodies brings social withdrawal and emotional suffering – including
            depression, low self-esteem, and insecurities.

            Writing enabled these people to find their voice. Fat seems to be the last socially acceptable
            grounds “justifying” prejudice. Fat individuals are some of the most stigmatized and silenced
            people today.



[Source: reproduced by permission of the American Anthropological Association from American Ethnologist, Volume 39, Issue 3,
           pp. 471–487, 2012. Not for sale or further reproduction. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1548-1425.2012.01375.x]


Answer question 1 and question 2.

1.        Define the term self and describe how it is understood in the context of the young people in
          California described in the passage.                                                                          [4]

2.        Explain how the key concept of social relations helps you understand the ethnographic data
          presented in the passage.                                                                                     [6]


Answer either question 3 or question 4.

3.        Compare and contrast the way in which the key concept of power or belief and knowledge
          is evident in this passage with how it is evident in one other ethnographic example you have
          studied. Make reference to theory in your answer.

OR

4.        Compare and contrast the approaches to research adopted by the anthropologist in this
          passage to the approaches to research used by another anthropologist you have studied.
          Make reference to concepts, ethnographic material and theory in your answer.                                [10]


Answer question 5.

5.        What does it mean to be a person? Discuss with reference to at least two sources of
          ethnographic material and examples from the passage.                                                        [10]




                                                                                                                Turn over
                                                     –4–                    M19/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                                Section B

Answer question 6.

6.     With reference to either stimulus A or stimulus B and your own knowledge, discuss the
       defining features of anthropological ethics.                                                  [10]


Stimulus A

          The director of collections of Museé de L’Homme in Paris, Michel Guiraud, informed that
          the demand for repatriation presented by the Mapuche [indigenous community of Southern
          Argentina] and the University Research Group in Social Anthropology has been submitted to
          the French government.

      5   The human remains of chief Liempichun of the Mapuche arrived in France after Count Henri
          La Vaulx desecrated his grave in the nineteenth century to steal his skeleton. La Vaulx
          explored Patagonia in 1896. Impressed by the height of the natives he dug up a number of
          bodies, boiled the bones to clean them and took them to France where they were included in
          the collection displays of the Parisian museum.

     10   In 2009 an Argentine anthropologist conducting research in the museum, identified
          Liempichun’s skull and notified the Mapuche community and the living descendants, who
          initiated the demand for the return of the remains. “For the Mapuche, the life cycle ends
          when one returns to the earth, to the ‘Ñuke Mapu’. When the French government returns
          Liempichun, his descendants will be able to properly bury his remains according to their
     15   rituals, the cycle will close and harmony may return to the community” explained the
          anthropologist J. Pepe. […]

                               [Source: reproduced with authorisation from Télam]
                                                   –5–                 M19/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Stimulus B

The anthropologist (left) pointing at the scar of a man (right) who has sold his kidney to someone who
traffics* body parts in Brazil in 2008.




                                       Removed for copyright reasons




* traffic: deal or trade in something illegal
