Computer science
Higher level
Paper 3

Monday 31 October 2022 (morning)



1 hour



Instructions to candidates
•   Do not turn over this examination paper until instructed to do so.
•   A clean copy of the computer science case study is required for this examination paper.
•   Read the case study carefully.
•   Answer all questions.
•   The maximum mark for this examination paper is [30 marks].




                                                                                                 8822-7013
      2 pages                                                 © International Baccalaureate Organlzation 2022
                                                    -2-                                             8822-7013

Answer all questions.

1.     (a)     Outline why combinatorial optimization is used in the travelling salesman problem.


     (b)      Outline one potential problem with hill climbing when applied to the travelling
             salesman problem.


2.    (a)      An annual cycling race is scheduled totakeplace between 20cities The race starts
             and finishes in the same city All other cities on the route are visited only once.
             Each day, competitors race between two cities on the route.

             Each year, the organizers of the race plan a new route. However, an Independent
             cycling organization has suggested that a genetic algorithm could be used Instead.
             This has several Social and ethical implications.

             Compare and contrast the suitability of using a genetic algorithm to plan the route
             against the race organizers planning the route.

     (b)     After several generations of selection followed by order crossover (OX), the parent
             routes between eight cities have become similar




             Explain why mutation would be introduced into this example.
                                                                                                          [4]



     Two selection methods that could be applied to the travelling salesman problem are roulette
     wheel selection and tournament selection.

     Evaluate these two selection methods.
                                                                                                          [6]


     The case study states: "Successful implementations of genetic algorithms strike a
     natural balance between exploration and exploitation, and techniques such as simulated
     annealing can fine-tune that balance as the algorithm progresses towards convergence"
     (page 7, Discussion).

     Discuss the role of convergence in genetic algorithms and how exploration and exploitation
     can affect its success.
                                                                                                         [12]
