N12/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX




     88120084

ENGLISH A1 – STANDARD LEVEL – PAPER 2
ANGLAIS A1 – NIVEAU MOYEN – ÉPREUVE 2
INGLÉS A1 – NIVEL MEDIO – PRUEBA 2

Monday 12 November 2012 (afternoon)
Lundi 12 novembre 2012 (après-midi)
Lunes 12 de noviembre de 2012 (tarde)

1 hour 30 minutes / 1 heure 30 minutes / 1 hora 30 minutos


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

 Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on at least two of the Part 3 works
  you have studied. You may include in your answer a discussion of a Part 2 work of the same
  genre if relevant. Answers which are not based on a discussion of at least two Part 3 works will
  not score high marks.
 You are not permitted to bring copies of the works you have studied into the examination room.
 The maximum mark for this examination paper is [25 marks].

INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS

 N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
 Traitez un seul sujet de composition. Vous devez baser votre réponse sur au moins deux des
  œuvres de la 3e partie que vous avez étudiées. Le cas échéant, vous pouvez inclure dans votre
  réponse une discussion sur une œuvre du même genre littéraire étudiée dans la 2e partie
  du programme. Les réponses qui ne sont pas basées sur au moins deux des œuvres de
  la 3e partie n’obtiendront pas une note élevée.
 Vous n’êtes pas autorisé(e) à amener des exemplaires des œuvres que vous avez étudiées dans
  la salle d’examen.
 Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est [25 points].

INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS

 No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
 Elija un tema de redacción. Su respuesta deberá basarse en al menos dos de las obras
  estudiadas en la Parte 3. Se podrán hacer comentarios sobre una obra de la Parte 2 del
  mismo género, si fuera necesario. Las respuestas que no incluyan una discusión sobre al
  menos dos obras de la Parte 3 no recibirán notas altas.
 No se permite traer a la sala de examen copias de las obras estudiadas.
 La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [25 puntos].




8812-0084                                                                                   3 pages/páginas
                                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2012
                                                    –2–                  N12/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on at least two of the Part 3 works you
have studied. You may include in your answer a discussion of a Part 2 work of the same genre if relevant.
Answers which are not based on a discussion of at least two Part 3 works will not score high marks.

Drama

1.    In some plays, ideas seem more important than actions or events. In at least two plays you have
      studied, which of these elements can be seen as the primary concerns of the playwrights and how
      effectively have they handled them?


2.    Dramatic characters are sometimes credible insofar as they demonstrate the unpredictability
      of human behaviour. How do at least two playwrights you have studied incorporate moments of
      inconsistent behaviour and to what effect?



Poetry

3.    Repetition in any of its many forms can help convey the poet’s primary concern/s. With close
      reference to at least two poets you have studied, show how and to what effect repetition is used.


4.    Many poems deliberately leave the reader uncertain of a poem’s interpretation. In what ways and
      to what effect have at least two poets you have studied created this sense of ambiguity in their poetry?



Prose: The Novel and Short Story

5.    A protagonist’s weaknesses or failings are more memorable than his/her admirable qualities.
      With close reference to at least two works you have studied, show how and to what effect writers
      have portrayed such weaknesses or failings.


6.    Moments of enlightenment or sudden realization are golden opportunities for writers of fiction.  
      With close reference to at least two works you have studied, demonstrate how the writers have made
      good use of such moments in developing plot or character.




8812-0084
                                                    –3–                  N12/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Prose: Other than the Novel and Short Story

7.    The interests of women and men are sometimes different and sometimes treated differently in works
      of prose other than the novel and short story. In the work of at least two writers you have studied,
      consider how those differences are foregrounded and used to create interest for the reader.


8.    The natural world can sometimes take on so strong a presence in works of prose other than the novel
      and short story that it becomes more than merely a backdrop for events or a convenient setting for
      other concerns. In the works of at least two writers you have studied, discuss their handling of the
      natural world.



General Questions on Literature

9.    The portrayal of guilt in literary works can be delivered through a variety of techniques with a variety
      of effects. In what ways has guilt been presented in at least two works you have studied?


10.   The struggle between reason and emotion often provokes the imagination of writers. In what ways
      has this struggle or conflict been portrayed in at least two works you have studied?


11.   “Ultimately, everybody is controlled by social expectations.” Show how far at least two writers you
      have studied have constructed the settings of their works to question or support this view.


12.   “Heroism is an elusive idea.” How and to what effect have at least two writers you have studied
      portrayed heroic action?




8812-0084
