M13/1/AYENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX




     22132016

ENGLISH A: LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE – STANDARD LEVEL – PAPER 2
ANGLAIS A : LANGUE ET LITTéRATURE – NIVEAU MOYEN – ÉPREUVE 2
INGLÉS A: LENGUA Y LITERATURA – NIVEL MEDIO – PRUEBA 2

Friday 3 May 2013 (afternoon)
Vendredi 3 mai 2013 (après-midi)
Viernes 3 de mayo de 2013 (tarde)

1 hour 30 minutes / 1 heure 30 minutes / 1 hora 30 minutos


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

 Do not turn over this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on both of the Part 3 works you
  have studied.
 You are not permitted to bring copies of the works you have studied into the examination room.
 The maximum mark for this examination paper is [25 marks].

INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS

 Ne retournez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
 Traitez un seul sujet de composition. Vous devez baser votre réponse sur les deux œuvres de
  la troisième partie que vous avez étudiées.
 Vous n’êtes pas autorisé(e) à apporter des exemplaires des œuvres que vous avez étudiées dans
  la salle d’examen.
 Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est [25 points].

INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS

 No dé la vuelta al examen hasta que se lo autoricen.
 Conteste una sola pregunta de redacción. Base su respuesta en las dos obras estudiadas de la
  Parte 3.
 No está permitido traer copias de las obras estudiadas a la sala de examen.
 La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [25 puntos].




2213-2016                                                                                   2 pages/páginas
                                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2013
                                                   –2–                 M13/1/AYENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on both of the Part 3 works you
have studied. Answers which are not based on a discussion of both Part 3 works will not score
high marks. Your answer should address the ways in which language and context contribute to your
reading of each work.

1.    Works of literature can teach us something that may not have been originally intended. To what
      extent have you found this to be true in the two works you have studied?


2.    Show how belief or faith is represented in the two literary works you have studied and discuss how
      this aspect might be interpreted or understood in different historical, cultural or social contexts.


3.    Why are the works you have studied considered “literary” texts? Identify and discuss some of the
      features that make the two texts you have studied literary.


4.    In what ways is the reader seduced or comforted by the ideas in the works studied and in what ways
      challenged or alienated? Refer to the two literary works you have studied.


5.    Context – historical, cultural or social – can have an influence on the way literary works are written
      or received. Discuss with reference to the two works you have studied.


6.    Literary works often show men and women struggling to resolve problems and not succeeding
      very well. To what degree do you find this to be true in the two works you have studied?




2213-2016
