M13/1/AXENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


                    May / mai / mayo 2013

         ENGLISH / ANGLAIS / INGLÉS A:
          LITERATURE / LITTÉRATURE /
                 LITERATURA

                       Standard Level
                       Niveau Moyen
                        Nivel Medio

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2



6 pages/páginas
                              –2–         M13/1/AXENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.
                                                –3–           M13/1/AXENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking and as a supplement to
the published external assessment criteria for written paper 2. They are not offered as an exhaustive
and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must rigidly adhere. Good ideas or
angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate. Similarly, answers
which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here may still be very good answers.

Examiners: please note that the term “comparison”, both in the descriptors and in the
marking notes, includes the discussion of relevant “contrasts” as well.

The features of the “very good to excellent” answers assume that those for “adequate to good”
are included.

Drama

1.    An adequate to good answer will identify appropriate examples and use them to compare the
      role of action or lack of action in delivering the meaning of the plays.

      A very good to excellent answer may also discuss in greater detail the uses made of action, or
      lack of it, showing more awareness of how they contribute to an understanding of the plays.


2.    An adequate to good answer will identify the content of the dénouement, wherever placed,
      and show an understanding of how it brings together the different threads of the play (e.g.
      character, theme, plot), comparing the methods used to enhance our understanding of each
      work.

      A very good to excellent answer may also discuss in greater detail what is achieved in the
      chosen dénouements and show a greater appreciation of how the drawing together of the
      various threads contributes to our understanding.


3.    An adequate to good answer will identify and describe contrasting characters in each play,
      comparing how such contrasts contribute to the impact of the plays.

      A very good to excellent answer may also analyse in greater detail the contrast between
      characters, comparing more precisely the contribution of such contrasts to the impact of the
      plays as a whole.
                                              –4–           M13/1/AXENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Poetry

4.   An adequate to good answer will define non-visual imagery and give appropriate examples,
     making some comparison of their uses and effects.

     A very good to excellent answer may also consider in greater detail a wider range of non-
     visual imagery, possibly including the synaesthetic, demonstrating a more perceptive
     comparison of their uses and effects.


5.   An adequate to good answer will define what is meant by “voice” and identify the voice or
     voices used, comparing the effects of the poets’ choices on the reader.

     A very good to excellent answer may also show a greater understanding of how one or more
     voices can produce a range of different effects (persuasion, humour, pathos, etc), giving a
     detailed analysis of voice and its effects upon the reader.


6.   An adequate to good answer will explain how representations of the world in the chosen
     poems are “realistic” or “unrealistic”, and will discuss and compare how each poet has used
     detail to create these representations.

     A very good to excellent answer will explain how representations of the world in the chosen
     poems are “realistic” or “unrealistic”, and will discuss and compare with greater
     sophistication how each poet has used detail to create these representations.
                                              –5–           M13/1/AXENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Prose: novel and short story

7.   An adequate to good answer will identify appropriate events and show how they are arranged,
     making some comparison of the writers’ techniques and indicating in what ways these choices
     and arrangements affect our understanding of the texts as a whole.

     A very good to excellent answer may also consider a wider variety of events, showing a
     firmer grasp of the effects of their arrangement and making a more developed comparison of
     the writers’ techniques, indicating in greater detail the ways in which these choices and
     arrangements affect our understanding of the texts as a whole.


8.   An adequate to good answer will identify the moods and atmospheres evoked within the
     chosen texts and show how those moods and atmospheres are established.

     A very good to excellent answer may also choose more apt examples and give a much more
     detailed explanation of the means by which they develop the mood and atmosphere and their
     overall impact on each work.


9.   An adequate to good answer will identify some “unpleasant characters”, discuss why they are
     regarded as unpleasant, and compare some techniques of characterization that are used to
     make them acceptable or at least understandable to the reader.

     A very good to excellent answer may also explain more precisely what makes selected
     characters unpleasant, analysing in greater depth the techniques used to make such characters
     acceptable or at least understandable.
                                               –6–           M13/1/AXENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Prose other than fiction

10.   An adequate to good answer will identify some descriptive techniques and compare ways in
      which writers use them to evoke a particular sense of place.

      A very good to excellent answer may also identify a broader range of descriptive techniques,
      making a more detailed comparison of the ways in which writers use them to evoke a
      particular sense of place and its effect on each work.


11.   An adequate to good answer will identify some appropriate examples of anecdotes and/or
      analogies, analysing and comparing the ways in which they have been used.

      A very good to excellent answer may also make a more effective choice of anecdotes and/or
      analogies, analysing in greater detail how they have been used.


12.   An adequate to good answer will identify examples of objective view or persuasive
      techniques and compare how successfully either or both are used in the works.

      A very good to excellent answer may also offer a wider range of well-chosen examples and
      comment on the use of an objective view or persuasive techniques, analysing in greater detail
      how successfully either or both are presented.
