M13/1/AYENG/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


                    May / mai / mayo 2013

         ENGLISH / ANGLAIS / INGLÉS A:
         LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE /
           LANGUE ET LITTÉRATURE /
            LENGUA Y LITERATURA


        Higher Level and Standard Level
       Niveau Supérieur et Niveau Moyen
          Nivel Superior y Nivel Medio

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2

4 pages/páginas
                                –2–           M13/1/AYENG/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.
                                                   –3–               M13/1/AYENG/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


 Context should be understood in the widest possible sense. It may include the social and/or historical
 setting of the work; it may include the context of a situation within the work and will certainly include
 contexts of production and reception of a work.



1.   An adequate to good answer will refer to the context of the selected texts and examine authorial
     intention highlighting relevant detail. It will also discuss possible interpretations beyond the original
     intended meaning.

     A good to excellent answer will also analyse possible interpretations beyond the original intended
     meaning as well as exploring the idea that literature teaches its readers something.


2.   An adequate to good answer will identify instances of belief or faith, whether secular or religious,
     in the chosen works and give examples of how they are represented. Discussion will focus on
     understanding and interpretation of these representations in addition to their reception in different
     contexts.

     A good to excellent answer may also identify contrasting, or markedly different instances of belief
     or faith and show clearly how differently they could be interpreted according to context.


3.   An adequate to good answer will demonstrate an understanding of what makes a text “literary”
     through reference to “literary” features of the selected texts and illustrate this with detailed
     reference to the chosen works. The discussion may include consideration of some of the features of
     texts not considered to be literary.

     A good to excellent answer may also discuss more fully the problem of defining the term “literary”
     and explore a variety of literary aspects such as genre, narrative technique, characterization, stylistic
     effects and poetic language.


4.   An adequate to good answer will clearly identify and define relevant ideas in the chosen texts and
     use examples to support both sides of the argument.

     A good to excellent answer may also recognize the ways in which readers may be challenged or
     alienated by the ideas in a text and give some reasons as to why this might be.


5.   An adequate to good answer will demonstrate by the use of pertinent examples the influence of
     context on the production or reception of literary works.

     A good to excellent answer may also provide markedly different or contrasting examples that
     clearly bring out these influences and perhaps explore its role in constructing meaning in the texts.
                                                 –4–             M13/1/AYENG/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


6.   An adequate to good answer will clearly identify individuals or groups in the works chosen,
     explain the problems they face, their struggles and their lack of success. Discussion of some of the
     reasons why this might be may give some consideration to context and provide a reflection on the
     nature of literature.

     A good to excellent answer may also include contextual examples both of individual and collective
     struggle, show a more comprehensive understanding of the relevance of context and a fuller
     reflection on the nature of literature.

     Please note: This question may be interpreted as specifically relating to gender, but “men and
     women” may also be interpreted as “people”. Both interpretations are equally valid.
