M&N13/3/BUSMT/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS




BUSINESS AND MANAGEMENT
CASE STUDY: ROYAL DANISH BEARINGS


For use in May and November 2013



Instructions to candidates

• Case study booklet required for Higher Level Paper 1 and Standard Level Paper 1 Business and
  Management examinations.




2213-5001 ; 8813-5001                                                                             6 pages
                                                          © International Baccalaureate Organization 2012
                                                     –2–         M&N13/3/BUSMT/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

                                           Royal Danish Bearings

          Royal Danish Bearings (RDB) is a successful multinational company operating in the ball bearing
          industry.  RDB was set up in 1915, in Denmark, by a Danish machinist called Henrik Holstein.  
          Henrik was a visionary.  He foresaw the expansion of the ball bearing industry in the twentieth
          century, which was largely due to the growth of the automotive sector.  Ball bearing technology
     5    contributed to engineering progress throughout the twentieth century, especially in the secondary
          sector of the economy.  Today, the outlook of the ball bearing industry is still promising: its market
          size is predicted to further expand over the next decades.  “High-tech industries” such as computer
          software and artificial intelligence attract considerable attention and capital; however, most global
          industrial output continues to be mechanical devices.   For example, ball bearings are found in
    10    all types of vehicles, such as in gearboxes and wheel suspension; there are even ball bearings in
          fighter jets and space shuttles.

          RDB has always operated in the business-to-business (B2B) market.  Throughout the twentieth
          century, it expanded by internal/organic growth.  Consistent with business thinking of that era,
          the company concentrated its manufacturing in three megafactories (very large factories) located
    15    in Denmark, northern Germany and Sweden, where the workforce had become highly skilled
          in operating machinery for industrial production.   Benefiting from several economies of scale,
          RDB created thousands of jobs, supporting the “company towns” where they were the main
          employer, held in high esteem both locally and regionally.

          In the 1930s, RDB’s market position was determined by the high quality and high price of its
    20    ball bearings.  RDB’s two main competitors were UAB and FIB; UAB’s ball bearings were medium
          quality and medium price, and FIB’s ball bearings were low quality and low price.

          Immediately after the second world war, RDB began to face competition from new Japanese
          companies, which used their low labour costs to gain entry into the ball bearing market.  Thanks to
          its well-established reputation for high quality, RDB maintained its market share.

    25    By the 1970s, the competitive environment changed again.  As Japan’s economy developed, wages
          rose substantially.  To remain competitive, Japanese companies moved to just-in-time production.  
          Using this method, they could respond faster to specific customer needs.  Their flexibility became
          their unique selling point (USP); it represented an important competitive advantage against other
          companies such as RDB.  They also met international quality standards, making it easier to export
    30    to different regional trading blocs.


          Valdemar Holstein’s efficient leadership

          Valdemar Holstein (the son of RDB founder Henrik Holstein) started working at the company
          in 1951, when he was only twenty-one.   He spent his entire career at RDB, including several
          years as a machinist.  In 1965, he replaced Henrik as Chief Executive Officer (CEO).  Under his
          leadership, RDB kept thriving, as he successfully implemented several changes.  Although the
    35    company maintained a tall organizational structure, Valdemar empowered his middle managers.  
          He also adopted management techniques that were fashionable at the time, such as total quality
          management (TQM), benchmarking and Kaizen.



2213-5001 ; 8813-5001
                                                     –3–         M&N13/3/BUSMT/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

          RDB remained profitable and maintained brand loyalty.   However, financially, gross and net
          profit margins were lower than previously, which Valdemar thought was unavoidable.  Internally,
    40    some maintenance and technological upgrades were being delayed – but Valdemar did not pay
          attention to this.   Externally, some environmental campaigners started to put pressure on RDB
          because of the high pollution levels in the vicinity of RDB factories – but Valdemar ignored
          their claims.

          Valdemar was proud of the company’s traditions.  It remained privately owned by members of the
    45    Holstein family.  Valdemar, like his father, had a paternalistic leadership style – though he could
          occasionally be autocratic, especially when the workers’ collective bargaining agreements were
          being renegotiated.  Although there were few opportunities for promotion, the employees liked
          RDB’s corporate culture.  They too were proud of working for a well-known, well-established
          and well-respected company.  They were well paid, enjoyed working in a culturally homogeneous
    50    environment, and felt that their jobs were secure.   Many of the workers’ fathers and, in some
          cases, their grandfathers, had worked for RDB.  Work patterns and practices followed the northern
          European Christian calendar and local traditions.  Getting a job at RDB was like “joining a family”.  
          The employees all appreciated their job security, their high standard of living and their working
          environment.

    55    A cautious manager, Valdemar always tried to manage risks.  He regularly consulted economists
          and other specialists in order to minimize the impacts of changes in the external environment.  Over
          the years, these efforts proved worthwhile.  For example, RDB remained largely unaffected by the
          1970s energy crisis.  Every year, Valdemar reviewed RDB’s contingency plans; this helped him
          avoid a possible technological disaster in 2000 with the so-called “millennium bug”.  A crisis that
    60    Valdemar had not foreseen was the sudden collapse of Icelandic banks Kaupthing and Landsbanki
          in 2008; RDB had funds in saving accounts in those two banks.  However, it later managed to
          recover most of these funds.

          In terms of operations, RDB manufactured standard-sized ball bearings in a flow production
          process.   It sometimes used batch production for deliveries to established customers who used
    65    non-standard-sized ball bearings, and sometimes job production for one-off special orders, such
          as large ball bearing systems for power stations or mines.  In all respects, from human resource
          management to operations, Valdemar felt that RDB was ready for the twenty-first century.


          Anna Holstein and “RDB 2020”

          It was long anticipated that, when Valdemar retired, his daughter Anna would replace him as CEO
          of the company.  Unlike her father, she had no experience as a machinist; she did not “work her
    70    way up” from the factory floor and had less empathy for the factory workers.  After earning her
          IB Diploma in Copenhagen, followed by a degree in “green” engineering at university, she
          completed an MBA postgraduate degree and worked for an investment bank in New York.   In
          2005, shortly after her thirtieth birthday, she took her first position at RDB, in the Engineering
          Department, where she immediately began to implement “green” approaches to manufacturing.




2213-5001 ; 8813-5001                                                                               Turn over
                                                    –4–         M&N13/3/BUSMT/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

    75    Anna had big ideas for RDB.  A scientific and analytical thinker, she had carefully studied the
          external environment in which RDB operates.   She knew that demand for ball bearings was
          slowing down in Europe, whereas it was growing substantially in countries such as Brazil, China
          and India that were going through a phase of strong industrialization.   From her research, she
          also concluded that manufacturing in the twenty-first century would be accomplished in smaller,
    80    more flexible factories, instead of the huge modernist structures typical of the late nineteenth
          and twentieth centuries.  Time would be the critical factor; having factories close to customers’
          locations would reduce response time and improve logistics, including distribution and delivery.  
          This would also shorten the working capital cycle – an important benefit for RDB.

          Given her international experience, working at RDB made Anna realize that her colleagues in the
    85    Engineering Department, and even the entire RDB workforce, needed a better cultural understanding
          of their customers.  The best way to achieve this, she thought, would be through a workforce that
          resembled RDB’s customers, and increasingly they would be from Asia, India and South America.  
          She was also convinced that RDB had to focus on “green” technologies and its corporate social
          responsibility.  The company would have to significantly increase its spending on research and
    90    development (R&D) and also examine its impact on the environment and on its customers’ carbon
          footprint.  The two are linked, Anna reasoned: the ultimate aim of innovation in the ball bearing
          industry is to save energy, which is fundamentally what ball bearings do by reducing friction.  For
          users, better ball bearings mean less friction and, in turn, less friction means that less energy is
          wasted.  Thus, less energy is needed.

    95    Anna’s vision for RDB was to make the world’s most technologically advanced, energy-efficient
          ball bearings in small “green” factories located near its customers.  This would require selling
          the two megafactories in northern Germany and Sweden, and significantly downsizing the one
          in Denmark.   RDB’s production would be offshored to 12 small factories to be opened around
          the world, mainly in Brazil, China and India.   In terms of workforce planning, each of those
  100     new RDB factories would be jointly managed by one experienced RDB senior manager from
          Europe and one local manager familiar with the language and culture.   Some machinists from
          RDB’s European factories would be offered key positions.  Most of the existing jobs in Europe
          would be made redundant, as most of the new workers would be recruited locally on lower wages.  
          Northern European countries have generous redundancy payments, largely funded by the
  105     employers, and these costs would be significant in the short term.   In the long term, however,
          RDB would lower labour costs.

          Marketing would also play a major role in the new RDB that Anna imagined.  RDB’s marketing
          department had always been “sleepy”, with a small budget and unchallenging objectives.  
          Advertising and promotion were limited to some trade journals and trade shows.  Anna thought
  110     that this should change.  She believed that RDB should advertise in a wider range of publications,
          including e-zines (online magazines) and professional web sites for industrial design and
          architectural robotics.   She wanted to use information and communication technology (ICT)
          to communicate to a wider range of external stakeholders.  That way, RDB would create brand
          awareness in the design community, and not just in the manufacturing community.  The marketing
  115     department should start carrying out market research, both primary and secondary.  Anna also
          pictured groups of RDB “engineers-turned-salesmen” calling on major manufacturers to generate
          orders, whilst other staff would pressure politicians for more legislation and incentives to support
          environmentally-friendly products.



2213-5001 ; 8813-5001
                                                      –5–          M&N13/3/BUSMT/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

          Anna wrote all the details of her ideas in a strategic plan that she named “RDB 2020”.  
  120     She calculated that the transition costs for such a large-scale restructuring would be enormous.
          In order to generate 50 % of the funds required, RDB would need to sell the two megafactories in
          northern Germany and Sweden.  For the rest of the funds, Anna would list RDB on the Frankfurt
          Stock Exchange: RDB would become a public limited company, with funds generated from the
          sale of newly issued shares.  Anna was very pleased with her overall strategy for RDB; she found
  125     it coherent, consistent and forward-looking.


          Valdemar’s counterproposals

          Valdemar was stunned when Anna explained her “RDB 2020” strategic plan to him.  Although
          he recognized that manufacturing was shifting away from Europe, and that RDB had to become
          more environmentally conscious, he had major objections.   “RDB is a Danish company”,
          he insisted, “we managed to expand significantly after the first world war thanks to a major contract
  130     from the Danish government”.  He felt a moral obligation to provide jobs in Denmark.  At times,
          RDB had also formed public-private partnerships with the Swedish and German governments for
          various projects.  The workforce was local and loyal; Valdemar felt like a father to them; a major
          retrenchment would be a violation of the “social contract” he implicitly had with them.  He also
          despised the idea of RDB going public.  Despite Anna’s assurances that the Holstein family would
  135     still be the major shareholder, he did not want to answer to shareholders who were not family
          members and had no sense of the company’s history or traditions.  He had a bad feeling about this.  
          He also did not like the idea of the relocation of the factories.  A lifelong industrialist, he loved to
          see his three megafactories in northern Europe.  Their scale of operation was so vast that expansions
          had been coordinated with the local urban planning authorities; the Swedish factory was so large
  140     that railroad lines had been installed in order to deliver supplies and to transport finished products.  
          It was beyond his imagination that small factories operating in industrial parks on the outskirts of
          Mumbai or São Paulo could accomplish the same as the European ones.

          Despite Valdemar’s objections, Anna told him that she would speak to other shareholders in the
          family and could collectively force the company to change.  He asked her for time to come up with
  145     an alternative proposal that would incorporate “some” of her ideas.  

          A month later he suggested the following to her:
          • Rebrand the company, changing its name from “Royal Danish Bearings” to “Green Bearings,
            an RDB Company” and adopt Anna’s marketing strategy.  Green Bearings would be “green” in
            name only.
  150     • Remain in northern Europe, but divide each of the three megafactories into autonomous cells,
            each assigned to serve a region of the world and each with its own strategic and tactical/
            operational objectives.   Local salesmen would be hired, paid low salaries, but with high
            commissions as an incentive.  This would make the company look more international, but the
            current workforce in Europe would not change.
  155     • Form strategic alliances with ball bearing companies in Brazil, China and India.




2213-5001 ; 8813-5001                                                                                 Turn over
                                                   –6–         M&N13/3/BUSMT/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

          Valdemar admitted that he had thought about finding a major investor whose financial assistance
          RDB could use to modernize the current factories and make them environmentally-friendly.  
          The Holstein family could sell a portion of their shares to the major investor.   However,
          Valdemar rejected this idea.  Though being “green” was good practice and was socially responsible,
  160     he hated the idea of having a shareholder who was not a member of the Holstein family.  

          Anna listened attentively, however, she was not satisfied.   She thought that this plan was not
          enough to prepare RDB for the twenty-first century.   Changing the name and reconfiguring
          the factories to cell production would be satisfactory in the short term, but it would only
          delay the major changes that would eventually have to come.   She wanted RDB to have a
  165     first-mover advantage in terms of brand awareness and “green” practices.  Developing a global
          identity and a global workforce was a strategic priority for her.   Demographic changes in
          Europe would eventually undermine Valdemar’s vision of RDB as a “happy European family”.  
          There was also the problem of European labour costs: in the long term, European workers
          would be too expensive and probably uncompromising when engaged in collective bargaining.  
  170     Globalization, Anna argued, undermined the “social contract” that her father believed in.




Additional terms not in the Guide

Paternalistic leadership style
First-mover advantage



Companies, products, or individuals named in this case study are fictitious and any similarities with actual
entities are purely coincidental.




2213-5001 ; 8813-5001
