M13/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                  MARKSCHEME


                          May 2013



                       GEOGRAPHY



                        Higher Level



                               Paper 3




8 pages
                              –2–            M13/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.
                                                   –3–              M13/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.   (a)   Using examples, distinguish between cultural imperialism and cultural diffusion.            [10]

           There is no universal agreement on the precise meaning of these terms, but expect a
           general distinction to be made between voluntary / consented changes (diffusion) and
           enforced/pressured changes (imperialism). In reality, there is a spectrum of pressure,
           and candidates may take different positions on this. All arguments should be judged
           on their individual merits.

           Cultural imperialism denotes the projection of power – wherein a subaltern
           community or subordinate country experiences the “top-down” / forced imposition of
           cultural traits eg religion (missionaries), language, legal structures, dress codes, etc.
           Examples might include English language insistence in some Alaskan Inuit schools
           in recent times; or China in Tibet today; Indonesia and East Timor. Global
           domination of English – via the internet – is another contemporary theme, or
           American cultural hegemony (Hollywood, etc).

           Cultural diffusion denotes a wider set of processes of cultural spread of which
           imperialism is just one avenue. Traits may be sought out and adopted voluntarily
           (eg Japanese teenagers adopting US music, film, etc). There are many avenues for
           diffusion, notably migration and music (via the internet). Adoption of Mexican
           diaspora cultural traits (especially food) by wider US society might be explored
           (or parallel examples elsewhere, eg UK, Sweden).

           Political viewpoints may differ as to how the actions of TNCs should be categorized
           (the spread of consumerism may be seen either as a form of imperialism, or as
           diffusion) and different arguments should be judged on their own merits and in light
           of the evidence presented.

           Good answers may touch on the growing projection of eg Indian and Chinese culture
           as exemplification, rather than being restricted entirely to historical European and
           USA superpower examples.

           To access band C, both concepts/processes must be addressed and examples
           provided; and at band D, an attempt at distinguishing should be made, with specific
           examples of both provided (though the distinction may not be entirely convincing,
           because the concepts are sophisticated ones).

           To access band E, the response should be well-balanced, well-articulated and
           well-exemplified.

           Other approaches may be equally valid. Marks should be allocated according to the
           markbands.
                                              –4–              M13/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   Examine the range of responses to the loss of national sovereignty that
      globalization can bring.                                                                    [15]

      Credit all content in line with the markbands.         Credit unexpected approaches
      wherever relevant.

      Loss of sovereignty describes a state surrendering legislative power (eg can no
      longer act unilaterally when setting tariffs, migration controls etc). Loss of
      sovereignty could also be seen as a growing dependency on foreign-based TNCs, and
      foreign influences on national culture, etc. Some may argue the retreat of national
      identity, due to cultural diffusion [Guide 5] is progressive (“global citizen” ideas).

      Reasons for loss of actual political sovereignty could include the growth of
      multi-governmental organizations (MGOs) or trade blocs, the actions of global
      organizations such as World Bank and IMF, the growth of international treaties and
      courts, as well as the excessive power of large global corporations [Guide 6]. Do not
      expect all of these themes to be covered, even in a good answer.

      The economic logic behind MGOs may be appreciated and the benefits this can have
      for freer financial flows and migration flows, which may bring wealth to host and
      source regions [Guide 3]. Thus, some groups/companies/governments respond to
      globalization by embracing the benefits associated with MGO membership (weaker
      answers may simply cite the benefits, rather than explaining why some businesses
      show enthusiasm for MGO membership).

      The negative response against globalization – such as resurgence of nationalism and
      opposition to migration in the EU – are likely themes [Guide 6] that can be extended
      through the analysis of the reaction of civil society and the organized rejection of this
      aspect of globalization, perhaps through political or religious pressure groups.

      There is also the larger-scale idea of countries “opting out” of globalization
      (N Korea, Bhutan) [Guide 7]. These may determine what degree of sovereignty is
      ceded (not all European nations have joined EU, for instance).

      Positive responses to globalization can thus be weighed against the fear of possible
      losses, costs and challenges. Any conclusion reached will be context-dependent.
      The arguments may be different for an account focused on the EU, in comparison to
      a discussion of NAFTA or MERCOSUR.

      Band C answers describe a narrow range of responses that are linked to globalization
      or may explain why sovereignty is lost/threatened (but do not link this to the
      responses of particular actors). At the upper end of this level, there may be a simple,
      assertive conclusion based on a narrow synthesis of information.

      For band D there should be a synthesis of several evidenced themes taken from the
      subject guide or a conclusion that reflects on a range of responses (perhaps weighing
      the net balance of positive and negative responses, or taking into account the
      differing perspectives of different actors). At band E, expect both of these elements
      (both synthesis and some proper evaluation).

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.
                                                 –5–             M13/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   (a)   Explain the role of ICT in the growth of international outsourcing.                     [10]

           Outsourcing is the concept of taking internal company functions and paying an
           outside firm to handle them (eg one company employing another company to
           produce goods or services rather than manufacture them “in-house” at a branch plant
           or back-office owned by the first company). International outsourcing consists of the
           means by which a domestic firm asks a foreign firm to produce a specified product,
           component or service, for which it can perhaps supply the inputs and transfer
           technology and technical assistance to the producer. Different sectors of industry
           (from agribusiness to call centres) use ICT in different ways to support outsourcing.

           Links with ICT might include: outsourced office and quaternary/research work that is
           enabled via ICT and the movement of bundled files, data, use of Skype, etc. Many
           back-office services eg call centres, accountancy, have been moved to India from
           UK/USA for instance; and France to North Africa (the role of other factors eg
           availability of European language speakers, may be commented on). Some answers
           may comment on how the trend has changed over time in line with technological
           advancements. Also credit more general ideas about using ICT to research
           outsourcing destinations, or to transfer payments to client companies.

           ICT also helps with inventories, just-in-time ordering from suppliers, etc, thereby
           supporting outsourcing of other sectors of industry including manufacturing and food.

           For bands D and E, expect a broad analysis of the role of ICT that has some good
           supporting details of outsourcing (and is likely to offer a definition).

           Performance at band C is likely to be narrower (very limited range of outsourcing
           examples) and/or may lack much/any evidence of where/when outsourcing has taken
           place (or may get side-tracked by describing in depth the evolution of ICT, or ICT-
           led global interactions, with little explicit focus on outsourcing ).

           Other approaches may be equally valid. Marks should be allocated according to the
           markbands.
                                             –6–              M13/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   “Environmental degradation is the inevitable outcome of global economic
      interactions.” Discuss this statement.                                                     [15]

      Credit all content in line with the markbands.         Credit unexpected approaches
      wherever relevant.

      The terms “environmental degradation” and “global economic interactions” are both
      broad; either, or both, may be deconstructed to provide some essay structure.

      Commodity movements (raw materials, agro-industrial produce, e-waste) are
      important forms of economic interaction [Guide 4]. Global economic interactions
      also comprise financial flows ie loans, aid, debt repayment, FDI [Guide 3].
      Migration, tourism and online financial transactions may also be included [Guide 3].

      A broad interpretation of “degradation” should be credited [Guide 4].
      Environmental degradation can take many forms, with the geography guide
      suggesting candidates become familiar with impacts of tourism [Guide 5],
      agro-industrialization, air freighting (food miles), waste movements and
      transboundary pollution events [Guide 4]. Other suggestions may be made drawing
      on other parts of the geography course, and these should be credited. Weaker
      answers may neglect to link these impacts with specific global interactions (may
      assert that “businesses” cause deforestation but say little about why they are doing
      so / where demand is coming from/who the actual TNCs are). Do not over-credit
      pollution events that do not relate to global interactions (eg Chernobyl) or are weakly
      related.

      Good answers may cast the net wider eg addressing the carbon footprint of financial
      flows such as online trading (relying on the use of ICT requiring electricity); or may
      look at how the burden of debt may result in an increase in environmentally
      damaging practices such as logging; or may look at the environmental impacts of
      FDI-led development eg Bhopal (India) or Shell (Niger delta) or BP (Gulf of
      Mexico).

      Counter-arguments may include the limited impacts of online interactions; or the
      measures taken by TNCs or other actors to minimize environmental impacts
      including climate change “carbon-neutral” initiative and other mitigation measures
      (actions of NGOs eg WWF). Credit any attempt made to stress the lower-impact
      nature of certain activities (good answers may even question the level of damage that
      constitutes actual “degradation”, or may contrast local and global scale degradation).

      At band C, there could be a conclusion that disagrees with the statement, but purely
      on the basis of the discussion of a very narrow range of interactions (eg has simply
      contrasted internet use with oil spills) or impacts (but global interactions not clear).

      For band D there should be a synthesis of several evidenced interactions and impacts,
      or a properly evidenced conclusion that provides a considered viewpoint, or gives an
      overview, about the impacts of different global interactions on the environment.
      At band E, expect both of these elements.

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.
                                                  –7–              M13/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   (a)   Explain why the landscapes of major world cities are becoming increasingly
           similar.                                                                                  [10]

           The focus should be an explanation of the landscapes of major world cities eg Sao
           Paulo, New York, Cape Town, Singapore, Mumbai, Barcelona, Dublin etc. These
           settlements may house “cloned” retailing districts and ubiquitous branded
           commodities (expect references to McDonald’s and Starbucks); also, a suggestion of
           “universal” modernist architecture in financial and housing districts (expect a range
           of examples in stronger responses); also, a broader response may encompass the
           proliferation of cultural and religious signs and symbols as a result of migration and
           diaspora (eg mosques, synagogues, churches all present in major world cities/global
           hubs). Metro-style transport networks are a common shared feature.

           Explanation may include: the global influence of property developers
           (retail/financial/housing) key architects and their firms; inter-urban competition
           (eg status competition for the highest, or most modern-looking buildings); the power
           of TNCs to project global advertising messages in urban environments (and perhaps
           regulatory changes or trade bloc enlargements assisting their global expansion);
           rising affluence in emerging economies (thus enticing McDonald’s, etc); the
           “shrinking world” effect (the global diffusion of architectural styles, etc); migration
           leading to landscape changes; historical connections (colonial architecture).

           The question does not require counter-argument although some may note that
           “similar” is not equivalent to “same” due to the survival of local architecture.

           The focus invites an overview of the world’s major cities/urban landscapes and the
           best answers may cite examples drawn from both developed world cities and those of
           some emerging economies eg “Asian Tigers”, Middle East, BRIC nations.

           Band C answers are likely to be descriptive (lacking explanation) of urban
           homogenization, or explain cultural/global homogenization but without a
           landscape/city focus.

           For band D, at least two reasons for urban/landscape homogenization should be well
           explained, or a wider range of reasons for cultural homogenization are explained in
           less detail and some links are made with urban landscapes. Band E should provide
           breadth and depth of explanation, with some variety of landscape exemplification.

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.
                                             –8–              M13/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   “Global interactions are putting all the world’s wealth into the hands of a small
      number of people and countries.” Discuss this statement.                                  [15]

      Credit all content in line with the markbands.        Credit unexpected approaches
      wherever relevant.

      The broadest macro-scale distributional contrasts should be clearly highlighted –
      including the high growth rates of emerging economies, especially those of China
      and India (can be used to support or argue against the question) and the continued
      lack of FDI for the poorest 50 LDCs. A historical view might contrast the historical
      Brandt Line north-south wealth distribution with today’s more complex pattern of
      cores [Guide 1].      Good answers may even appreciate the recent relative
      underperformance and loss of share of wealth of established core regions (Japan,
      USA, Eurozone). Answers should be focused on wealth, rather than “importance”
      and may have supporting data, eg GDP figures or income data or use of Gini index
      data. These changes may be linked with a range of explanatory reasons relating to
      economic interactions including FDI, remittances, aid etc. [Guide 3], changes in
      global participation [Guide 1] or geopolitical change and interaction [Guide 6].

      The benefits of globalization are not evenly spread within nations and this is a reason
      for resistance from some groups [Guide 5/7]. One approach might be to examine the
      claim that “the rich get richer while the poor get poorer” and describe evidence for
      worker poverty within some nations, linked to FDI/TNCs [Guide 3], outsourcing or
      agro-industry employment [Guide 4]. Societies that have been excluded from global
      interactions (indigenous tribes, etc) may also be discussed [Guide 7].

      Good answers may address the question at different scales, or may suggest a
      complex global pattern of “haves” and “have-nots” (perhaps by identifying wealth in
      the Middle East or East Asia, or highlighting the persisting poverty of the poorest
      LDCs eg Mali). The best answers may distinguish between relative and absolute
      levels of wealth. As the rich have got richer, the poor may hold a lessened share of
      wealth – this is not the same thing as losing wealth.

      Band C responses may assert the statement is correct/incorrect, based on a narrow
      range of supporting ideas, lacking much specific evidence / information.

      For band D there should be a synthesis of several evidenced themes taken from the
      subject guide, or a properly evidenced conclusion that provides a
      considered/balanced viewpoint/overview, clearly related to the changing distribution
      of global wealth. At band E, expect both of these elements.

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.
