M13/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                           May 2013



                      PSYCHOLOGY



                        Higher Level



                               Paper 3




6 pages
                              –2–            M13/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.
                                         –3–              M13/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 3 markbands

Marks      Level descriptor

0          The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

1 to 3     There is an attempt to answer the question, but knowledge and
           understanding is limited, often inaccurate, or of marginal relevance to the
           question. The response makes no direct reference to the stimulus
           material or relies too heavily on quotations from the text.

4 to 7     The question is partially answered. Knowledge and understanding is
           accurate but limited. Either the command term is not effectively
           addressed or the response is not sufficiently explicit in answering the
           question. The response makes limited use of the stimulus material.

8 to 10    The question is answered in a focused and effective manner and meets
           the demands of the command term. The answer is supported by
           appropriate and accurate knowledge and understanding of qualitative
           research methodology.       The response demonstrates a critical
           understanding of qualitative research methodology applied to the
           stimulus material.
                                                   –4–               M13/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.   Explain two ethical considerations relevant to this study.                                   [10 marks]

     Refer to the paper 3 markbands when awarding marks.

     The command term “explain” requires candidates to give a detailed account, including
     reasons, for the relevance of two ethical considerations to the study.

     Responses that use the term “experiment” as a generic term for “study” should not be
     penalized for this.

     Relevant ethical considerations in this study could be, but are not limited to:
     • anonymity
     • confidentiality
     • informed consent.

     Candidates could mention that the participants know each other so it may be practically
     impossible to keep anonymity. This situation is often the case when snowball sampling
     is used. However, the importance of the research topic in understanding factors in
     excessive use and (perhaps) addiction to online gaming could justify that anonymity is
     not guaranteed within this study. Candidates could perhaps argue that as long as the
     researcher makes sure that the identities of the participants are not known outside of the
     group, a study like this is still ethically acceptable.

     Candidates may explain that confidentiality is particularly important in a topic like
     online gaming addiction because it is a very personal and sensitive issue.
     Candidates could give various reasons for the relevance of confidentiality, for example
     that it is important that other people will not find out anything about the participants’
     internet addiction.

     As for informed consent, the researchers obtained informed consent from all
     participants. A relevant consideration in this study could be the age of the participants.
     Candidates could explain that parental consent should in principle be gained for these
     minors but that it may not have been done due to the sensitive nature of the study.

     Another relevant ethical consideration would be to say that research such as this study
     could include a follow-up procedure in which treatment is offered for those who are
     adversely affected by this addiction.

     Candidates may refer to ethical considerations taken by the researcher in the study in the
     stimulus material and/or considerations that could have been taken. Both approaches
     are equally acceptable.

     If a candidate explains more than two ethical considerations, credit should be given only
     to the first two explanations.

     If a candidate explains only one ethical consideration, apply the markbands up to a
     maximum of [5 marks].
                                                  –5–              M13/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   Discuss the use of semi-structured interviews in this study.                                 [10 marks]

     Refer to the paper 3 markbands when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered and balanced
     review of factors relevant for the use of a semi-structured interview in the research
     study in the stimulus material. Opinions or conclusions should be presented clearly and
     supported by appropriate knowledge of semi-structured interviews.

     Responses that use the term “experiment” as a generic term for “study” should not be
     penalized for this.

     Semi-structured interviews can use a combination of closed and open-ended questions
     and the interview is often more informal and conversational in nature.

     Candidates could argue that the researchers have chosen semi-structured interviews
     most probably because they want answers to certain questions they have, while giving
     participants the opportunity to talk more freely about their motivation to play online
     games. Using open-ended questions makes it possible for interviewees to give an
     account of their personal experiences with online gaming from their own perspective.
     This seems a major advantage in this study on a sensitive topic.

     In the context of the study in the stimulus material, candidates could also argue that the
     flexibility of open-ended questions allows the researcher to obtain richer data. If the
     researchers had used a structured interview with closed questions they would perhaps
     not be able to gain the same insight into why the adolescents are more or less addicted
     to internet games. Candidates may also refer to the disadvantages of semi-structured
     interviews, for example, that analysis of data is extremely time-consuming. Since the
     researchers have chosen to use the semi-structured interview in spite of this, it could be
     because of the possibility to obtain richer data.

     Responses that briefly refer to other research methods as part of the discussion of why
     semi-structured interviews were used in this study should be fully credited.
                                                  –6–               M13/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   Describe the use of inductive content analysis (thematic analysis) in this study.             [10 marks]

     Refer to the paper 3 markbands when awarding marks.

     The command term “describe” requires candidates to give a detailed account of how
     inductive content analysis could be applied to the interview transcripts in the study.

     Responses that use the term “experiment” as a generic term for “study” should not be
     penalized for this.

     In the context of this study, candidates should describe characteristics or features of the
     procedure of inductive content analysis. Relevant parts of the procedure of inductive
     content analysis in this study could be, but are not limited to:
     • Analysis of the transcripts of the interview to identify possible themes that relate to
        adolescents’ own perceptions of their addiction to internet games.
     • Following a systematic analysis of the transcript for emerging themes (for example,
        “avoiding homework” or “finding friends”) the researcher could try to connect
        emerging themes in meaningful ways to establish possible hierarchies of themes.
     • Constructing a summary table of the four higher-order themes mentioned in the
        stimulus material.
     • Connecting the subordinate themes with relevant quotations from the adolescents to
        support the choice of each theme. The final task is to make interpretations based on
        the analysis.

     Responses that do not describe the use of inductive content analysis in this study but
     merely refer to the themes mentioned in the stimulus material should be awarded up to a
     maximum of [3 marks].
