M13/3/WLDRE/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                           May 2013



                  WORLD RELIGIONS



                      Standard Level



                               Paper 2




18 pages
                         –2–          M13/3/WLDRE/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive
use of examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate
and must not be reproduced or distributed to any other
person without the authorization of the IB Assessment
Centre.
                                                                             –3–                                                       M13/3/WLDRE/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Markbands

                         AO1                                      AO2                                      AO3                             AO4                  Paper 2
                                                                                                                                                                 Marks
  Level                                                                                                                                                          0–20
              Knowledge/understanding                    Application/analysis                      Synthesis/evaluation                    Skills
descriptor


                                             No evidence of application; the question has
    A           No relevant knowledge                                                                  No evaluation                None appropriate              0
                                                   been completely misinterpreted

                Little knowledge and/or
                understanding; largely        Very little application; important aspects of                                    Very low level; little attempt
    B                                                                                                  No evaluation                                             1–4
               superficial or of marginal                the question are ignored                                              at organization of material
                        relevance
                                                Some attempt at application; answer                                           There is some evidence of an
              Some relevant knowledge
    C                                        partially addresses the question; there is no             No evaluation          attempt to follow a structured     5–8
                and understanding
                                                 or little analysis of the key concepts                                                 approach
                                             Some attempt at application; competent
               Relevant knowledge and                                                                                           There is a clear attempt to
                                            answer although not fully developed, and               Some evaluation or
    D        understanding, but with some                                                                                      structure answers in line with    9–12
                                          tends to be in parts descriptive; there will be       unsubstantiated evaluation
                      omissions                                                                                                         the question
                                               some analysis of the key concepts
                                             Appropriate application; developed answer        There is evaluation of all major
                 Generally accurate                                                                                            Answers are well structured;
                                              that covers most aspects of the question;       areas of the answer; answers
                   knowledge and                                                                                                  ideas are organized in a
    E                                          there is a developed analysis of the key        demonstrate a consistently                                       13–16
             understanding, but with some                                                                                      clear, coherent and balanced
                                                concepts; using both secondary and/or           analytical and/or a critical
                   minor omissions                                                                                                         essay
                                                           primary sources                               approach
                                                                                              Good and well-balanced attempt
                                             Detailed application; well-developed answer
                                                                                               at evaluation; arguments are     The specific question is
                                                that covers most or all aspects of the
                                                                                               clear, coherent, relevant and     addressed in a clearly
              Accurate, specific, detailed    question; the answer demonstrates an in-
                                                                                                 well substantiated where    structured and focused essay
    F              knowledge and             depth analysis through effective use of ideas                                                                      17–20
                                                                                                appropriate, there will be a  that indicates a high level of
                   understanding               drawn from a wide range of secondary
                                                                                                successful challenge to the  awareness of the demands of
                                             and/or primary sources; there is evidence of
                                                                                                assumptions implied in the            the question.
                                                rigorous analysis of the key concepts
                                                                                                          question
                                                  –4–              M13/3/WLDRE/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                              SECTION A

Hinduism

1.   To what extent is puja central to Hindu ritual?

     Candidates should show awareness that ritual is a central feature of Hinduism. Candidates should
     show awareness of the common forms of puja and their universality in Hindu religious life (for
     example, worship of a murti, repetition of a God’s name, singing of devotional songs, arti, prasad).
     Better candidates should know that it has two sources: Vedic and Agamic/Puranic.

     Vedic ritual derives from the classical sacred texts and is rooted in a theology of sacrifice that
     explains everything as ritual. Such rituals have to be carried out absolutely correctly and are
     performed on behalf of the householder by brahmins. Offering such sacrifices remains part of
     Hindu dharma and can be extremely large public events when carried out by wealthy patrons.
     Exceptional candidates should be aware that in such rituals the gods (devas) are controlled by the
     ritual act when it is carried out correctly.

     This ancient Vedic system has nothing to do with the devotion to deities or gurus that is commonly
     carried out by most Hindus today. This more popular form of Hinduism has its origins in other
     sacred texts, notably the Agamas and Puranas which recount the legends of the many deities. It is
     this popular form of worship in temples dedicated to many deities (murti) that has transformed the
     religious landscape of Hinduism although the sacrificial rituals of the brahmins are still carried out
     on formal or ceremonial occasions. Worship of these popular gods is known as puja. This act of
     puja is rooted in bhakti. The majority of Hindus today follow some form of bhakti defined as
     worship or devotion toward a deity. Puja is regarded as central to bhakti.

     Accept any other relevant answer.

     Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                  –5–             M13/3/WLDRE/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   Evaluate the significance of the Hindu classification of sacred texts.

     Candidates should be aware of the binary classification of Hindu sacred texts into shruti and smriti.
     They would show their knowledge of this division and its significance. For example, they should
     be aware that shruti means perceived through hearing and is regarded by brahmins to constitute
     revelation. They should know that shruti consists of the Vedic texts (Samhitas, Aranyakas,
     Brahmanas and Upanishads). These collections are the instruments for the Vedic rituals of sacrifice
     and remain denied to the common people and are accessed even today through the Sanskrit
     language. The essential point is that students should be aware that not all the sacred books of
     Hinduism possess the same degree of revelation. Hindus developed a categorization system in
     which all sacred texts were classified. Good students should know that this is not universally
     accepted but varies according to schools of thought. Vedantins, for example, included the
     Upanishads, Bhagavad Gita and Brahmasutra as shruti but the Mimamsa school only accepts the
     four Vedas, and their developments into the Aranyakas and Brahmanas. Smriti literature signifies
     that which is remembered and constitutes the authority of tradition. Smriti literature is also
     disputed. Good students should be aware that it can be further divided into the Dharmasastras, in
     which rules of conduct were elaborated for brahmin families or regulations for other castes. These
     books may not have significant impact on the majority of Hindus who are more likely to be
     influenced by the Puranas or the great epics, the Mahabharata and Ramayana. These legendary
     tales of gods and avatars are known throughout the Indian masses and form the constituents of
     popular culture. Most Hindus would consider this literature to be part of smriti. Although
     acknowledging the binary division, the latter form of smriti texts have far greater influence. Good
     students should be aware that the Puranas are written to attest the supremacy of a particular deity
     and are therefore significant in Hindu sectarianism. Exceptional students should also be aware of a
     third category of sacred texts known as Nyaya or pramama; these are writings that provide logical
     or rational arguments to demonstrate or provide valid proof for religious knowledge. They are
     accessible only to the learned.

     Accept any other relevant answer.

     Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                  –6–              M13/3/WLDRE/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Buddhism

3.   Evaluate the importance of ritual within Buddhist monastic life.

     Candidates should demonstrate awareness that ritual is an important part of monastic life but also
     that it is not the only component. On the basis of this, they should evaluate how important ritual
     actually is within monastic life. Candidates may indicate that for some monastic orders meditation
     is more significant than ritual.

     Buddhist monks and nuns take part in rituals that are restricted to the monastic community and also
     rituals that involve lay people. The former include: entering a monastery as a novice; higher
     ordination; reciting their rule of discipline and confessing their faults; communal chanting of texts.
     The latter include: leading lay people in the chanting of the refuges and the five precepts; preaching
     to lay people; the pirit ceremony through which texts are chanted to bring blessing to lay people;
     funeral ceremonies and the transferring of merit to those who have died; the kathina ceremony
     when lay people offer new robes to monks at the end of the rains retreat.

     Monastic life also involves: the practice of meditation; the study of Buddhist texts; learning to live
     harmoniously as a community of monks or nuns; receiving food from lay people, sometimes
     through participating in alms rounds; ordinary practices such as sweeping the compound, gardening,
     washing clothes. Some monks and nuns are also involved in social work, particularly in situations
     where the lay people are poor or affected by war.

     Candidates should be given credit if they show awareness that the Buddha did not form his orders
     of monks and nuns for the purpose of ritual. They were formed to offer men and later women the
     chance to practise meditation diligently and to reach nibbana more quickly. It was as Buddhism
     attracted more and more people and became more institutionalized that rituals arose.

     Accept any other relevant answer.

     Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                  –7–               M13/3/WLDRE/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   Discuss the experience of meditation in Buddhism, including the differences between the
     experience of monks/nuns and lay people.

     Candidates should demonstrate awareness that meditation is central to the experience of being
     Buddhist but that there are differences in the practice of meditation by ordained and lay people.
     Students should be given credit if they also recognise that, in contemporary societies, the practice of
     meditation by lay Buddhists (and non-Buddhists) is increasing.

     Meditation is central to the experience of being Buddhist because it features in the Noble Eightfold
     Path as Right Effort, Right Mindfulness and Right Concentration. It is through meditation that the
     Three Poisons (ignorance, desire and aversion) can be eradicated from the mind, leading to the end
     of dukkha (suffering or unsatisfactoriness) and the attaining of nibbana.

     Candidates should mention some of the following points: there are two main forms of meditation,
     tranquillity meditation (samatha) and insight meditation (vipassana), both of which involve sitting
     with back erect, in quietness, and developing mindfulness; watching the breath as it enters and
     leaves the nostrils is one of the most common forms of meditation; meditation can lead to states of
     joy and peace; meditation is a form of mind culture through which those meditating see more
     clearly how desire and aversion arise in the mind; meditation can be hard work, and involves much
     effort and discipline.

     Buddhist monks and nuns have more time to practise meditation. They are on the fast track to
     nibbana because they have left home and family, and have therefore reduced their attachments.
     Some monks and nuns live in forest monasteries to aid the practice of meditation.

     Most lay Buddhists in Asia place more emphasis on morality and devotional practices than
     meditation. They venerate the Buddha, offer gifts of food to monks and nuns, and strive to follow
     the Five Precepts. However, increasingly, in contemporary societies, lay people are also meditating.
     Meditation centres for lay people are present in Asia and the West.

     Accept any other relevant answer.

     Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                   –8–              M13/3/WLDRE/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Sikhism

5.   “The Guru Granth Sahib is by far the most important of the Sikh scriptures.” To what extent
     do you agree with this statement?

     Candidates should be aware that the Guru Granth Sahib contains the teachings of the ten human
     Gurus and is therefore the only repository in which Sikhs can discover and interpret the tenets of
     their religion.

     They should also be aware that the Guru Granth Sahib does not provide information on the Gurus’
     lives. Considering the centrality of the Guru in the Sikh relationship with God, Sikhs use events in
     the Gurus’ lives to illustrate teachings and bolster faith. These hagiographical accounts are found in
     the Janam Sakhis, which are part of the Sikh collection of sacred texts. Bright candidates might be
     aware of the controversy concerning the historicity of the Janam Sakhis as they weren’t written
     down until the eighteenth century. Some candidates should be aware of the Dasam Granth
     presumed to be written by Guru Gobind Singh. They might consider Owen Cole’s and Piara Singh
     Sambhi’s observation that this literature could be classed as “occasional”, that is, literature that was
     significant at the time of compilation and publication but whose appeal diminishes with time
     (1995:56).

     However, the key point has to be the awareness that the Guru Granth Sahib is more than a canon of
     teachings but is considered by Sikhs to consist of the living word of God. Sikh understanding of the
     “word of God” is incorporated in the terms “bani” (the spoken word of divine truth) and “shabad”
     (the written word of divine truth). The presence of bani was enough for the fifth human Guru to
     bow before the Book which he had installed in the Golden Temple in 1604. Candidates need to be
     aware that the last human Guru, Gobind Singh, named the Book as the final Guru on his death.
     Consequently the Book is the spiritual guide of Sikhs and dominates Sikh practice and doctrines.
     The Guru Granth Sahib has replaced the human Gurus.

     Accept any other relevant answer.

     Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                   –9–              M13/3/WLDRE/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


6.   Examine the Sikh doctrine of the Guru and its centrality in Sikhism.

     Sikhs believe that Guru Nanak (1469–1539), the founder Guru of Sikhism, received from God, the
     original Guru, a revelation. As a consequence of this he absorbed the divine spirit and became
     himself the Guru. Nanak then appointed a successor prior to his death. This succession of human
     Gurus lasts until Guru Gobind Singh (1666–1708), the final human Guru. Gobind Singh declared
     that there would be no more human Gurus and that the divine authority would go into the last and
     final Guru, the Guru Granth Sahib.

     For devout Sikhs, the Guru is an aspect of God. All the things one would expect God to do are
     ascribed to the Guru. In the Sikh term “Gurmukh” (follower of the Guru) we find the clarification
     of this relationship as it signifies that the person who is attuned to the voice of the Guru, is one who
     is devoted to God. The Guru is described as sinless, a saviour, an enlightened being who is as
     perfect as God and able to transfigure a person through grace. In the Guru the Creator has
     manifested His own spirit. On the other hand, these ten Gurus were clear that they were not
     incarnations.

     Good answers might examine the Guru’s relationship with God, the Guru’s character and the
     Guru’s mission. Others might focus on Sikh practice and the centrality of devotion to the Guru.
     This is expressed in Sikh veneration of the Guru Granth Sahib in the gurdwara. Others might focus
     on the very strong salvation role given to the Guru. Very good answers might focus on the
     ambiguity between the humanity of the Guru as written in sacred writings and popular piety.

     Accept any other relevant answer.

     Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                   – 10 –            M13/3/WLDRE/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Open-ended question

7.   To what extent can a war be considered “just”? Answer with reference to either Hinduism or
     Buddhism or Sikhism.

     Candidates should clearly state what they understand by a “just war”, that is a war which, under
     certain circumstances can be considered as justified or justifiable. The answer and arguments
     presented will depend upon the specific religion chosen.

     Hinduism and Buddhism
     Candidates need to introduce and explain the importance in Indian religions of the principle of
     ahimsa (non-violence). This involves not harming by act or thought any living being. Not to
     follow this would accrue negative karma.

     Hinduism
     In Hinduism killing and acts of war could be part of fulfilling one’s duty as determined by a
     particular caste (varna). In particular, this is explained in the Bhagavad Gita by the narrative of
     Arjuna and the argument presented by Krishna. Warfare can be seen as an obligation and fulfilling
     the dharma of individuals belonging to the kshatriya (warrior) caste.

     Candidates could also mention Gandhi as a more modern Hindu example of the teaching and
     practise of non-violence, although ahimsa is also mentioned in some ancient Hindu texts.

     Buddhism
     In particular, in Buddhism, ahimsa is the first of the Five Precepts. However, there are different
     understandings of and responses to the application of this principle. In Theravada Buddhism non-
     violence is an essential practice, a principle, but not necessarily a rule. Therefore Theravada
     Buddhists have justified the act of waging war in self-defence. Similarly in Mahayana Buddhism
     war can be justified in cases of self defence and to save others.

     Credit should also be given to answers that recognise that the use of violence in Buddhism is highly
     contested as many Buddhists today would argue that warfare can never be considered just.

     Sikhism
     Candidates should discuss the concept/theory of dharam yudh (a righteous/just war) which was
     particularly developed by Guru Gobind Singh (10th Guru) and be aware of the concept of Sant –
     Sipari (warrior saints) developed by the earlier Gurus. Guru Gobind Singh set out specific criteria
     to ascertain whether a war can be justifiable: that war, as an option, is only undertaken as the last
     resort; that the motives are pure and not selfish or for territorial or other gain; that soldiers are Sikh
     and behave honourably; that the use of force is kept to a minimum. Therefore, if all these criteria
     are met, war, especially war against aggression and tyranny, can be considered “just”. These are
     theoretical guidelines and principles based on the authority of the Guru. In practice it will be for the
     Khalsa to provide moral guidance and assessment of cases of “just war”.

     All in all, a war can be considered “just” in almost all Indian religions, especially under specific
     circumstances such as self-defence and against acts of aggression and tyranny. The extent of such
     justification depends on the particular religions and specific interpretations.

     Accept any other relevant answer.

     Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                 – 11 –            M13/3/WLDRE/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                              SECTION B

Judaism

8.   Assess the extent to which marriage customs in Judaism have changed.

     Marriage is at the centre of Jewish life and is seen as an obligation as is also the duty to have
     children. Traditionally, marriages took place anywhere except in a synagogue, the sole requirement
     being the chuppah (bridal canopy) which was originally a tallit held up by its four corners.
     Nowadays in western Europe, most weddings do, in fact, take place in the synagogue though in
     Israel and elsewhere the tradition of weddings in the outdoors continues.

     The unveiling of the bride by the groom continues in most traditions. The seven berachot and the
     smashing of the glass by the groom are still widely practised. In Orthodox Judaism the ketubah is
     signed by the groom in the presence of two male witnesses whilst in more liberal traditions the
     bride also signs. After the ceremony it was traditional for the bride and groom to withdraw to a
     private room to consummate the marriage. Although many couples still withdraw this has become
     largely ceremonial.

     Before the wedding the bride and, in many cases, the groom would visit the mikveh so that they
     were ritually pure at the time of the wedding. Although not as widely practised as before, the use of
     the mikveh in liberal traditions is reviving.

     “Marrying out” is an increasing occurrence which, of course, is against traditional Jewish teachings,
     particularly for men. In the past, this would have resulted in Jewish parents declaring their child to
     be dead to them and this still continues in some communities. In order for the marriage to be
     permitted a significant number of people convert to Judaism, the practise is still not welcomed.

     Credit should also be given to answers considering divorce. Divorce remains a major issue in
     Orthodox Judaism. In liberal traditions either party can apply for a get. However, in Orthodoxy,
     only the husband can apply and is entitled to refuse. In this case the wife remains agunah and any
     subsequent children of hers are viewed as illegitimate and not part of the Jewish community even if
     their father is Jewish.

     Accept any other relevant answer.

     Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                – 12 –           M13/3/WLDRE/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


9.   To what extent do you agree with the idea that shechitah (ritual slaughter) is cruel and should
     be banned?

     Answers should show good understanding of Jewish dietary laws from Deuteronomy and Numbers
     as well as an awareness of Talmudic instructions in Shulchan Aruch on ritual slaughter.

     According to the Torah, Jews are not permitted to consume the blood of an animal. There is also a
     requirement that the animal should be slaughtered by one cut to the throat whilst a prayer is said.
     Pre-stunning is not permitted. Jews argue that shechitah is the most humane way of slaughtering
     animals as well as being in accordance with God’s will. There are many additional conditions
     which also have to be met such as ensuring that no other animal can see what is happening. Many
     scientific studies have been carried out to determine how fast the animals lose consciousness and
     whether this is, in fact, humane or whether it causes suffering. There should be a consideration of
     the importance of the dietary laws and instructions and whether these outweigh considerations
     about animal welfare.

     Accept any other relevant answer.

     Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                  – 13 –           M13/3/WLDRE/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Christianity

10.   To what extent might it be true to say that Christian monks and nuns contribute nothing to
      the life of the wider community?

      Answers need to look beyond stereotypical ideas of monks and nuns and could include different
      interpretations of the wider community.

      Both monks and nuns may live in open or closed communities. There are many examples of, for
      example, the good work done in society by orders such as the Missionaries of Charity. There are
      also teaching, nursing and missionary orders who contribute to the world at large.

      However, there are many enclosed orders such as Cistercians, Carthusians and Trappists for men
      and Augustinian, Carmelite, and Poor Clares for women, amongst many others. Whilst it cannot be
      denied that there is a contribution to society as a whole from many open orders, the question
      remains as to the value of the enclosed ones. Points made in support of enclosed orders include the
      effect of their constant worship and also the power of prayer, in particular vicarious prayer and the
      availability of retreats in enclosed communities.

      Accept any other relevant answer.

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                    – 14 –            M13/3/WLDRE/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


11.   Compare the strengths and weaknesses of the claims of creationism and evolution.

      The strength of Creationism, a largely unknown concept before the end of the nineteenth century
      lies in its total reliance on the Creation accounts in Genesis 1 and 2 (primarily Genesis 1). A
      completely literalist approach to this text, together with a belief in a dating of creation to around six
      thousand years ago (based partly on the 4004BCE date from Bishop Ussher), means that once the
      absolute literal truth of the Bible is accepted then further discussion is not needed.

      Its weaknesses lie also in the heavy reliance on this text. It is difficult to marry the two Genesis
      accounts with each other and also difficult to ignore the weight of archaeological and scientific
      evidence.

      Evolution, on the other hand is based on science even though it can be argued that it cannot be
      proven. It is important here not to get confused between evolution and natural selection and
      cosmology.

      Some Creationists have produced a theory called Intelligent Design which argues that the design of
      the world is too complex to have come about by chance and therefore there must have been an
      Intelligent Designer.

      The majority of scientists, religious or not, and the bulk of Jews and Christians would argue that the
      scientific evidence heavily outweighs a need to accept the Bible as literal truth. This does not mean
      that it is untrue or that there is a necessary conflict between the Bible and evolutionary theory.

      However, such an interpretation does require that the accounts in Genesis are not viewed as
      historical narrative.

      Accept any other relevant answer.

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                    – 15 –            M13/3/WLDRE/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Islam

12.   “My Lord, eyes are at rest, the stars are setting… The doors of kings are locked and guarded
      by their henchmen. But Your door is open to whosoever calls on You. My Lord, each lover is
      now alone with his beloved. And I am alone with You.” (female Sufi mystic Rabia
      al-Adawiyya, d. 801)

      The above passage is an expression of love of the divine in Islam. Examine the extent to which
      personal devotion, dhikr and meditation are legitimate means of worshipping Allah.

      Candidates may attempt to answer this question by applying their knowledge of the key practices
      of Islam in the context of personal devotion to Allah. Exceptional candidates will show a clear
      understanding of the role of personal devotion, dhikr and meditation in Islam. They could address
      the question by examining doctrinal or historical issues related to Sufi practices and the extent of
      their “legitimacy” for some Muslims. They could address tensions between Sufism and
      Wahhabism/Salafism in contemporary contexts. Alternatively, candidates could examine the text
      more closely and provide an evaluation of Rabia or of love mysticism.

      The passage conveys some of the themes of love mysticism in Islam: the symbolic use of the
      language of sexual love to convey the relationship with the divine, the experience of the unity of
      nature as divine creation (night, stars and humans are at peace, all enveloped in love), Allah as the
      Beloved and the creature as the lover, Allah as King and Master but, unlike human kings, Allah’s
      door is always open to humans.

      The “love” language conveys doctrines such as that of tawhid (oneness of Allah and of creation), of
      submission of the creature to the Creator (Islam) as an act of love, of compassion of the Creator
      towards Its creatures (“the door is open to whoever calls on Allah”).

      Sufi practices such as personal prayer (du‘a) and devotion to Allah, repetition of Allah’s names
      (dhikr) as well as meditation are legitimate means to worship Allah for most Muslims. They are
      means of experiencing the presence, omnipotence but also compassion of Allah. The passage
      indicates a direct relationship between the creature and the Creator. Muslims support this argument
      by indicating that Muhammad himself had mystical experiences when he was alone in the cave of
      Hira to meditate.

      It is when Sufi practices are seen as becoming too intense and replace or sideline the traditionally
      sanctioned rituals such as salat, hajj, that tensions arise as to the legitimacy of such practices. It is
      especially when individual mystics are seen as more than just creatures and become themselves
      object of prayer and veneration (Sufi saints, Sufi shrines). Practices linked to them, and not
      dedicated exclusively to Allah, arouse the suspicion of some Muslim scholars.

      The passage by Rabia shows the universality and a-temporality of mystical love as individual
      experiential “encounter” with Allah (“and I am alone with You”). This could sideline or render
      superfluous the authority of the interpreters of the message of Allah (ulama) who would raise objections
      about the validity of such non-mediated practices. In Rabia’s passage the Beloved is still a separate
      entity (You), it is when the union between the lover and the Beloved occurs and the two entities merge
      that such practises are seen by some as dangerous or even heretical.

      Accept any other relevant answer.

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                 – 16 –            M13/3/WLDRE/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


13.   Using specific examples, discuss two main functions that the Hadiths serve in Islamic doctrine
      and/or practice.

      Candidates should be able to demonstrate knowledge of what hadiths are and also to identify and
      elaborate upon two functions the hadiths serve. These include:
       The formulation of the law (shari‘a) by being the second source of legal authority after the
          Qur’an and introducing specific legal issues and cases
       Explaining Qur’anic passages which by themselves are general or too concise
       Contextualising Qur’anic verses by providing references to the time and occasions of revelation
          (Mecca, Medina) and therefore indicating whether some Quranic verses are superseded by
          others
       Providing the specific information and details about Islamic rituals such as prayer, hajj etc.
          which are mentioned in the Qur’an with no specific details
       Being one of the sources of biographical details on Prophet Muhammad, hence providing
          content to the Prophetic sunna, which most Muslims strive to live by
       Explaining specific doctrinal points, especially for Shi’i hadiths on the doctrine of the Imamate.

      Once the two functions are identified, the candidate should support their choice by appropriate
      evidence.

      For instance, to argue for the function of legal formulation, evidence is provided by hadiths
      introducing details on the punishment for adultery and fornication (stoning to death is a punishment
      indicated in the hadith but not mentioned in the Qur’an). To illustrate the function in detailing
      Islamic ritual, the example could be given of hadiths explaining the sequence of prayer positions,
      who can be an imam, when to start fasting.

      Shi’i hadiths provide explanations and esoteric interpretations of Qur’anic passages about the
      excellence of the Ahl al-Bayt (people of the house of the Prophet) to do with authority and
      succession to the Prophet Muhammad in leading the community. Because Shi’is believe that the
      imams know the inner meaning of the Qur’an, Shi’i hadiths are usually transmitted on the authority
      of one imam.

      Accept any other relevant answer.

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                    – 17 –            M13/3/WLDRE/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Open-ended question

14.   With reference to one rite of passage in either Judaism or Christianity or Islam, evaluate the
      link between the significance of the rite for the individual and for the community of believers.

      The choice of the rite of passage will influence the evaluation of the link between the significance
      for both the individual and the community of faith.
      Candidates should define “rite of passage” and clearly indicate which rite they choose from which
      tradition (ideally from which denomination within the religion, for example: Orthodox Judaism,
      Catholic Christianity etc.).

      Judaism
      Appropriate rites of passage include: circumcision (brit milah), bar and bat mitzvah, marriage, death
      rituals.

      Bar Mitzvah (son of the commandment) in Orthodox Judaism: at the age of 13 a Jewish boy, on the
      authority of Scripture, especially Mishnah and Talmud, attains the age of Jewish adulthood, that is
      he is obliged to fulfil the Jewish law by observing the 613 mitzvot. It is a rite of passage because it
      marks a change in status of the individual from childhood into adulthood and, with it, religious/legal
      responsibility. The significance for the bar mitzvah of this ritual is that it indicates that he is now
      an adult who can participate fully in religious ceremonies and appreciate their meanings and that he
      has to take responsibility for his own actions in relation to his religion. In particular, the bar
      mitzvah needs to learn a passage of the Torah, read it aloud and comment upon it thus showing his
      knowledge of the sources. The rite holds also a great communal significance in that the boy is now
      officially a member of the minyan (quorum for prayer) and can perform rituals in congregation.

      Christianity
      Appropriate rites include: baptism, communion, confirmation, conversion, taking holy orders,
      marriage and death rituals.

      Confirmation in Roman Catholic Christianity: on the basis of the interpretation of scripture (John
      14.15–20 and Acts 2.37 ff) and of the doctrine of the Holy Spirit, adolescent boys and girls usually
      receive the ritual of confirmation. It is a rite of passage because it marks a change in status of the
      individual into one with a renewed spiritual awareness of the meaning and workings of the Holy
      Spirit (God). When a Christian child is baptised, usually (s)he is too young to be aware of religious
      identity and doctrines; confirmation is the ritual which renews the vows of Baptism, this time taken
      in the first person. The significance for the individual is therefore that of awareness and personal
      choice of religious identity and commitment. The confirmed individual believes in being nurtured
      and enriched by the Holy Spirit, thus becoming a “witness” of Christ and responsible to live by the
      faith, to spread it and defend it. For Catholics Confirmation is a sacrament, that is a channel of
      God’s grace to the recipient, who, in the case of confirmation has the knowledge and state of
      faith/ intention for the sacrament to be valid. The central element of the ritual is the anointing of the
      person with oil, given by a priest or a bishop. The significance of confirmation for the Catholic
      community is such that the confirmed person is by his/her own choice an active member of the
      congregation, and of the Church as an institution, and is therefore responsible and “bound” to live
      according to faith.
                                            – 18 –           M13/3/WLDRE/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Islam
Appropriate rites include: male circumcision (khitan), naming ceremony, conversion, marriage,
performing hajj, death rituals.

Conversion in Sunni Islam: Muslims tend to talk about “reversion” rather than “conversion”
because they believe that all humans are born “Muslim [meaning submitted to the will of
God/Allah]” and, accordingly, to convert means to go back to the natural and original state of
humankind. Conversion or reversion is a rite of passage in the sense that it sanctions a [apparent]
change of status by becoming a full member of the Islamic community (ummah).

The ritual of conversion consists above all of pronouncing the Testimony of Faith (shahadah) with
understanding and conviction, usually in front of one or more witnesses. The formula should be
recited in Arabic as this is the ritual language of Islam in which the Qur’an was revealed. The
formula (There is no God but Allah and Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah) states the main
belief in the oneness of God and in the role of Muhammad as Allah’s Prophet. The convert often
adopts a traditional Muslim name. By becoming a Muslim, an individual acquires awareness of
religious identity and of what is required in faith and practice. This includes performing the daily
prayers, fasting during Ramadan and the other Pillars of Islam. For the individual, conversion or
reversion signifies the renouncing of old ways of living and beliefs in other gods and striving for a
life of virtue along the path indicated by the message of the Qur’an and the life of the Prophet
Muhammad. For the ummah, conversion is the ritual that sanctions the receiving of a new brother
or sister in faith and succeeding towards the achievement of the divine plan for humankind to
submit to the will of God.

Accept any other relevant answer.

Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
