M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                               May 2018


                                Music


           Higher level and standard level


                        Listening paper




32 pages
                           –2–              M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use
of examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Global Centre, Cardiff.
                                                 –3–               M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The following are the annotations available to use when marking responses.


                                                                             Associated
             Annotation     Explanation
                                                                              shortcut
                            CKS - Clear Knowledge Shown

                            Cross – Incorrect point

                            DES – Descriptive

                            Excellent Point - Excellent Point

                            GA - Good Analysis

                 GEN        GEN – Generalisation

                            GEXA - Good Example

                            H Line - Underline tool

                            IR – Irrelevant

                  OK        OK – OK/Answer Acceptable

                            On page comment tool

                            SEEN_Small – Seen

                            Tick Colourable

                            TV - Too vague

                  UA        UA - Unfinished answer

                            WARG - Well argued

                            WKAR - Weak argument



You must make sure you have looked at all pages. Please put the        annotation on any blank page,
to indicate that you have seen it.
                                                  –4–                 M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


General comment to examiners
Please note that the markscheme is provided as guidance for marking. There are many potential and
valid ways in which to approach the questions and examiners need, therefore, to use their judgment
when attributing marks to a candidate’s answers. Examiners are also reminded to accept cultural /
geographical differences in terminology (eg quavers / eighth notes).

Each question is worth [20 marks].

                                              Section A
This criterion concerns the candidate’s ability to:
• question 1 or question 2 – analyse and examine essential musical elements (including form and
   structure) within one of the two prescribed works
• question 3 (HL only) – compare and contrast the two prescribed works, emphasizing the presence of
   any significant musical links.

Marks      Level descriptor
  0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
          The answers, which generally do not address the question, show a minimal level of
          musical understanding. There is limited use of musical evidence, though this is poorly
          located, or none at all. There is limited use of musical terminology or none at all.
          The answers, which generally do not address the question, […]
          There is little understanding of the demands of the question. The response consists mostly
          of generalizations or poorly substantiated assertions.
          […] show a minimal level of musical understanding.
          The response relays irrelevant knowledge, or inaccurately applies remembered content.
  1–4     There is limited use of musical evidence, though this is poorly located, or none at all.
          Musical evidence is never or rarely used. When evidence is given, it is inaccurate, superficial
          and imprecise with regards to bar/measure number(s), rehearsal number(s) and/or
          instrument(s).
          There is limited use of musical terminology or none at all.
          The responses communicate without the use of musical terminology, or where musical
          terminology is applied, it is generally not relevant and/or inaccurate. However, a rudimentary
          understanding of terminology in relation to the material/topic in question may surface on
          occasion.
                                              –5–                M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


       The answers, which may not always address the question, show some level of musical
       understanding. There is some use of musical evidence, though this is not located
       precisely enough. There is some use of musical terminology.
       The answers, which may not always address the question, […]
       The response indicates an understanding of the question, but only partially addresses it.
       The response is narrative and/or descriptive in nature.
       The answers show some level of musical understanding.
       The response contains some prior knowledge, but demonstrates merely recall of
5–8    information, rather than application of prior knowledge and engagement with the question
       through reasoned discussion and evaluation.
       There is some use of musical evidence, though this is not located precisely enough.
       Musical evidence is presented on occasion, but used without explanation or not relevant to
       the question under discussion. Where musical evidence is given, it is imprecise with
       regards to bar/measure number(s), rehearsal number(s) and/or instrument(s).
       There is some use of musical terminology.
       Musical terminology is applied and on occasion is relevant and appropriate with regards to
       the material under discussion, while there is also some inaccurate use of terminology
       and/or vague statements.
       The answers, which generally address the question, show an adequate level of musical
       understanding. There is use of musical evidence, though this is not always precisely located.
       There is partially effective use of musical terminology.
       The answers, which generally address the question, […]
       The response indicates an understanding of the demands of the question. The response
       contains some critical discussion, analysis, evaluation, examination, etc. However, answers
       lack clarity and development.
       […] show an adequate level of musical understanding.
       The response appropriately applies and sometimes explains prior knowledge in relation to
9–12   the question and the material under discussion.
       There is use of musical evidence, though this is not always precisely located.
       Throughout the answer musical evidence is used, which is sometimes, but not consistently,
       accurate, relevant and explained in relation to the question. Evidence is sometimes, but not
       consistently, located by using bar/measure number(s), rehearsal number(s) and/or
       instrument(s).
       There is partially effective use of musical terminology.
       The use of musical terminology is mostly relevant and accurate, but does not consistently
       support the discussion, analysis, evaluation, examination, etc. Critical terminology is
       appropriately used, although some may be ignored or unaccounted for.
                                               –6–                 M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


        The answers, which generally address the question, may not always be convincing but show
        a good level of musical understanding. There is appropriate use of musical evidence, mostly
        precisely located. There is mostly effective use of musical terminology.
        The answers, which generally address the question, may not always be
        convincing […]
        The demands of the question are understood and addressed. The response contains some
        critical discussion, analysis, evaluation, examination, etc. Most of the main arguments are
        substantiated and lead towards suitable conclusions in the context of the question.
        […] but show a good level of musical understanding.
13–16
        The response explains prior knowledge which is appropriate and relevant in relation to the
        question and material under discussion.
        There is appropriate use of musical evidence, mostly precisely located.
        The musical evidence used is relevant and accurate and supports the context of the
        response. Musical evidence is usually located accurately by using bar/measure number(s),
        rehearsal number(s) and/or instrument(s).
        There is mostly effective use of musical terminology.
        A variety of musical terminology is used, which is usually relevant and accurate and supports
        the discussion, analysis, evaluation, examination, etc.
        The answers, which consistently address the question, are convincing and show a very good
        level of musical understanding, supported by a most appropriate use of musical evidence,
        precisely located. There is highly effective use of musical terminology.
        The answers, which consistently address the question, are convincing […]
        Responses are clearly focused and show a high degree of awareness of the demands of the
        question. Responses contain well developed critical discussion, analysis, evaluation,
        examination, etc. The main points are well substantiated, and the response argues towards
        a reasoned conclusion.
        […] and show a very good level of musical understanding, […]
        The responses accurately interpret and synthesize prior knowledge to illustrate points with
17–20   relevant examples.
        […] supported by a most appropriate use of musical evidence, precisely located.
        Musical evidence is relevant, accurate and the best choice for the context of the response.
        Musical evidence is consistently located accurately by using bar/measure number(s),
        rehearsal number(s) and/or instrument(s). Where on occasion this is not the case, the
        quality and accuracy of the response are not compromised.
        There is highly effective use of musical terminology.
        The use of musical terminology is skillful, accurate, sophisticated, wide ranging, and highly
        effective in supporting the discussion, analysis, evaluation, examination, etc of the question
        and the material under investigation. Where on occasion this is not the case, the quality and
        accuracy of the response are not compromised.
                                                   –7–                 M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Note: The following indicative content is for guidance only, and by no means meant to suggest that
candidates should be marked according to the extent that their answer resembles these suggestions.
It is quite possible for candidates to come up with good responses other than these, which should be
credited accordingly.

Examiners may find the following resources helpful:

Brandenburg Concerto No 2 in F major by Johann Sebastian Bach
Various editions of the score are available online for free download, eg at:

http://imslp.org/wiki/Brandenburg_Concerto_No.2_in_F_major,_BWV_1047_(Bach,_Johann_Sebastian)


Dances of Galánta by Zoltán Kodály

The score of the work is still in copyright and no free download versions as such are available, but a
digital copy of the score used by André Kostelanetz when conducting the New Philharmonic is available
(for viewing, not printing) at:

http://archives.nyphil.org/index.php/artifact/db9cbad7-6e9c-4dc1-bc81-08439b597b11

Note: Examiners should be aware that there is an error in the bar/measure numbering of Dances of
Galánta. The indication for bar/measure 95 has actually been placed in bar 96, and all numbers
following this are one lower than they should be. Some candidates will have been alerted to this by their
teachers, but others will not, and will simply use the bar/measure numbers given in good faith. We have
therefore decided to accept both possibilities, and examiners will need to remember that the bar
numbers provided by some candidates may be one more than those given in the score. As these differ
only by one bar/measure, however, it should be easy to distinguish such “adjustments” of the numbering
from actual errors in location.
                                                  –8–                  M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.   Brandenburg Concerto No 2 in F major by Johann Sebastian Bach
     Discuss Bach’s use of texture and timbre (tone colour) in his Brandenburg Concerto No 2 in
     F major. In your discussion refer to each of the three movements.

     The answers should refer to the prescribed work.

     Answers should address the question and be consistent and convincing in their display of musical
     understanding. Evidence should be located by using bar(s)/measure(s), rehearsal number(s),
     and/or instrument(s) in the works/extracts. Musical terminology should be effective in its use.

     Preamble:
     • The elements of texture and timbre may be discussed in tandem as they often work together.
     • However, when describing texture, instrumental doublings should not be confused with
        independent textural layers. For instance, the very opening bars show a textural layer from the
        trumpet, another unison layer presented by flute, oboe and violin 1, with violin 2 playing at the
        interval of a third below, the viola di ripieno and the doubled lines on violone di ripieno and
        violoncello e cembalo or basso continuo.
     • Throughout any discussion, the distinction between texture and timbre must be evident and
        less credit awarded where there is conflation of these elements.
     • Credit may be given for the correct use of technical terminology which includes the terms
        associated with concerto grosso forms – ritornello – ripieno – concertino – basso continuo, in
        addition to general terms of texture which include homophonic, monophonic and polyphonic or
        their close equivalents (contrapuntal etc.).
     • A discussion of texture may also reference interval relationships such as parallel movement in
        thirds or contrary motion.
     • Discussion of timbre should refer to the use of instruments in different ways and in different
        combinations or as solos and the interplay between them.
     • Clearly close reference might be made to the role of the trumpet in the first movement and
        third.
     • Textural change and contrast also help the definition of the form in terms of concerto grosso
        although Bach’s expression represents an integrated approach which is not a simple matter of
        making concertino and ritornello distinctions.
     • The concerto features four solo instruments which introduce contrasts of timbre, viz. trumpet,
        flauto dolce [recorder], oboe and violin, each of which is very different.


     The following notes cite points of relevance which may be credited in responses section by
     section. [The notes do not constitute a formal analysis, which is not required for the
     question.]

     Movement I
      Bars             Points of relevance
      Anacrusis–8      Homophonic five-part texture, viz trumpet-supported melody with
                       single melodic line in flute, oboe, violin and violino di ripieno, violone
                       moves in parallel thirds while the violone di ripieno and basso
                       continuo replicate their semiquaver movement.
                       Final two beats of bar 8 have the flute and oboe link to bar 9 where
                       the texture changes. Bars 1–8 [bt2] use the full ensemble with
                       carefully blended and balanced instrumental grouping and
                       consequent timbral quality.
                                         –9–                  M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


9–28          Accompanied only by the continuo, the solo violin plays over two
              bars followed by an equally balanced two bars of tutti/homophonic
              texture on the initial figures.
              The violino ripieno now has an accompanying semiquaver figure
              (b. 13) as the oboe takes the solo role followed by two bars of
              homophony tutti (bb. 15–16) and the flauto/recorder solo, a further
              two bar tutti (bb. 19–20) but which has the clear colour/timbre of the
              high trumpet in C, which then completes the passage and merges
              into the opening homophonic ritornello passage between
              bb23–28bt2.
28bt3–59bt3   The initial most prominent timbral contrast is from the trumpet solo
              joined by the violino di ripieno playing in counterpoint against it for a
              few bars [a brief moment of polyphony, it might be said].
              The trumpet’s trill beginning in bar 31 marks the beginning of an
              imitative/canonic relationship with the oboe which is
              polyphonic/contrapuntal in two parts.
              The flute plays a florid semiquaver figure which also weaves
              contrapuntally between the parts, imitated again in the violoncello
              and continuo parts from beat 3 of bar 33.
              Although the string and continuo parts from bar 50 have a degree of
              independence, they are triadic in formation and do not constitute a
              thorough polyphonic or contrapuntal texture; however, the wind
              and violino di ripieno parts are related polyphonically and Bach’s
              writing almost blurs the distinction between homophony and
              polyphony by placing one against the other as blocks. The
              section marks a passage of textural [and harmonic] intensity which
              is contrasted by a passage such as bb48–49, distinguished by the
              unison of flute, oboe and violins.
59bt4–83bt3   Textural contrast and timbral contrast combine, beginning from a
              2- to 3-part [excluding the basso continuo] contrapuntal texture on
              flauto/recorder and violino primo. The counterpoint is not thorough,
              the violin being written in an accompaniment style before imitating
              the recorder figure at bar 62; the texture increases to a 3-part
              counterpoint from the oboe entry at bar 63 and then to a 4-part
              texture from the trumpet entry in bar 65. The roles also change,
              eg in the violin entry at bar 62, which imitates the recorder entry
              from bar 60, imitated again by the oboe at bar 64.
              From the last quaver of bar 63, the sonority is enriched with an
              orchestral tutti incorporating nine instrumental parts but only a
              four-part texture prevailing through most of the passage to bar 83.
              From bar 72, the passage becomes more distinctly contrapuntal
              including the syncopated figure in the ripieno violin and the
              suspensions arising in flute and ripieno violins. From bar 80, the
              counterpoint is more intricate with figures derived from the initial
              ideas until bar 82 where the texture reduces: the bass doubled in
              continuo, the viola’s syncopated line, the flute doubled by violins
              and the oboe playing a figure derived from the fugue subject which
              then returns in its first recognisable form at bar 83/4.
                                         – 10 –               M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


83bt3–end      There is a notable unison [monophonic] passage where the main
               theme is reiterated at bb102–106, with the trumpet the only
               contrapuntal addition. From bar 107, the homophonic texture is
               clearly outlined through a harmonic progression in arpeggio triads
               while flute, oboe and violin are treated polyphonically.
               From bar 115, the texture is fast moving homophony in five parts as
               at the beginning: solo trumpet, flute/oboe/violin, ripieno strings and
               basso.

Movement II
 Bars          Points of relevance
 1–30          The movement begins with a three-part canonic texture supported
               by the continuo bass and associated chord progressions. The
               nature of the basso continuo might be thought of as homophonic.
               The prevailing texture above that is, therefore, three-part imitative
               counterpoint/canon.
               The movement highlights three of the solo instruments without using
               the trumpet, in a series of entries of contrasting timbres.
31bt3–56       The appoggiatura figure [flute bar 33, for example] is presented
               imitatively across the ensemble mainly in paired combinations: eg,
               flute+oboe, flute+violin, or, in a passing 3-part texture at bar 41, all
               three instruments. The point to be made is that Bach repeats the
               figure/motif but uses timbre as a feature of contrast.
               Although the passage contains elements of imitation, it is not
               thoroughly contrapuntal, using many rests and only short passages
               of imitation.
57–end         The individual parts and instruments draw together as polyphony
               which is closer to decorative homophony than thorough
               counterpoint.
               The movement closes on the cadence homophonically.


Movement III
 Bars          Points of relevance
 1–56          Trumpet leads in a two-part texture with the continuo bass. The
               texture is three-part counterpoint from the oboe entry at bar 7.
               The material is as the exposition of a fugue and presented almost
               exclusively in the solo instruments, while the string section enters
               close to cadences adding both change of timbre [colour] and some
               further imitative entries, eg, at bar 53–57 before the perfect
               cadence to C major.
57–97          The trumpet rests from this bar, giving way to the paired
               combination of oboe and violin. The parts are initially tied in
               parallel sixths, but soon deviate into independent counterpoint,
               including brief imitations from the continuo bass.
               Notice that Bach frequently contrasts the tutti ensemble with either
               solo or duet/trio combinations, with their respective timbres and
               textural changes.
               The cadence at bar 85 is also approached by way of the string
               section, this time to G minor.
               The instrumental colour changes with oboe and violin duet; there
               is a further change at bar 89 with the entry of the flute which is then
               paired, by way of more contrast, with the violin.
                                                – 11 –             M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


      98–end           Changes of timbre are sometimes used to highlight melodic or
                       harmonic features.
                       For example, the sequence of suspensions from bar 97–104 is
                       given definition by the violins, which cut through the rapid
                       movement in woodwinds.
                       Following the reduction of texture in bars 107–118, the tutti
                       ensemble returns and a similar passage of sequential suspensions
                       leads to the closure of the final four bars which are essentially
                       homophonic despite the individual movement in the trumpet and
                       violin.


      An adequate to good response                  A very good to excellent response will:
      will:
      Show a clear understanding of musical         Show a clear understanding of musical
      texture.                                      texture and provide references from the
                                                    score.
      Relate texture to fugue and counterpoint in   Relate texture to fugue and counterpoint in
      general.                                      general and to Bach’s treatment in
                                                    particular.
      Locate examples of contrasting texture in     Locate examples of contrasting texture in
      the score.                                    the score and offer analysis.
      Use appropriate terminology when              Use correct technical terminology when
      describing fugal and canonic textures         describing fugal and canonic textures
      [second/third movements], although terms      [second/third movement] and clearly
      may be generic such as “imitative” rather     demonstrate understanding through correct
      than “canonic”, or refer to the fugal terms   usage including references to tonality.
      specifically [subject, answer,
      countersubject].
      Discuss passages which show clear             Discuss passages which show clear
      contrasts of timbre and relate to             contrasts of timbre and relate to
      instrumentation and combinations.             instrumentation and combinations with
                                                    commentary on the use of instruments.
                                                    Comment on the relationship of timbre to
                                                    texture with evidence from the work.


2.   Dances of Galánta by Zoltán Kodály
     Explore how Kodály uses instruments and combinations of instruments to highlight thematic
     material in Dances of Galánta.

     The answers should refer to the prescribed work.

     Answers should address the question and be consistent and convincing in their display of musical
     understanding. Evidence should be located by using bar(s)/measure(s), rehearsal number(s),
     and/or instrument(s) in the works/extracts. Musical terminology should be effective in its use.

     [NB: Rehearsal marks are used as given in the score, ie without compensating the error.]
                                           – 12 –               M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


General Features:
• The Dances of Galánta is a work which is melody-dominated throughout, and so it is the
  melodies which are highlighted and central to the question.
• Responses should focus on orchestration, timbre/instrumental colour, combinations of sounds,
  performance techniques such as pizzicatos, the relationship of themes to orchestral
  context/accompaniment
• Kodály’s orchestral works are exemplars of orchestration and reveal his particular concern for
  orchestral colour [cf. Peacock Variations]
• Themes are generally highlighted through use of solo unaccompanied instruments such as
  the initial cellos and horn, and then through repetition in changing presentations or with
  changing surroundings achieved through constant re-orchestrations.

A: Lento (Bars 1–49)
• The cellos present the introductory theme in bars 1–5 unaccompanied so there is no doubt
    that it is the theme which is going to be important.
• Bar 10 has a repeat of the same theme but played by the French horn a perfect 4th
    higher. Both the presentations of the theme are interspersed with demisemiquaver figure
    flourishes at a quicker tempo [Poco accelerando] which also contributes to thematic emphasis.
• At bars 19–35, repetition of the theme begins for a third time on solo oboe doubled by
    solo flute, then solo bassoon and violas, and finally on violins I & II in octaves and (later)
    solo clarinet, which takes the theme further into a cadenza-like passage that relates to the
    opening scale flourishes. The sound of the strings at this point is a pre-echo of a later
    presentation where the sound becomes rich and Romantic.

B: Andante maestoso (Bars 50–93)
• The solo clarinet now presents the second principal theme [although similar to the first]
• As before, the theme is presented by means of a solo instrument but, unlike the first theme
   presentation, it is supported homophonically mostly by a syncopated harmonic passage in
   strings and an octave pedal on E in two horns [III+IV]. The homophonic texture here
   gives fresh highlighting relationship to the theme in contrast to the rushing filigree of section
   A.
• From bar 66 the second theme is stridently highlighted by strings in unison and octaves
   doubled by flutes and clarinets with open fifths underpinning in cellos, basses and bassoons
   and harmony in horns.
• From bar 82 the theme is given to the violas and cellos doubled by the bassoons and
   clarinets while the rest of the orchestra have the homophonic “accompaniment” harmonies.

C: Lento – poco a poco accel. – allegretto moderato (Bars 94(95)–172)
• The section begins quietly as a contrast and the new theme is presented in the low register of
   the solo flute with accompaniment provided mainly from strings played pizzicato.
• From bar 109 the consequent of the theme is taken up by clarinets and first violins doubled
   by violas.
• The consequent is repeated by solo flute at bar 113
• Bar 119–134: timpani and then triangle added to the mix.
• Bar 123 has the theme in woodwinds only.
• The string ensemble highlights the theme again from bar 134 and is immediately
   contrasted by a repeat in flutes/piccolos and oboes playing motivic fragments.
• The richly Romantic string unison tone returns, highlighting the principal theme at the
   Andante maestoso with an orchestral tutti until bar 167 where the coupling of violas with
   cellos [see above] provides the concluding timbre to bar 172.
                                           – 13 –              M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


D: Allegro con motto grazioso (Bar 173–235)
• The theme is first presented by solo oboe with light pizzicato accompanying figures and a
   simple rising fourths figure from
   clarinet II.
• Reduced orchestration contrasts with the richness of the previous passage.
• Repetition of the theme (b. 181) is offset against some deft orchestral effects such as the
   double natural harmonics in the divided strings and the pizzicatos and the definition of the
   grace notes in flutes and oboes. The emphasis is on rhythm and timbre. The addition of
   the triangle and campanelle [di mano] or hand-bells serves to highlight the lightness of the
   theme and the shift of register.
• The verbunkos idiom enters again at Animato (b. 209) with a briefly contrasting return of the
   string tone which then combines with woodwinds from bar 217.
• The Andante maestoso from bar 229 highlights the theme in a huge orchestral tutti which
   includes for only the second time trumpets in C [NB the brass section is relatively small,
   without trombones or tuba]. The theme itself is much doubled in upper woodwinds and
   strings, as previously, and with a prominent roll on timpani [B-flat].

E: Allegro (Bars 236–334)
• The emphasis is on rhythm and colour achieved through orchestration.
• The theme is presented in the strings followed by a presentation on oboes and clarinets in
   octaves. As the oboes and clarinets continue, the strings have a fast-moving semiquaver
   accompanying role which gives way to a rhythmic off-beat pattern on lower strings, simulating a
   drone-like effect.
• At bar 252, the violins now repeat the figure in sixths and in a higher register. Kodály often
   changes register at the same time as the instrumentation as can be seen in almost any
   passage previous to bar 252.
• The repeat in flutes and clarinets at bar 258 has a prominent horn part which follows the
   contour in regular crotchets and, in terms of orchestral colour/timbre, introduces an element of
   contrasting timbre.
• The consequent passage is fast-moving semiquavers in woodwinds from bar 268 which acts
   as a foil to the subsequent repetition of the theme from bar 277. At that point, the theme is
   again doubled in woodwinds and violins playing in octaves to add emphasis/highlight.
• The syncopated theme is treated like a cantus firmus being doubled by violas and trumpets
   from bar 278.
• Bar 315 marks another presentation of the theme in double stopped sixths played by
   violins in octaves, with the consequent passage from b. 268 and decorative quaver
   movement in the woodwinds while the horns, entering two bars in at bar 317, highlight the
   theme in canonic imitation.
• The final repetition between bars 322–334 is highlighted by the strings’ homophonic
   presentation with added off-beat staccato attacks in woodwinds with acciaccaturas following
   the contour of the theme.

F: Poco meno mosso (Bars 334–565)
• To an accompaniment of horns and strings the next theme is played by solo clarinet. It is
    doubled in octaves by the flute at bar 350 and then repeated by cellos and bassoons
    from 354.
• Second theme is introduced by Vln I at bar 362, providing close contrast with the woodwind-
    dominated presentation earlier, and the theme is treated imitatively between flutes, oboes,
    clarinets and bassoons with violins.
• The piccolo returns to the theme at bar 393, imitated by bassoon as the horns repeat their
    ostinato-like figure along with lower strings, continuing until the entry of a second theme
    announced by horns in octaves in bar 405 with little accompaniment and therefore being
    highlighted through exposure.
                                             – 14 –                M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


•    The theme is imitated across the orchestra in flashes of different instrumental colour
     through to bar 443 where a new syncopated theme is presented mainly by the strings [and with
     an accelerando in verbunkos style].
•    The earlier homophonic theme (from bar 236) returns in a different orchestral guise from
     bar 490. The orchestration includes double-stopped string parts in both violins and violas
     and doubled by the woodwinds until a full orchestral tutti at bar 502. Here the timpani
     add strength to the bass F-sharp.
•    Contrast is particularly emphatic at bar 502, where the woodwinds provide sustained trills and
     harmonic cohesion to the syncopations focused in strings. Kodály is constantly employing
     colourful means to highlight repeating material whether in blocks of orchestral sound or
     as lightly accompanied or unaccompanied solos.
•    Compare, for instance, bars 506–509 with the following block beginning at bar 510, the
     texturally thinner bars 514–517 with the following tutti.

G: Andante maestoso (Bars 566–578)
• Violins and violas are divided in three, creating a diffuse sound which supports the return of
   the principal theme which was introduced at bar 50. The theme is highlighted against the slow
   harmonic tremolandos starting in flutes, moving down to oboes and returning to what
   might seem its “home timbre”, the clarinet which, as previously, runs away into a
   cadenza.

Allegro molto vivace (Bars 578–end)
The final bars make a brief return to the preceding material with full orchestral tutti.


     An adequate to good response will:               A very good to excellent response will:
    Identify some examples of thematic ideas          Will focus on thematic ideas and their
    and the associated                                presentation in terms of orchestration and
    instruments/combinations.                         contrast of repeated material in different
                                                      combination.
    Reference different instruments in both solo      Will reference timbre and sonority relating
    and tutti passages without comment.               clearly to thematic idea; instrumental
                                                      register and its effect on timbre [lower
                                                      register of flute, for example]; instrumental
                                                      effects such as pizzicato, harmonics, string
                                                      divisions and the occasional use of
                                                      percussion for added colour.
    Reference solo and tutti passages without         Will compare in detail solo and tutti
    analytical comment of distinctive features        passages in terms of sonority.
    providing the contrast.
    Use examples from the score which may             Examples will be precisely located from the
    support the response generally.                   score and which support
                                                      statements/arguments strongly.
    Discuss some passages using some                  Discuss a range of passages taken from
    appropriate terminology.                          the whole work in appropriate and
                                                      accurately used technical language.
                                                     – 15 –               M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.     Brandenburg Concerto No 2 in F major by Johann Sebastian Bach and Dances of Galánta
       by Zoltán Kodály
       Compare and contrast the concerto characteristics in Dances of Galánta and the Brandenburg
       Concerto No 2 in F major, emphasizing any significant musical links.

       (HL only)

       The answers should refer to both prescribed works. The comparing and contrasting of significant
       musical links must focus on concerto characteristics.

       Answers should be consistent and convincing in their display of musical understanding, and should
       be backed up by clearly located evidence. Musical terminology should be effective in its use.

       [NB: bar/measure numbers below are as given in the score, without adjustment].

       First of all, it should be noted that, although the Bach is a specific type of concerto (grosso), the
       question here explicitly refers to “concerto characteristics” more generally. Candidates should
       identify concerto features in their answer, such as textural contrast and associated thematic
       contrast.

       Candidates need not limit themselves to the concerto grosso-like aspects of either work, but can
       discuss concertante principles of various kinds, eg, as might be found in a solo concerto or indeed
       a “concerto for orchestra” (a 20th-century type of which Kodály himself was later to produce an
       example in 1940).

       The success of candidates’ responses is likely to depend on their ability to identify concerto-like
       elements in the Kodály, and to both compare and contrast these with such elements in the Bach.
       The discovery of significant musical links is, as always, particularly difficult here, and inventiveness
       in this respect should be correspondingly rewarded.

       The following summary is not intended to provide an exhaustive “checklist” for assessment, but
       rather to give examples of the kind of issues candidates might fruitfully explore.


       Similarities/comparisons:
     1. With regard to concerto grosso elements, the contrast between the solo group/concertino
        and the ripieno strings, or tutti sections involving both is obvious in the outer movements of
        Bach, particularly movement I, and indeed central to the work’s structure. This is clearly not an
        explicit element of the work’s structure in Kodály’s case but, nevertheless, it is certainly possible
        to find passages of alternation between soloists (or groups) and tutti writing here as well.

        The openings of the two works provide a good comparison in this respect, and might
        indeed be cited as a “significant musical link”. Here Bach offers a clear contrast between tutti
        passages (roughly bb. 1–8, 11–12, 15–16, 19–20 etc.) and interpolated sections which each
        showcase one solo instrument plus (from b. 13 onwards) a second solo instrument as
        accompaniment. Kodály presents a vaguely similar pattern of contrasts in his opening section as
        well. In this case tutti-like passages dominated by the orchestral strings (eg, bb. 6–9, 15–18, 37–
        43) alternate with solos for the cello section (b. 1), horn (b. 10), oboe (b. 19, later doubled by flute
        @ 8ve), bassoon plus viola (23) and finally clarinet (33), which emerges to become the dominant
        solo instrument from here until b. 65.

     2. Both composers also present contrasts between thematic material given to the soloists and
        tutti.

        The opening of the Bach (see above) sets up a contrast between the ritornello theme of the tutti
        sections and the different material given to the soloists. Similarly, there is contrast at the
                                               – 16 –               M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


   beginning of the Kodály between the folk-derived theme given to the soloists and the scale-based
   figuration of the orchestral interpolations; or in the Lento (b. 93/4ff.) between the dotted-note
   melody given to various woodwind solos or groups (eg, 96ff) and the answering material given to
   the orchestral strings + various doublings (eg, 109ff).

3. This device of allocating independent material to solo/tutti groups also recalls another aspect of
   the concerto grosso form used by Bach, the ritornello principle exemplified in particular during
   the first movement (eg, bb. 1, 11, 15, 19, 23 etc.)

   The passages of orchestral figuration at the beginning of the Kodály (eg, b. 6ff) could also be
   regarded as a kind of ritornello theme in the context of the opening section. Perhaps there is also
   some suggestion of ritornello form in Kodály’s various revisitings of the Andante theme, which
   first appears in b. 50, and resurfaces later in bb. 151, 229 and 566: Ferenc Bónis, in the
   introduction to the miniature score (p. XIII) even refers to the first part of the work as a “rondo”.

4. In the case of both composers, however, musical material that is initially specific to either
   soloist(s) or the tutti group may subsequently be transferred from one to other, or played
   by both simultaneously.

   In the first movement of the Bach, the ritornello theme announced at the beginning is later taken
   over by soloists (eg, b. 44, oboe). In the Kodály, the folksong theme of b.1 is taken over by orch.
   strings at 27, while the orchestral figuration of b. 6 is later picked up by the solo clarinet in its
   cadenza (b. 45) and played in tandem with the folksong theme in b. 20ff and b. 37ff.

5. In both works, the “tutti” (or ripieno) groups are dominated by strings (+ continuo in Bach’s
   case, and plus anything up to and including the entire ensemble in Kodaly’s). By contrast,
   Bach’s solo group (except for Movt. II) is dominated by woodwinds and brass, and Kodály
   tends to prefer woodwinds (or horns) for his solo material. In his case, indeed, the contrast is
   underscored by the absence of any passages for solo string instruments.

6. Although Bach’s work is not a solo concerto, his solo parts are certainly technically
   challenging, and individual concertino soloists have several opportunities to display their skills –
   most obviously the trumpet’s high-flying clarino playing (eg, Movt. III, bb. 41–47). Similar
   passages of instrumental virtuosity are found in Kodály’s work; indeed, it could be said that in
   places his clarinet has an equivalent role to Bach’s clarino, with passages of dazzling virtuosity of
   a very different style (eg, the cadenza, b. 44ff). This is indeed one of most obviously concerto-
   like aspects of the Dances of Galánta, and many candidates are likely to comment on it.


  Differences/contrasts:
1. The most obvious point of difference is that Bach’s solo writing focuses on a group of
   instruments – the concertino – and passages in which only one instrument from this group is
   playing are actually quite rare (Movt. I, bb. 9–10, violin.; Movt. III, bb. 1–6, trumpet). By contrast,
   in addition to its concerto grosso aspects, Kodály’s work features many more passages
   reminiscent of a solo concerto, with the woodwind in particular frequently showcased in solo roles
   (examples throughout). This type of writing is also reminiscent of a “concerto for orchestra”, a
   genre to which (as noted) Kodály was later to make his own contribution.

2. As a result of this focus on group interaction – and the relatively modest size of the ripieno forces
   – Bach’s concertante writing still retains some characteristics of a chamber-like musical
   “conversation” between an intimate group of players (Movement II is a good example). By
   contrast, with its preference for spotlighted instrumental solos contrasted with a much bigger
   orchestra, Kodály’s writing is generally more reminiscent of the large-scale solo concertos
   of the 19th century or (again) the 20th century concerto for orchestra, both of which are
   designed for performance before a wider public in a less intimate setting. (There are however
                                              – 17 –               M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


   one or two passages in the work where an orchestral section might be considered as having a
   concertino-like role, eg, the woodwinds at b. 181ff or 354 to 461.)

3. Bach’s work does not feature any solo cadenzas as such, which do however appear elsewhere
   in the Brandenburg Concertos (eg, the long harpsichord solo in No. 5). Kodály, by contrast, of
   course includes three quite spectacular cadenza passages for the clarinet (bb. 33–36, 44–49,
   571–578).

4. Generally speaking, the ripieno strings have a much less prominent and technically
   demanding role in the Bach. By contrast, the writing for the orchestral strings can be every
   bit as brilliant and challenging as the solo parts in Kodály’s case. The verbunkos-style
   writing from b. 443 onwards – simulating the virtuosity of the Galanta gypsy bands of Kodály’s
   childhood – is an obvious example; here it is as though the entire violin section takes on a
   “soloist” role, again echoing the “concerto for orchestra” concept.

5. Bach’s solo instruments tend to engage in contrapuntal dialogue both between
   themselves (most obviously in the fugue that begins Movement III) and with the ripieno group
   (eg, throughout the middle section of Movement I from ca. b. 31ff.). By contrast, Kodály’s
   writing for soloists is mostly of a “melody and accompaniment” character, usually with an
   essentially homophonic, harmony-based texture (several examples throughout, eg, b. 50ff, 96ff,
   173ff, etc.)



    An adequate to good response will:              A very good to excellent response will:
    Demonstrate that the candidate                  Demonstrate a clear understanding of the
    understands the topic of the question and is    question and the way it relates to the
    aware of some of the appropriate                different historical and social contexts of the
    terminology to describe it (eg, concertino,     two pieces.
    ripieno, cadenza).
    Include at least one accurately located         Construct a logical discussion that explores
    example that relates to this topic.             various aspects the question in a
                                                    systematic way (eg, by looking at different
                                                    types of concerto features).
    Discuss a range of different concerto-like      Go beyond obvious features such as
    features.                                       ripieno-concertino contrasts or instrumental
                                                    cadenzas to explore subtler aspects of the
                                                    question, such as the relationship between
                                                    concerto principles and textural or thematic
                                                    elements.
    Provide a balanced range of examples from       Provide a wide range of examples to
    both works to illustrate these – particularly   illustrate these points. Generally speaking,
    from the Kodály, where the concertante          however, a response which simply provides
    features are less obvious.                      multiple examples to illustrate the same
                                                    point is less likely to score a high mark than
                                                    a response which makes more points but
                                                    uses fewer examples of each.
    Identify significant musical links and          Demonstrate greater inventiveness in the
    compare these examples in terms of              selection of examples, exploration of
    similarities and difference, framing the        concerto features (particularly in the
    comparison within a structured discussion       Kodály) and in the identification of
    of the question.                                significant musical links.
                                                   – 18 –                M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                                Section B
A     Musical elements
This criterion concerns the candidate’s ability to perceive the musical elements, such as, but not limited
to, duration, pitch, tonality, timbre/tone colour, texture and dynamics, and their significance. Articulation
and other expressive and production techniques might also be discussed.

Note: Structure is assessed in a separate criterion.

Marks      Level descriptor
0          The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
           The work displays insufficient and weak aural perception. The candidate has
           identified musical elements poorly, including very few, if any of the significant ones.
           There is little understanding of the musical material under investigation: the response makes
1
           irrelevant points or inaccurately labels and locates musical elements. Of the key elements
           very few, or none, are recognized.
           The response rarely (or never) refers to the musical excerpt.
           The work sometimes displays adequate aural perception. The candidate has identified
           some musical elements, including a few of the significant ones.
2          The response indicates a basic understanding of the musical excerpt: a limited number of
           key elements are identified and listed, but without explanation.
           Where musical evidence is given, it is imprecise and broad or general.

           The work displays partially effective aural perception. The candidate has generally
           accurately identified musical elements, including some of the significant ones.
           The response indicates an understanding of the musical excerpt: throughout the answer
3
           important musical elements are identified and presented in relation and reference to the
           musical excerpt.
           Sometimes, but not consistently, these are accurately located, relevant and explained.
           The work displays mostly effective aural perception. The candidate has accurately
           identified musical elements, including many of the significant ones.
           The response shows a good/solid understanding of the musical excerpt: the chosen
4
           elements are relevant, accurate and appropriate with regards to the excerpt and presented
           through engagement with and in reference to the musical excerpt.
           Musical evidence used is accurately located to support the response.
           The work consistently displays highly effective aural perception. The candidate has
           accurately identified musical elements, including nearly all of the significant ones.
           The response displays a high degree of awareness and understanding of the musical
5          excerpt: the answer gives a detailed account of highly important and relevant musical
           elements. The investigated elements add valuable information to the musical discussion,
           analysis and evaluation of the excerpt.
           Musical evidence is consistently accurately located to support/substantiate the points made.
                                                   – 19 –                M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


B Musical structure
This criterion concerns the candidate’s ability to perceive principal structural features, such as, but not
limited to, form, phrases, motifs.

Marks      Level descriptor
   0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

           The work demonstrates little perception of principal structural features.
           The response is an inaccurate narration of structural events, which are never or rarely
   1       substantiated with musical evidence. The response consists mostly of generalizations or
           poorly substantiated assertions.
           When evidence is given, it is inaccurate, superficial and imprecise.

           The work demonstrates limited and ineffective perception of principal structural
           features.
   2       The response constitutes merely a narration or description of some structural events, or
           simply labelling structure with no justification or explanation.
           Musical evidence is presented on occasion, but may not be accurately located.

           The work demonstrates partially effective perception of principal structural features.
           The response indicates understanding by appropriately identifying and sometimes explaining
   3       and justifying main as well as less significant structural events.
           Throughout the answer musical evidence is used, which is sometimes, but not consistently,
           located accurately, relevant and explained.

           The work demonstrates mostly effective perception of principal structural features.
           The response applies prior knowledge to identify and understand the main, and on occasion
   4
           less important, structural events of the excerpt.
           The musical evidence used is relevant and accurately located to support the response.
           The work consistently demonstrates highly effective perception of principal structural
           features.
           The response displays a high degree of awareness and understanding of important structural
   5
           events. Answers accurately apply prior knowledge to provide a detailed account of the
           principal structural features through locating, defining, explaining, labelling, etc.
           The musical evidence is consistently accurately located to support/substantiate the point.
                                                 – 20 –              M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


C Musical terminology
This criterion concerns the candidate’s knowledge of musical terminology and its appropriate use.

Marks     Level descriptor
   0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
          The work displays little knowledge and use, if any, of musical terminology.
          Musical terminology may not be used at all in the answers. Where musical terminology is
   1
          applied, it is generally not relevant and/or inaccurate, although a rudimentary understanding
          of terminology in relation to the material/topic in question may surface on occasion.
          The work displays some knowledge of musical terminology but its use is inaccurate at
          times.
   2      Musical terminology is applied on occasion and some, but not all, of it is relevant and
          accurate with regards to the context, while there is also some inaccurate use of terminology
          and/or vague statements.
          The work displays satisfactory knowledge and use of musical terminology.
          The use of musical terminology is mostly relevant and accurate, but does not consistently or
   3
          effectively enough support the discussion, analysis, evaluation, examination, etc. Critical
          terminology is appropriately used, although some may be ignored or unaccounted for.
          The work displays good knowledge and use of musical terminology.
   4      A variety of musical terminology is used appropriately. All terminology is relevant, accurate
          and supports the discussion, analysis, evaluation, examination, etc.
          The work consistently displays very good knowledge and use of musical terminology.
          The use of musical terminology is skillful, accurate, wide ranging, and highly effective in
   5
          supporting the discussion, analysis, evaluation, examination, etc of the question and the
          material under investigation.
                                                   – 21 –               M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


D Musical context
This criterion concerns the candidate’s ability to place each extract in its musical context, such as, but
not limited to, cultural, historical and stylistic context.

Marks      Level descriptor
  0        The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
           The work demonstrates little and inaccurate knowledge of the musical context. The
           candidate has used little reasoned argument.
           The work demonstrates little and inaccurate knowledge of the musical context.
           The response relays irrelevant knowledge, or inaccurately applies remembered content.
   1
           References to the musical context are few and generally incorrect.
           The candidate has used little reasoned argument.
           The response consists mostly of superficial generalizations or poorly substantiated
           assertions. The answer recalls and lists rudimentary information.
           The work demonstrates some knowledge of the musical context. The candidate has
           sometimes used reasoned argument.
           The work demonstrates some knowledge of the musical context.
   2       Comments on the musical context are generally correct, but answers merely exhibit recall of
           prior knowledge and little engagement with the musical excerpt.
           The candidate has sometimes used reasoned argument.
           The response is narrative and/or descriptive in nature.
           The work demonstrates adequate knowledge of the musical context. The candidate has
           used partially effective reasoned argument.
           The work demonstrates adequate knowledge of the musical context.
           Comments on the musical context are generally correct. The response uses and sometimes
   3
           explains prior knowledge in relation to the context of the musical excerpt.
           The candidate has used partially effective reasoned argument.
           The response contains some critical discussion, analysis, evaluation, examination, etc.
           However, answers may lack clarity and development.
           The work demonstrates good knowledge of the musical context. The candidate has used
           mostly effective reasoned argument.
           The work demonstrates good knowledge of the musical context.
           The comments on the musical extract’s place in its musical context are appropriate and
   4
           relevant. Contextual conclusions are largely supported and justified by musical evidence.
           The candidate has used mostly effective reasoned argument.
           The response contains some critical discussion, analysis, evaluation, examination, etc.
           Some of the main points are substantiated and the response draws some conclusions.
           The work consistently demonstrates very good knowledge of the musical context.
           The candidate has consistently used highly effective reasoned argument.
           The work consistently demonstrates very good knowledge of the musical context.
           The extract is correctly placed in an appropriate context and its place in this context is
           discussed with convincing justifications. The responses accurately interpret and synthesize
   5
           prior knowledge to illustrate points with relevant examples.
           The candidate has consistently used highly effective reasoned argument.
           Responses are clearly focused. Responses contain well developed critical discussion,
           analysis, evaluation, examination, etc. Nearly all of the main points are substantiated, and
           the response argues towards a reasoned conclusion.
                                                – 22 –              M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


When marking candidates’ answers to questions in section B, examiners must refer to the HL and SL
external assessment criteria available in the music guide.

3.   SL
4.   HL (Note: this section refers to question 3 at SL and question 4 at HL.)

     Roman Carnival Overture, Opus 9 by Hector Berlioz
     (Identified piece, score provided)

     Musical elements
     • Large orchestra Berlioz placed great importance on the orchestra and on orchestral
       colour; combinations of instrumental colour often illustrate blending of timbres such as violas
       with bassoons, or bassoons with horns, upper strings alone, flutes with oboes, or horns with cor
       anglais.
     • Tempo markings Allegro assai con fuoco (“very lively and with fire”), Andante sostenuto
       (“at a walking/steady pace and sustained sound”) and poco animato (“slightly animated”).
     • Diatonic, but includes chromaticism. Melodic contour varies.
     • Dynamic range from pianissimo (pp) to fortissimo (ff); silence used for effect at the
       beginning.


     Musical structure
     The overture is designed in clearly demarcated sections definable through the use of tempo, key or
     texture and themes:

     Introduction (m. 1–20): Allegro assai con fuoco, A major

     m. 1–6:    Fast compound duple [6/8] metre associated with medieval dance called a saltarello
                (used by Berlioz in Benvenuto Cellini). Brief opening unison/octave monophony
                dominated by the string timbre though bassoon entry (bar 4) stands out. Opening
                key A major, indicated by introductory scale passage which, however, closes
                indecisively on F sharp.

     m. 7–13:   General Pause [GP] followed by five-bar chordal passage for trilled strings (without
                double-basses). Reinforces a D with unprepared dissonance forming a half-
                diminished seventh chord on B [F – A – B – D], which relates as a dominant to build
                towards the cadence to E major in bar 14 and 18; crescendo in bars 9–13 helps
                define the formation of the chord leading into the ff tutti.

     m. 14–20: Second five-bar passage of orchestral tutti (minus percussion). Time signature
               changes to common duple time [2/4] in some parts while 6/8 continues in brass and
               strings (example of polyrhythm.) Overall effect is a rapid tremolando in semiquavers.
               Passage progresses towards another pause in bar 18 before time signature changes
               to common triple time [3/4] and new tempo of Andante sostenuto. French horn and
               clarinet play a major 6th with horn taking upper E; slow crescendo as the chord is
               formed. Cadence to E major is unusual and forms a mediant relationship with the C
               major following from bar 21.

     A (m. 21–36): Principal theme, Andante sostenuto, C major

     m. 21–27: Entry of principal theme -homophonically supported melody. Cor anglais,
               supported by pizzicato strings C major triadic melody with chromatic alterations
               Dotted notes and a syncopation [bar 23]. False relations created from F-
               sharp/natural (bar 27). In final phrase to the perfect cadence in C major.
                                            – 23 –               M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


m. 28–36: regular semiquaver accompaniment. . At bars 33/34 pizzicato double basses and
          flutes and oboes colour the cor anglais again at bars 34/35. Progression to the new
          key of E major in bar 37.

A1 (m. 37–52): Principal theme with counter-melody at bar 45, E major

m. 37–44: Principal melody given to the violas.. Countermelody in octaves heard from flutes
          and oboes, sometimes doubling the line as at bar 39 (in thirds).

m. 45–52: Orchestration reduces with significant removal of the brass. Principal melody in violas
          with cor anglais countermelody.

A2 (m. 53–60): Principal theme in close canon, A major

m. 53–60: Returns to A major with an A-natural pedal point in double basses. Full orchestral
          tutti now utilising percussion and trombones…


Musical terminology
Musical terminology is referenced in all of the above and the list below is intended for a quick guide
and reference point which is not exclusive.

Responses which offer merely a catalogue of terms should not be credited as highly as responses
which demonstrate a clear and accurate use of such terms when discussing or analysing the
extracts.

•   See tempo markings above – perhaps expect translations or interpretations
•   chromaticism
•   Diatonic
•   Key change and modulation
•   Texture/textural contrasts
•   Triadic
•   Trills
•   Homophonic texture/“homophonically supported melody”
•   Counter-melody
•   Time signatures/compound duple/simple duple/triple time


Musical context
• Concert overture Le carnaval romain/Roman Carnival Opus 9
• Composed 1844
• Hector Berlioz (1803–1869)
• Responsible for invigorating the art of orchestration and expansion of the orchestra during the
  nineteenth century. Berlioz placed great importance on the orchestra and on orchestral colour;
  combinations of instrumental colour often illustrate blending of timbres such as violas with
  bassoons, or bassoons with horns, upper strings alone, flutes with oboes, or horns with cor
  anglais.
• French composer of the Romantic Period
• Responsible for invigorating the art of orchestration and expansion of the orchestra during the
  nineteenth century
• Wrote operas as well as large-scale orchestral works and a treatise on orchestration and
  instruments
• The work is an independent overture derived from Berlioz’ opera Benvenuto Cellini, which
  includes a carnival scene.
• “Saltarello” skipping rhythm used (associated with Mardi Gras/Carnevale di Venezia)
                                                   – 24 –               M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


        An adequate to good response will:          A very good to excellent response will:
        Identify the design/form of the extract,    Identify formal divisions in the extract clearly
        perhaps as a diagram with bar               referencing defining musical elements and
        numbers.                                    features with a symbolic representation of
                                                    the design.
        Identify use of most instruments in solo    Reference the close canon treatment of the
        and tutti roles throughout the extract.     cor anglais melody and offer some analytical
                                                    comment perhaps also commenting on the
                                                    orchestration and the use of solos and tutti.
        Comment generally on harmony,               Make analytical comment on harmony,
        melody and rhythm.                          melody, rhythm, orchestration, tempo and
                                                    dynamics which demonstrates secure
                                                    understanding of those elements and their
                                                    associated terminology.
        Place the music in the Romantic             Reflect a clear knowledge of the historical
        Period and identify it as a concert         and stylistic context of the extract and
        overture without necessarily citing         include some specific references to
        stylistic reasons.                          Romanticism and the work of Berlioz.




4.   SL
5.   HL (Note: this section refers to question 4 at SL and question 5 at HL.)

     Pacific 231 (Symphonic Movement No 1) by Arthur Honegger
     (Identified piece, no score provided)

      Musical elements
      • The instrumentation consists of the following: 2 flutes, 2 piccolo flutes, 2 oboes, English horn, 2
        clarinets, bass clarinet, 2 bassoons, contrabassoon, 4 French horns, 3 trumpets, 3 trombones,
        tuba, 4 percussionists (tenor drum, cymbal, bass drum, tam tam) and strings (violin 1, violin 2,
        violas, ’cellos and double basses)
      • Symphonic work
      • Parallel chord texture
      • Dissonance, tonal ambiguity
      • Chromaticism
      • Consistent decreasing tempo: initial tempo Moderé minim = 60, changing to Rythmique dotted
        minim = 80 to crotchet = 152 and so on…
      • Motivic structure
      • Polyphonic, homophonic textures and some examples which could be described as
        heterophonic
      • Instrumental effects: pizzicato, arco, con sordini, sur le chevalet, fluttertonguing, bouche cuivré,
        “au talon”harmonics. Also extensive use of tremolandi and long trills add to the combination of
        timbral qualities
     • Wide ranging dynamics with some sudden contrasts
                                            – 25 –               M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Musical structure
Extract essentially consists of a number of short sections / episodes.

The following is one possible analysis:

A (00:00)   (Introduction) Modéré (moderate) tempo Triple meter. Texture and sonority created by
            the use of string effects including harmonics / tremolandi / pedal points. Low horns
            punctuate with rasping sforzando. Trumpets and flutes with flutter-tongued tremolando
            General crescendo at 0:22, apart from the tubas, which introduce a low syncopated
            scalic motif leading into section B.

B (00:25) Tempo changes to half note/minim = 80 and duple meter is established. Melodic
          shape 1 introduced at 00:31 by horns.

C (00:48) Interlocking rhythmic pattern played by trombones and cello/bass using motivic
          material from section A. Use of rhythmic subdivision of four crotchets continues to
          create aural effect of accelerando.
  (01:03) Bass clarinet trill.

D (01:08) Melodic shape 2 introduced by clarinets and violas.
  (01:19) Bassoon ostinato alternating with oboe and low strings.

E (01:31) Melodic shape 3 introduced by horns. Motivic material from section A hidden in
          harmonic fabric. More rhythmic subdivision.

F (01:49) Development of melodic shape 3 (solo trumpet) Rhythmic subdivision.

G (02:08) Introduction of melodic shape 4a which was anticipated rhythmically by the horns in
          section F (melodic shape 4a at 02:03).

H (02:24 – fade at 02:37)
           Growth/variation of melodic shape 4a and 4b, varying the ideas in different ways e.g.
           use of imitation and stretto, fragmentation, juxtaposition of melodic fragments,
           diminution and various articulations.

Musical terminology
• Tonal centres
• Homophony
• Motivic
• Sonority
• Timbre (sur le chavalet, con sordini, pizzicato, arco, harmonics, bouché cuivré, flutter tongue,
  au talon etc…[or any acceptable equivalents])
• Imitation
• (Harmonic) ostinato
• Recurring bass patterns
• Syncopation
• Tritone or augmented 4th
• Pedal points

Musical context
• Pacific 231 is an orchestral work by Arthur Honegger (1892–1955), written in 1923.
• The popular interpretation of the piece is that it depicts a steam locomotive, an interpretation
  that is supported by the title of the piece. Honegger, however, insisted that he wrote it as an
  exercise in building momentum while the tempo of the piece slows. He originally titled it
  Mouvement Symphonique, only giving it the name Pacific 231, a class of steam locomotive
                                                 – 26 –             M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


         designated in Whyte notation as a 4–6–2, with four pilot wheels, six driving wheels, and two
         trailing wheels (the French, who count axles rather than wheels when describing locomotives,
         call this arrangement 2–3–1) after it was finished.
     •   Arthur Honegger was a Swiss composer, who was born in France and lived a large part of his
         life in Paris. He was a member of “Les Six”, a group of 6 French composers Georges Auric
         (1899–1983), Louis Durey (1888–1979), Arthur Honegger (1892–1955), Darius Milhaud
         (1892–1974), Francis Poulenc (1899–1963), and Germaine Tailleferre (1892–1983).
     •   Principal elements of Honegger’s style are driving rhythms, melodic amplitude and highly
         colouristic harmonies and orchestral sonorities.



     An adequate to good response will:            A very good to excellent response will:
     Identify:                                     Accurately identify many of/nearly all the
     • instrumentation and the symphonic           significant musical elements.
        nature of the work.
     • use of colouristic harmony.
      • use of polyphonic devices.
      • use of rhythmic subdivision.
     • use of timbre.
     Describe and sometimes explain the main       Demonstrate effective perception of
     structural events giving examples and         principal structural features including a
     locations – including rhythmic and metric     detailed analysis of the metric and rhythmic
     organization.                                 organisation and the melodic development
                                                   with relevant examples.
     Demonstrate understanding of basic terms      Display a very good knowledge of musical
     such as motivic development, timbre,          terminology including less familiar terms
     ostinato, pedal note, imitation and           such as “sur le chavalet”, “bouché cuivré”
     ornamentation.                                and “au talon” (or acceptable equivalents)
     Show an understanding of the nature of        Demonstrate a good to very good
     “programmatic” music and an idea              knowledge of the musical context of Les Six
     regarding the composer and the period this    and the Bachian influence in the work,
     piece of music was written. Also something    using critical discussion that shows a
     about “Les Six” may be mentioned here.        synthesis of prior knowledge to illustrate
                                                   points with relevant examples.



5.   SL
6.   HL (Note: this section refers to question 5 at SL and question 6 at HL.)

     Take the A Train by Billy Strayhorn, Duke Ellington (arrangement by Luther Henderson)
     (Unidentified piece, no score provided)

     Musical elements:
     • B-flat major.
     • Common time/fast tempo/4/4
     • Moderato, Allegro moderato [or other reasonable terms]
     • The main theme is in two parts the first being angular [disjunct] and diatonic, the second being
       more conjunct and chromatic and incorporating some features of the first phrase, principally the
       rising and falling 6ths.
     • The first part of the phrase is triadic, the second is chromatic.
     • Leaps of 7ths, and importantly, 6ths are prominent as well as some chromaticism.
     • The first part of the first phrase also shows triadic formations on E-flat major 7th.
                                                 – 27 –               M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


     • The trumpet solo in the intro (c. 15”) provides a secondary melody which is contrasted by its
       A-flat “blue note” [representing the origins of the style].
     • The variations, such as in the solo passage on trumpet and later on saxophone, are framed
       within a constant harmonic basis by the band which allows individual freedom for the soloist.
     • The chords include sevenths, ninths and other chromatically altered characteristic of jazz.
     • The long introduction builds a gradually layered rhythmic passage in semiquaver and crotchet
       triplets.
     • The theme is played in jazz-style eighths/ “swung rhythm”
     • The band/orchestra includes large brass and woodwind sections including saxophones, a
       rhythm section comprising piano, basses and drum-kit, a string section and additional pitched
       percussion such as xylophone which provide a range of timbres and contrast.
     • The ensemble might also be called a Pops Orchestra.
     • Comping

     Musical structure:
     The overall design of the extract is formed from an introduction followed by the presentation of the
     A section, a bridge passage, a return to the A section with improvised variations over the written
     parts played by the rest of the band, a second bridge passage and the beginning of a third A
     section before the fade-out. This is typical of the big band approach of the era, which allowed
     organisation of large forces and at the same time facilitated free solo improvisation supported by
     the fixed written arrangements.

     The design is INTRO – A – BRIDGE – A1 – BRIDGE 2 – A2 [fade]

     INTRO: 4/4, B flat

     00:00–00:48
     • First section [00 – 14”] Layered ostinato semiquaver repetitions on strings; then single
        crotchet/dotted quaver pattern on xylophone over two bars.
     • At the first repeat, solo timpani introduce rhythm based in crotchet triplets.
     • The xylophone is also heard very softly in high register.
     • The introduction is clearly imitative of a steam locomotive which is evoked further by the entry of
        the trumpet with plunger/straight mute [“waa-waa mute”] and the hissing effect from cymbals. It
        is essentially monophonic but, in terms of rhythm only, it might be considered to be in three
        parts, becoming four with the entry of the trumpets through a three-note ascending syncopated
        figure.
     • Trumpets enter at c.15” with a two note motif followed by a semi-sequential repeat:



                                                                                            The
consequent phrase is played by brass as parallel chords [from c. 24”] and ends with a syncopated
descending phrase.




     • The layered ostinato percussion continues as the strings begin rapid semiquaver scale ascent
       through a crescendo.
     • Brass present a motif from the main theme yet to be heard [c. 40”] comprising of the alternating
       major and minor 6ths with slides/glissandos/portamento exchanged antiphonally between
       different sections.
                                            – 28 –               M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


A: Theme

00:49–01:04 – First phrase [antecedent] is played by trumpets with syncopated chords
accompanying.
•
• The rhythm section with “train” rhythm on cymbals is prominent.



                                                                                 .

01:05–01:12 – Second phrase [consequent]




01:13–01:18
• First phrase varied as the violins take the theme.
• Brass section [principally trumpets] playing syncopated chords as homophonic support.
• A wide range of different timbres [sonorities] appears in the gradual layering, beginning with
   strings and hi-hat, timpani, xylophone and trumpet with mute [and “growl”].
• Brass section joins in with chords answering solo trumpet and the xylophone is heard faintly
   behind with single rhythmical taps.
• Strings enter with a scale run.
• Sixths from the main theme are exchanged antiphonally between the brass and woodwinds.
• Main theme is coloured by saxophones and trumpets with some trombone support but the main
   timbre is from the saxophones.
• Strings present three-note figure along with the ostinato cymbals.
• Trumpets provide contrast with the second part of the theme.
• Piano chords supplement the accompaniment.
• The predominant reed and brass are complemented by violins taking up the second phrase of
   the main theme.


BRIDGE:

01:19–01:25
• Features cross-rhythms of quavers with syncopated motif in brass.
• A rising chromatic progression in the brass [F – G-flat – G – A-flat].

A1:

01:25–02:31
• Trumpet solo variation based on chord progressions (“changes”) of the theme in D-flat major,
   introduced by rising scale figure and with interjections of the rising motif from the full band.
• Triple tonguing featured [eg, 01:39].
• The solo also features dotted rhythms and fast tempo.
• The band follows the written arrangement providing harmonic support to solos.
• Theme is heard twice (2x16 = 32 bars)

BRIDGE 2:

02:32–02:37
• Similar passage to 01:19, modulating to E-flat major.
                                            – 29 –               M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


A2:

02:38–02:40…fade
• Beginning of alto saxophone solo on theme in E-flat can be heard before fade.

Musical terminology
Musical terminology is referenced in all of the above and the list below is intended for a quick guide
and reference point which is not exclusive. Responses which offer merely a catalogue of terms
should not be credited as highly as responses which demonstrate a clear and accurate use of such
terms used in an analytical commentary.
• Swing [re style/context]
• Jazz eighths/swung rhythm
• Syncopation
• Dynamics [reasonable suggestions]
• Disjunct intervallic contour
• Conjunct intervallic contour
• Straight/plunger/“waa-waa” mute
• Portamento/glissando/slide
• Monophonic
• Homophonic
• Rhythm layering
• Homophonically supported melody
• Counter melody
• Ostinato rhythms
• Cross-rhythms
• Walking bass
• Diatonic
• Chromatic
• “Changes” (chord progressions)
• Improvisation
• Head


Musical context:
• Composed 1941(accept dates of appropriate era)
• Composed by Billy Strayhorn [1915–1967] who was Duke Ellington’s [1899–1974]
  co-writer/arranger. Take the A-Train was the composition Strayhorn offered Ellington at their
  first meeting.
• The period of the 1930s–1940s is known as The Swing Era.
• The jazz style of “swing” is characterized by the use of “swung” rhythm written as triplet
  crotchet/quaver or as dotted or double dotted quaver/semi-quaver.
• Pieces from the Ellington band included Ko-Ko, Don’t Get Around Much Anymore, Black and
  Tan Fantasy and It Don’t Mean a Thing (if it ain’t got that swing) of 1932.
• Ellington first established himself as a pianist, composer and band leader at The Cotton Club,
  Harlem in the late 1920s.
• Bands and musicians from the same era include Benny Goodman, Count Basie, Dorsey
  brothers, Glen Miller (accept reasonable alternatives linked to Big Band jazz or swing)
• Duke Ellington’s musical style constantly developed and came to include some features which
  first appeared in art music of the modern era such as bi-tonality, use of whole-tone scales, note
  clusters and quotations from other composers reflecting influence from Debussy and Stravinsky.
• Take the A Train became a theme song for the Ellington band and very popular towards the end
  of WWII in America.
                                                 – 30 –              M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


       An adequate to good response will:              A very good to excellent response will:
       Record observations of some elements            Record observations of all elements
       linked to specific time codes.                  identifying specific features accurately in
                                                       appropriate analytical language with some
                                                       supporting observations linked to specific
                                                       time codes.
       Describe the overall structure of the extract   Describe both the phrase structure of
       including some detail of defining content.      melody and the overall structure of the
                                                       extract convincingly.
       Identify the relationship of the solos to the   Comment on role of improvisation in the
       whole orchestra showing an understanding        arrangement with located evidence showing
       of improvisation.                               good understanding of the relationship of
                                                       solos to whole orchestra
       Use a limited range of terminology most of      Use terminology effectively, relevantly and
       which is accurate and appropriate.              appropriately for the style.
       Show musical structure as sections defined      Show musical structure of the whole extract
       by timing as well as content.                   together with sub-sections defined with
                                                       accurate and detailed reference to
                                                       significant content.
       Demonstrate general understanding of the        Demonstrate deep understanding of the
       social, historical and stylistic context.       social, historical and stylistic context
                                                       including specific references such as to
                                                       “Swing” and the Jazz Era.




6.   SL
7.   HL (Note: this section refers to question 6 at SL and question 7 at HL.)

     Akita Ohako (traditional)
     (Unidentified piece, no score provided)

     Musical elements
     • Duple / quadruple metre with characteristic “dotted” rhythm giving suggestion of 6/8 or “swung
       eighths”
     • Rhythmic and melodic ostinato
     • Male solo voice
     • Chorus of male voices / pitched male shouts
     • Pentatonic tonality (roughly: G# – B – C# – D# – F#)
     • Ornamentation
     • Imitation
     • Counter melody
     • Improvisation (flute sounds almost improvised)
     • Vocal and instrumental pitch slides and pitch bending
     • Melisma
     • conjunct melody
     • vibrato
     • Dotted rhythm
                                           – 31 –              M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Musical structure
00:00–00:13: Instrumental introduction – drum enters setting up rhythmic ostinato; after two beats
             shamisen (3-stringed lute) enters with pentatonic melody made up of 2–4 bar
             phrases closely followed by the shakuhachi (bamboo flute) briefly playing in unison
             with the shamisen and then harmonizing with longer note values. The kane
             (bell/cymbal) enters at 00:05 with an additional rhythmic ostinato emphasizing the
             dotted rhythmic nature of the song. Instrumental ensemble set up a repetitive
             accompaniment which continues to support the first verse.

00:13–00:51 Verse 1 – male vocal solo starts first verse (always on anacrusis) with pitched
            shouts from vocal group (kakegoe) at 00:19–00:20 and then again at 00:31–00:32.
            Instrumental ensemble accompanies with repetitive accompaniment as before
            although flute plays a counter melody to the vocal line, sometimes using imitation of
            the vocal line, at other times offering harmonic support in form of long notes and at
            others playing a type of counter melody.

00:51–00:57 Vocal group start to sing a chorus-type section using kakegoe. Instrumental
            accompaniment continues with flute taking the melody with shamisen.

00:57–01:03 Instrumental bridge section, again flute features as the melody instrument with
            shamisen – almost like a duet between these two instruments.

01:03         Verse 2 – same male voice enters with second verse (seems to be a very slight
              decrease in tempo here) – group kakegoe at 01:09–01:10 and then again at 01:21–
              01:22. Instrumental accompaniment as before but flute melody becoming more
              embellished and playing in a higher register – also more imitation between solo
              voice and flute.

01:41–01:47 Vocal group sing/chant chorus as before


01:47         Instrumental section

01:54 …fade Verse 3 – (further slight decrease in tempo) same male voice enters…

Musical terminology
• ostinato,
• pentatonic,
• swung-time feel,
• dance rhythm,
• multi-layered texture,
• sparse rhythmic texture,
• kakegoe (pitched shouts),
• anacrusis,
• imitation,
• counter melody,
• drone,
• strophic,
• melismatic,
• rallentando,
                                            – 32 –               M18/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Musical context
• Akita Ohako is a Japanese folk song and dance songs used for gatherings such as weddings,
  funerals, and festivals. Do not credit incorrect specifically named musical cultures, but
  candidates can be rewarded for perception and justification of instrumentation eb=ven if correct
  names are not given Many min’yō date back 300–500 years (accept ‘traditional’)
• In Min’yō, singers are typically accompanied by the three-stringed lute such as the shamisen,
  taiko drums, and bamboo flute called shakuhachi. Other instruments that can accompany
  min’yō are a transverse flute known as the shinobue / nokan, a bell known as kane, a hand
  drum called the tsuzumi, and/or a 13-stringed zither known as the koto. Accept reasonable
  alternative instruments offered.
• Many of these songs include extra stress on certain syllables as well as pitched shouts
  (kakegoe), as in Akito Ohako. Kakegoe are generally shouts of cheer but in min’yō, they are
  often included as parts of choruses and Akito Ohako is a demonstration of this.
• Do not credit incorrect specifically named musical cultures, but candidates can be rewarded for
  perception and justification of instrumentation even if correct names are not given


   An adequate to good response will:             A very good to excellent response will:
  Display an understanding of some of the         Display an effective perception of nearly all
  significant key musical elements including      the significant musical elements including
  time signature and tempo, non-Western           the identification of non-western
  instrumentation (specific instrument names      instruments and possibly the correct names
  may not be given, although alternative          of these instruments. Highly detailed
  instrument names may be given to describe       accounts should be given of many of these
  the aural effect), male voices, pitched         elements including in particular reference to
  shouts, ornamentation and pitch bending         the 2/4 swing time dance influence, flowing
  and the range of the vocal melody.              phrases, rhythmic and melodic ostinato,
                                                  calando, vocal qualities and timbre,
                                                  pentatonic tonality and use of counter-
                                                  melody and obbligato.
  Demonstrate some understanding of               Demonstrate effective understanding of the
  principal structural features such as the       strophic nature of this folk song, giving
  verse/chorus/instrumental bridge sections       details of the interaction between the soloist
  with some use of musical evidence and           and the group vocalists and the flute with
  locations.                                      precise locations throughout the work.
  Display satisfactory knowledge of some          Display good knowledge of appropriate
  relevant terminology including ostinato,        terminology such as min’yō, some of the
  rallentando and layered texture, drone and      correct names of the instrumentation
  song-structure.                                 (shamisen, taiko, koto for example), pitched
                                                  shouts (kakegoe) as well as other terms
                                                  mentioned in the musical terminology
                                                  section above.
  Demonstrate adequate knowledge of the           Demonstrate good knowledge of the
  context of this Japanese folk song and the      Japanese folk song context. Correctly
  different types of folk songs used for          placing the work in the appropriate context
  various occasions and events. Responses         of min’yō with convincing justifications.
  might include knowledge of min’yō and how       Responses will include knowledge of min’yō
  the folk songs vary from region to region, in   and how the folk songs vary from region to
  addition to information regarding the period    region in addition to information regarding
  when this folk song may have originated.        the period when this folk song may have
                                                  originated.
