M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                               May 2017


                                Music


           Higher level and standard level


                        Listening paper




29 pages
                           –2–         M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use
of examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Global Centre, Cardiff.
                                                  –3–           M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The following are the annotations available to use when marking responses.
                                                                             Associated
             Annotation     Explanation
                                                                              shortcut
                            BOD - Benefit of the doubt                         Alt+4

                            CKS - Clear Knowledge Shown

                 CON        CON - Contradiction

                            Cross – Incorrect point                            Alt+0

                            DES - Descriptive

                            Excellent Point - Excellent Point

                            GA - Good Analysis                                 Alt+5

                 GEN        GEN - Generalisation

                            GEXA - Good Example

                            H Line - Underline tool                            Alt+2

                            IR - Irrelevant

                            NAQ - Not Answered Question                        Alt+6

                            NMRD - Not much reasoning or discussion

                 OK         OK – OK/Answer Acceptable                          Alt+9

                            On page comment tool                               Alt+7

                            SEEN_Small – Seen

                            Tick Colourable                                    Alt+1

                            TV - Too vague
                                               –4–          M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



                 OK        OK – OK/Answer Acceptable                       Alt+9

                           On page comment tool                            Alt+7

                 REx       REx - Reasonable explanation

                           SEEN_Small – Seen

                 SGP       SGP – Some good points

                           Tick Colourable                                 Alt+1

                           TV - Too vague

                 UA        UA - Unfinished answer

                           WARG - Well argued

                           WKAR - Weak argument                            Alt+8

You must make sure you have looked at all pages. Please put the    annotation on any blank page, to
indicate that you have seen it.
                                                  –5–           M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


General comment to examiners
Please note that the markscheme is provided as guidance for marking. There are many potential and
valid ways in which to approach the questions and examiners need, therefore, to use their judgment
when attributing marks to a candidate's answers.

Each question is worth [20 marks].

                                              Section A
This criterion concerns the candidate’s ability to:
 question 1 or question 2 – analyse and examine essential musical elements (including form and
   structure) within one of the two prescribed works
 question 3 (HL only) – compare and contrast the two prescribed works, emphasizing the presence of
   any significant musical links.

Marks      Level descriptor
  0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
          The answers, which generally do not address the question, show a minimal level of
          musical understanding. There is limited use of musical evidence, though this is poorly
          located, or none at all. There is limited use of musical terminology or none at all.
          The answers, which generally do not address the question, […]
          There is little understanding of the demands of the question. The response consists mostly
          of generalizations or poorly substantiated assertions.
          […] show a minimal level of musical understanding.
          The response relays irrelevant knowledge, or inaccurately applies remembered content.
  1–4     There is limited use of musical evidence, though this is poorly located, or none at all.
          Musical evidence is never or rarely used. When evidence is given, it is inaccurate, superficial
          and imprecise with regards to bar/measure number(s), rehearsal number(s) and/or
          instrument(s).
          There is limited use of musical terminology or none at all.
          The responses communicate without the use of musical terminology, or where musical
          terminology is applied, it is generally not relevant and/or inaccurate. However, a rudimentary
          understanding of terminology in relation to the material/topic in question may surface on
          occasion.
                                              –6–          M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


       The answers, which may not always address the question, show some level of musical
       understanding. There is some use of musical evidence, though this is not located
       precisely enough. There is some use of musical terminology.
       The answers, which may not always address the question, […]
       The response indicates an understanding of the question, but only partially addresses it.
       The response is narrative and/or descriptive in nature.
       The answers show some level of musical understanding.
       The response contains some prior knowledge, but demonstrates merely recall of
5–8    information, rather than application of prior knowledge and engagement with the question
       through reasoned discussion and evaluation.
       There is some use of musical evidence, though this is not located precisely enough.
       Musical evidence is presented on occasion, but used without explanation or not relevant to
       the question under discussion. Where musical evidence is given, it is imprecise with
       regards to bar/measure number(s), rehearsal number(s) and/or instrument(s).
       There is some use of musical terminology.
       Musical terminology is applied and on occasion is relevant and appropriate with regards to
       the material under discussion, while there is also some inaccurate use of terminology
       and/or vague statements.
       The answers, which generally address the question, show an adequate level of musical
       understanding. There is use of musical evidence, though this is not always precisely located.
       There is partially effective use of musical terminology.
       The answers, which generally address the question, […]
       The response indicates an understanding of the demands of the question. The response
       contains some critical discussion, analysis, evaluation, examination, etc. However, answers
       lack clarity and development.
       […] show an adequate level of musical understanding.
       The response appropriately applies and sometimes explains prior knowledge in relation to
9–12   the question and the material under discussion.
       There is use of musical evidence, though this is not always precisely located.
       Throughout the answer musical evidence is used, which is sometimes, but not consistently,
       accurate, relevant and explained in relation to the question. Evidence is sometimes, but not
       consistently, located by using bar/measure number(s), rehearsal number(s) and/or
       instrument(s).
       There is partially effective use of musical terminology.
       The use of musical terminology is mostly relevant and accurate, but does not consistently
       support the discussion, analysis, evaluation, examination, etc. Critical terminology is
       appropriately used, although some may be ignored or unaccounted for.
                                               –7–           M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


        The answers, which generally address the question, may not always be convincing but show
        a good level of musical understanding. There is appropriate use of musical evidence, mostly
        precisely located. There is mostly effective use of musical terminology.
        The answers, which generally address the question, may not always be
        convincing […]
        The demands of the question are understood and addressed. The response contains some
        critical discussion, analysis, evaluation, examination, etc. Most of the main arguments are
        substantiated and lead towards suitable conclusions in the context of the question.
        […] but show a good level of musical understanding.
13–16
        The response explains prior knowledge which is appropriate and relevant in relation to the
        question and material under discussion.
        There is appropriate use of musical evidence, mostly precisely located.
        The musical evidence used is relevant and accurate and supports the context of the
        response. Musical evidence is usually located accurately by using bar/measure number(s),
        rehearsal number(s) and/or instrument(s).
        There is mostly effective use of musical terminology.
        A variety of musical terminology is used, which is usually relevant and accurate and supports
        the discussion, analysis, evaluation, examination, etc.
        The answers, which consistently address the question, are convincing and show a very good
        level of musical understanding, supported by a most appropriate use of musical evidence,
        precisely located. There is highly effective use of musical terminology.
        The answers, which consistently address the question, are convincing […]
        Responses are clearly focused and show a high degree of awareness of the demands of the
        question. Responses contain well developed critical discussion, analysis, evaluation,
        examination, etc. The main points are well substantiated, and the response argues towards
        a reasoned conclusion.
        […] and show a very good level of musical understanding, […]
        The responses accurately interpret and synthesize prior knowledge to illustrate points with
17–20   relevant examples.
        […] supported by a most appropriate use of musical evidence, precisely located.
        Musical evidence is relevant, accurate and the best choice for the context of the response.
        Musical evidence is consistently located accurately by using bar/measure number(s),
        rehearsal number(s) and/or instrument(s). Where on occasion this is not the case, the
        quality and accuracy of the response are not compromised.
        There is highly effective use of musical terminology.
        The use of musical terminology is skillful, accurate, sophisticated, wide ranging, and highly
        effective in supporting the discussion, analysis, evaluation, examination, etc of the question
        and the material under investigation. Where on occasion this is not the case, the quality and
        accuracy of the response are not compromised.
                                                   –8–           M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Note: The following indicative content is for guidance only, and by no means meant to suggest that
candidates should be marked according to the extent that their answer resembles these suggestions. It
is quite possible for candidates to come up with good responses other than these, which should be
credited accordingly.

Examiners may find the following resources helpful:

Brandenburg Concerto No 2 in F major by Johann Sebastian Bach
Various editions of the score are available online for free download, eg at:

http://imslp.org/wiki/Brandenburg_Concerto_No.2_in_F_major,_BWV_1047_(Bach,_Johann_Sebastian)


Dances of Galánta by Zoltán Kodály

The score of the work is still in copyright and no free download versions as such are available, but a
digital copy of the score used André Kastelanitz when conducting the New Philharmonic is available (for
viewing, not printing) at:

http://archives.nyphil.org/index.php/artifact/db9cbad7-6e9c-4dc1-bc81-08439b597b11
                                                   –9–            M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.   Brandenburg Concerto No 2 in F major by Johann Sebastian Bach
     Discuss how Bach follows the principles of both fugue and concerto grosso in the last movement of
     his Brandenburg Concerto No 2 in F major.

     The answers should refer to the prescribed work.

     Answers should address the question and be consistent and convincing in their display of musical
     understanding. Evidence should be located by using bar(s)/measure(s), rehearsal number(s),
     and/or instrument(s) in the works/extracts. Musical terminology should be effective in its use.

     The fugal elements of the movement are the easier to identify, and most candidates should have
     no difficulty describing at least some of them. They may not be able to cover them all in the time
     allowed, but for reference purposes a table is given below outlining the key points. (Some
     candidates might indeed adopt a graphic presentation of this sort in their answer.) Note that not
     all commentators agree on the location of certain formal landmarks – for example, some
     situate the beginnings of the middle section and final entries at bars/measures 57 and 107
     respectively (the choice depends on whether you consider theme or key as the essential
     distinguishing feature). There is thus some room for flexibility on the identification of certain formal
     sections, and examiners should make due allowance for this in assessment.

     The identification of concerto grosso elements in the movement is rather more problematic and,
     indeed, slightly contentious. In terms of instrumentation and texture, while there are certainly
     concertino and tutti passages (see table), the former are very much in the majority, and for the first
     46 bars the ripieno strings have nothing to do at all. As for the structure, some commentators
     describe the movement as a mixture of fugue and ritornello form, and point to the tutti episodes in
     measures 47-57, 79-85, 97-107 and 126-136 (highlighted in bold in the table below) as examples
     of the latter. Certainly these all share common, sequential material loosely based on an inversion
     of the fugue subject, which does not appear elsewhere. There are also tutti passages developing
     fugal materials (eg 72ff), which could be seen as integrating fugue with concerto grosso elements.
     However, not all commentators are convinced that the work displays unambiguous concerto
     grosso characteristics at all. Martin Boyd has suggested that, with the exception of the basso
     continuo, “the orchestral strings […] could be omitted without any real loss to the fabric of the
     music”, while others go further, suggesting that the work is a rearrangement of an earlier piece for
     the concertino instruments and continuo only, now lost. Some candidates might be aware of such
     issues, and should be credited accordingly; on the other hand, a straightforward account of the
     movement’s concerto grosso-like features is also quite acceptable.

     It is impossible to predict the form candidates’ responses will take, and therefore the following
     guidelines should not be taken too literally. However, to score a mark in the 5-8 band or above,
     there should at least be some engagement with the key terms in the rubric and some associated
     terminology (eg “ritornello”, “ripieno”), supported with examples. Higher-scoring candidates (9 and
     above) are likely to go into more detail regarding both aspects of question, for example providing a
     more detailed analysis of the fugal elements.

     The top markbands (13 upwards) are likely to be attained by those candidates who, in addition to
     the above, discuss in more depth the work’s integration of fugal and concerto grosso principles – or
     lack of it, depending on their point of view.
                                        – 10 –       M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Bar/       Formal features        Key               Remarks
measure

Exposition
1          Subject                F major           Subject (S) in trumpet
7          Answer (real)          C major           S in ob, countersubject (CS1) in tr
13         Episode                C major–F major   Tr, ob, continuo
21         Subject                F major           S (vln), CS1 (ob), CS2 (tr),
                                                    CS3 anticipated in bass
27         Answer                 C major           S (recorder). CS1 (vln), CS2 (ob),
                                                    CS3 continues in bass
33         Episode                C major           Rec, ob, vln
41         Answer                 C major           S (tr), CS1 (recorder), CS2 (vln),
                                                    CS3 (ob)
47         Episode/“Ritornello”   C major           Tutti
57         Answer                 C major           S (vln), CS2 (recorder), elements
                                                    of CS1 in bass

Middle entries/episodes
66          Subject               D minor           S (ob), CS1 (recorder), CS2 (vln),
                                                    CS3 in bass
72         Answer                 A minor           Tutti: S in bass, CS1 (tr), CS2
                                                    (recorder), new material in
                                                    vln/upper ripieno strings
79         Episode/“Ritornello”   D minor–G minor   Tutti
85         Episode                G minor–B-flat    Concertino
97         Episode/“Ritornello”   B-flat major      Tutti
107        Subject                B-flat major      S (ob), CS2 (tr), elements of CS1
                                                    (bass)

Final entries
113         Subject               F major           S (recorder), CS1 (tr), CS2 (ob),
                                                    CS3 (bass)
119        Answer                 C major           Tutti: S (bass), CS1 (tr), CS2
                                                    (rec.), other instr similar material
                                                    to 72ff
126        Episode/“Ritornello”   F–B-flat–F        Tutti
136        Subject (shortened)    F major           Tutti: S (tr), CS2 (vln), other instr
                                                    punctuating chords similar to CS1
                                                   – 11 –            M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   Dances of Galánta by Zoltán Kodály
     Explore the relationship between the role of the clarinet and the role of the orchestra in Kodály’s
     Dances of Galánta.

     The answers should refer to the prescribed work.

     Answers should address the question and be consistent and convincing in their display of musical
     understanding. Evidence should be located by using bar(s)/measure(s), rehearsal number(s),
     and/or instrument(s) in the works/extracts. Musical terminology should be effective in its use.

     The most obvious passages for discussion here are those in which the clarinet appears in a
     concertante role in relation to the rest of the ensemble, i.e. solos and cadenzas. Candidates aware
     of the work's context may relate these, and the style in which the instrument is used in them, to the
     instrument's traditional role in the gypsy ensemble; however, it should be pointed out that the
     clarinet part is notated to be performed in a typically Romantic “orchestral style.” There are no
     microtones, lip glissandi or extended techniques requested which one would expect to hear in an
     authentic “gypsy style” of clarinet playing:

      Bar/measure 31ff: clarinet emerges out of unison with strings for brief solo passage with
       cadenza-like trills and arpeggios, lightly accompanied by string harmonies. Pause marks
       (fermatas) in score indicate strings are to follow soloist here, as in a concerto. Clarinet
       continues to be heard clearly above the orchestral figurations from 37 onwards (marked at a
       higher dynamic throughout), until at…
      Bar/measure 43ff …clarinet emerges out of orchestral tutti for solo candenza, mostly
       unaccompanied except for string chords near end. Virtuoso in style, again with trills and
       arpeggios and covering very wide compass – (concert) C6 to D3, almost the lowest note on an
       instrument in A (some candidates might describe this part of the instrument’s range as the
       chalumeau register).
      Upbeat to bar/measure 50ff: slow clarinet solo, p, melodic and expressive rather than virtuosic,
       lightly accompanied by strings. Tutti answering passage at 66 seems to confirm clarinet’s solo
       role, concerto-style; in answering phrase (74) however, clarinet reverts to original role as
       doubling voice.
      Bar/measure 346ff: brief (4-bar) solo for clarinet; here, however, instrument is not unduly
       favoured above other instruments, which also have solos (cello + bassoon b. 354, oboe b. 357)
      Bar measure 571ff: cl. has 2-bar solo, echoing previous solos for flute + oboe, leading to 6-bar
       cadenza with trills and arpeggios as before, lightly accompanied by strings and ending on a
       series of trills, rather like a concerto cadenza. Reappearance of clarinet in earlier solo role
       provides a satisfying sense of “closure” just before orchestral conclusion, almost like a
       thematic reprise.

     It is possible that candidates might also consider some of the clarinet’s other roles, such as brief
     solistic or colouristic entries (106–8), colouristic doubling in unison (20ff) or octaves (303ff, 315ff),
     providing accompaniment figurations (181ff, 197ff, 213ff), playing in ensemble with other solo
     winds (123ff), or in dialogue (“call and response”) with them (142–150, 384–5, 409–410, 417–420,
     567ff). It is unlikely that they will discuss routine, inconspicuous uses of the clarinet, eg as part of
     big orchestral tutti; if they do, examiners will need to use their own judgement in deciding how
     relevant they are to the question. A decisive feature here may be issues of texture, i.e. how the
     clarinet (and accompanying instruments) are working together to produce a particular textural type.

     Candidates who themselves play the clarinet are, of course, at an advantage here and may include
     specific technical details. In such cases examiners (unless they are also clarinettists) may not be
     in a position to verify such claims, and should again employ their own judgement or (as a last
     resort) the ever-useful “BOD” function.
                                            – 12 –           M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Once again, the following guidelines on marks should not be applied too rigorously in all cases.
However, it is unlikely that candidates will attain 5 marks or more if no precisely located examples
of the clarinet/orchestra relationship are given at all. Stronger responses (9 and above) will
probably not only provide more examples and examine them in more detail, but select a range of
illustrations as the basis for a discussion of different roles played by the instrument within the
piece. In addition to the above, particularly strong responses (13 upwards) may examine such
features as the “gypsy” connotations of the instrument, or the placing of its cadenza-like passages
as an aspect of the work’s structure.
                                                – 13 –           M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   Brandenburg Concerto No 2 in F major by Johann Sebastian Bach and Dances of Galánta
     by Zoltán Kodály
     Compare and contrast the rhythmic character of the prescribed works, emphasizing any significant
     musical links.

     (HL only)

     The answers should refer to the prescribed works.

     Answers should address the question and be consistent and convincing in their display of musical
     understanding. Evidence should be located by using bar(s)/measure(s), rehearsal number(s),
     and/or instrument(s) in the works/extracts. Musical terminology should be effective in its use.

     As one might expect from two such diverse works, the contrasts in the use of rhythm here far
     outnumber the similarities:

     Contrasts
      Bach’s rhythm tends to be based on simple divisions/multiples of the pulse, combined like
       “building blocks” to create larger patterns which are, in turn, superimposed to create denser
       textures. For example, in the first movement the typical patterns used include straight quavers,
       semiquaver runs, and a characteristic “quaver + 2 semiquaver” pattern (some candidates might
       describe this as ‘dactylic’; this is acceptable).
      Kodály generally uses a wider range of rhythmic patterns, and in freer, more
       flexible combinations.
      Bach’s rhythms are exclusively based on multiples/divisions of 2 or 4.
      Kodály uses other divisions of the beat, such as triplets (b. 50ff clarinet, b. 229 trumpets),
       quintuplets (b. 131) and division of the beat into 11 (b. 65)
      Dotted rhythms are rare in Bach’s work. Apart from the dotted crotchet in the second
       movement theme (eg b. 2, violin) they are confined to dotted quaver cadential formulae, often
       trilled (eg violin, movt I b. 9).
      Kodály uses dotted (and double-dotted) rhythms more frequently. He also uses “reversed”
       dotted rhythms (so-called “Scotch snap” patterns), eg in the clarinet solo beginning b. 50.
       These are not found at all in Bach, but are a characteristic feature of Hungarian folk music.
      Several of Bach’s themes (eg movt I, b. 1, b. 8; movt II, b. 1) begin with an anacrusis (upbeat).
       Kodály’s themes generally do not – as is well known, this is typical of Hungarian folk music
       since Hungarian words are always accented on the first syllable. There are some exceptions –
       eg b. 393, although here the upbeat has actually been added by Kodály to the original source
       material deliberately, to give it a verbunkos character.
      Cross-rhythm occurs briefly in the fugue subject of Bach’s third movement (eg b. 3–6), where
       the phrasing in groups of 3+3+2 crotchets crosses the bar line of the 2/4 metre.
      Movement III of the Bach ends with a so-called “hemiola cadence” of the kind particularly
       associated with Handel, where the notes of bb. 63–4 are grouped in a pattern of 2+2+2
       crotchets which runs across the 3/4 metre. The option to use hemiola is not available to Kodály
       as he does not use triple metre in Dances of Galánta.
      The solo clarinet part of Kodály’s work contains unmeasured, cadenza-like passages (eg b. 45,
       b. 473) which are not meant to be played with rigid rhythmic accuracy. There is no exact
       counterpart for this in Bach’s work, although a certain rhythmic freedom would have been
       expected of players at various points in the piece, eg the end of Movement II.
                                                  – 14 –            M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


     However, there are some points of contact nevertheless, for example:

     Comparisons (“significant musical links”)
      The combinations of semiquaver runs and quaver+2 semiquaver patterns in the melody
        beginning at b. 173 of the Kodály bear comparison with the typical patterns used in the
        construction of Bach’s outer movements in particular.
      Both Bach and Kodály use syncopated rhythms where the attacks are consistently displaced
       onto the offbeat (eg Bach I, b. 50ff (violins), III, b. 10–11 (trumpet); Kodály, b. 236ff).
      Bach twice displaces the entire ritornello theme by two beats as a result of canonic processes
       in movement 1 (trumpet, bb. 88–9 and 93–4). Kodály does something similar, displacing the
       lower part by half a beat, at 311–314.

     Some candidates might include discussions of such related features as tempo, metre or
     ornamentation under the general heading of ‘rhythm’. The general consensus of the examining
     team is that the first of these is not really relevant, but that the others can certainly impact on the
     rhythmic aspect of the piece. Examiners should exercise their own personal judgement, therefore,
     as to whether the candidate has argued persuasively for the inclusion of such features, or whether
     they are simply including irrelevant information.

It is unlikely that candidates will score five marks or more without engaging with the rhythmic aspect of
these pieces in some way. Stronger responses (nine marks upwards) are not only likely to provide more
detailed comparisons, but to examine them in a systematic manner, and provide a range of examples to
illustrate different kinds of rhythmic devices. Good examples of such responses may indeed attain the
highest mark bands (13 upwards); however, given that it is so difficult to find convincing “significant
musical links” between these two pieces, candidates who demonstrate particular inventiveness in this
respect should also be given some credit for this, regardless of the general standard attained by the rest
of their response.
                                                   – 15 –            M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                                Section B
A Musical elements
This criterion concerns the candidate’s ability to perceive the musical elements, such as, but not limited
to, duration, pitch, tonality, timbre/tone colour, texture and dynamics, and their significance. Articulation
and other expressive and production techniques might also be discussed.

Note: Structure is assessed in a separate criterion.

Marks      Level descriptor
0          The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
           The work displays insufficient and weak aural perception. The candidate has
           identified musical elements poorly, including very few, if any of the significant ones.
           There is little understanding of the musical material under investigation: the response makes
1
           irrelevant points or inaccurately labels and locates musical elements. Of the key elements
           very few, or none, are recognized.
           The response rarely (or never) refers to the musical excerpt.
           The work sometimes displays adequate aural perception. The candidate has identified
           some musical elements, including a few of the significant ones.
2          The response indicates a basic understanding of the musical excerpt: a limited number of
           key elements are identified and listed, but without explanation.
           Where musical evidence is given, it is imprecise and broad or general.

           The work displays partially effective aural perception. The candidate has generally
           accurately identified musical elements, including some of the significant ones.
           The response indicates an understanding of the musical excerpt: throughout the answer
3
           important musical elements are identified and presented in relation and reference to the
           musical excerpt.
           Sometimes, but not consistently, these are accurately located, relevant and explained.
           The work displays mostly effective aural perception. The candidate has accurately
           identified musical elements, including many of the significant ones.
           The response shows a good/solid understanding of the musical excerpt: the chosen
4
           elements are relevant, accurate and appropriate with regards to the excerpt and presented
           through engagement with and in reference to the musical excerpt.
           Musical evidence used is accurately located to support the response.
           The work consistently displays highly effective aural perception. The candidate has
           accurately identified musical elements, including nearly all of the significant ones.
           The response displays a high degree of awareness and understanding of the musical
5          excerpt: the answer gives a detailed account of highly important and relevant musical
           elements. The investigated elements add valuable information to the musical discussion,
           analysis and evaluation of the excerpt.
           Musical evidence is consistently accurately located to support/substantiate the points made.
                                                   – 16 –            M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


B Musical structure
This criterion concerns the candidate’s ability to perceive principal structural features, such as, but not
limited to, form, phrases, motifs.

Marks      Level descriptor
   0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

           The work demonstrates little perception of principal structural features.
           The response is an inaccurate narration of structural events, which are never or rarely
    1      substantiated with musical evidence. The response consists mostly of generalizations or
           poorly substantiated assertions.
           When evidence is given, it is inaccurate, superficial and imprecise.

           The work demonstrates limited and ineffective perception of principal structural
           features.
    2      The response constitutes merely a narration or description of some structural events, or
           simply labelling structure with no justification or explanation.
           Musical evidence is presented on occasion, but may not be accurately located.

           The work demonstrates partially effective perception of principal structural features.
           The response indicates understanding by appropriately identifying and sometimes explaining
    3      and justifying main as well as less significant structural events.
           Throughout the answer musical evidence is used, which is sometimes, but not consistently,
           located accurately, relevant and explained.

           The work demonstrates mostly effective perception of principal structural features.
           The response applies prior knowledge to identify and understand the main, and on occasion
    4
           less important, structural events of the excerpt.
           The musical evidence used is relevant and accurately located to support the response.

           The work consistently demonstrates highly effective perception of principal structural
           features.
           The response displays a high degree of awareness and understanding of important structural
    5
           events. Answers accurately apply prior knowledge to provide a detailed account of the
           principal structural features through locating, defining, explaining, labelling, etc.
           The musical evidence is consistently accurately located to support/substantiate the point.
                                                 – 17 –           M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


C Musical terminology
This criterion concerns the candidate’s knowledge of musical terminology and its appropriate use.

Marks     Level descriptor
   0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
          The work displays little knowledge and use, if any, of musical terminology.
          Musical terminology may not be used at all in the answers. Where musical terminology is
   1
          applied, it is generally not relevant and/or inaccurate, although a rudimentary understanding
          of terminology in relation to the material/topic in question may surface on occasion.
          The work displays some knowledge of musical terminology but its use is inaccurate at
          times.
   2      Musical terminology is applied on occasion and some, but not all, of it is relevant and
          accurate with regards to the context, while there is also some inaccurate use of terminology
          and/or vague statements.
          The work displays satisfactory knowledge and use of musical terminology.
          The use of musical terminology is mostly relevant and accurate, but does not consistently or
   3
          effectively enough support the discussion, analysis, evaluation, examination, etc. Critical
          terminology is appropriately used, although some may be ignored or unaccounted for.
          The work displays good knowledge and use of musical terminology.
   4      A variety of musical terminology is used appropriately. All terminology is relevant, accurate
          and supports the discussion, analysis, evaluation, examination, etc.
          The work consistently displays very good knowledge and use of musical terminology.
          The use of musical terminology is skillful, accurate, wide ranging, and highly effective in
   5
          supporting the discussion, analysis, evaluation, examination, etc of the question and the
          material under investigation.
                                                   – 18 –            M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


D Musical context
This criterion concerns the candidate’s ability to place each extract in its musical context, such as, but
not limited to, cultural, historical and stylistic context.

Marks      Level descriptor
  0        The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
           The work demonstrates little and inaccurate knowledge of the musical context. The
           candidate has used little reasoned argument.
           The work demonstrates little and inaccurate knowledge of the musical context.
           The response relays irrelevant knowledge, or inaccurately applies remembered content.
   1
           References to the musical context are few and generally incorrect.
           The candidate has used little reasoned argument.
           The response consists mostly of superficial generalizations or poorly substantiated
           assertions. The answer recalls and lists rudimentary information.
           The work demonstrates some knowledge of the musical context. The candidate has
           sometimes used reasoned argument.
           The work demonstrates some knowledge of the musical context.
   2       Comments on the musical context are generally correct, but answers merely exhibit recall of
           prior knowledge and little engagement with the musical excerpt.
           The candidate has sometimes used reasoned argument.
           The response is narrative and/or descriptive in nature.
           The work demonstrates adequate knowledge of the musical context. The candidate has
           used partially effective reasoned argument.
           The work demonstrates adequate knowledge of the musical context.
           Comments on the musical context are generally correct. The response uses and sometimes
   3
           explains prior knowledge in relation to the context of the musical excerpt.
           The candidate has used partially effective reasoned argument.
           The response contains some critical discussion, analysis, evaluation, examination, etc.
           However, answers may lack clarity and development.
           The work demonstrates good knowledge of the musical context. The candidate has used
           mostly effective reasoned argument.
           The work demonstrates good knowledge of the musical context.
           The comments on the musical extract’s place in its musical context are appropriate and
   4
           relevant. Contextual conclusions are largely supported and justified by musical evidence.
           The candidate has used mostly effective reasoned argument.
           The response contains some critical discussion, analysis, evaluation, examination, etc.
           Some of the main points are substantiated and the response draws some conclusions.
           The work consistently demonstrates very good knowledge of the musical context.
           The candidate has consistently used highly effective reasoned argument.
           The work consistently demonstrates very good knowledge of the musical context.
           The extract is correctly placed in an appropriate context and its place in this context is
           discussed with convincing justifications. The responses accurately interpret and synthesize
   5
           prior knowledge to illustrate points with relevant examples.
           The candidate has consistently used highly effective reasoned argument.
           Responses are clearly focused. Responses contain well developed critical discussion,
           analysis, evaluation, examination, etc. Nearly all of the main points are substantiated, and
           the response argues towards a reasoned conclusion.
                                                – 19 –           M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


When marking candidates’ answers to questions in section B, examiners must refer to the HL and SL
external assessment criteria available in the music guide.

3.   SL
4.   HL (Note: this section refers to question 3 at SL and question 4 at HL.)

     Sinfonia in D (G.4) for trumpet, strings and continuo, Movement II (Presto and Adagio only),
     and Movement III (Allegro) by Giuseppe Torelli (Identified piece, score provided)

     Note that many details of the recorded performance differ from the score. In particular,
     there is no harpsichord in the second movement, while timpani are added to the third. The
     string passage at the end of the second movement is highly embellished and played with a
     great deal of freedom.

     Note also that examiners will need to use some judgement about whether details copied
     from the score/rubric are worthy of credit (e.g. ‘this is a piece for trumpet, strings and
     continuo’), or whether they demonstrate some interpretation or analysis (e.g. ‘the third
     movement is in compound time, 12/8’).

     Musical elements
      Violins I and II, violas with harpsichord continuo (cello and double bass), timpani and solo
       trumpet
      An early forerunner of concerto form for trumpet, strings and basso continuo
      Major key (Movement II in A, Movement III in D. Note that Movement II has D major key
       signature, but that actual home key is A major.)
      Opens with an improvised violin solo introduction which is matched in the episode before the
       fast movement and trumpet entry, but for the whole group. Features suspension at cadence.
      Begins in common time (freely) but then assumes triple (3/4)
      Although not a concerto grosso or fully developed solo concerto, it shares some characteristics
       such as the textural contrasts and, terraced dynamics.
      Some improvised embellishments

     Musical structure
     NB: The score does not represent exactly the solo performance.

     A (m. 1–7):      (Section repeats.) Violin section has a two-bar figure which features spiccato
                      playing (the repeating upper E, for example) and is punctuated with regular I–IV–
                      V–I cadences from the whole ensemble providing a harmonic element as well as
                      textural contrast. Remainder of strings play pizzicato throughout Presto passage.

     A2 (m. 8–14):    (Not repeated.) The same material is repeated but a P5th higher on E with the
                      same cadences as before. In both A sections, the answering phrases are
                      contrasted with a “loud–soft” dynamic (“terraced”) in the recording.

     B (m. 15–35):    The principal figure is treated through sequence, dynamics and key change as
                      the harmonic rhythm increases with the continuing cadential formula from section
                      A. The root movement is in a cycle of 5ths viz E–A–D–… which is typical of the
                      Baroque period. Note the harpsichord flourish to close, which is also a feature of
                      the performing style. The ensemble violin (“ripieno”) has punctuating off-beat
                      entries adding rhythmic interest to the repetition.

     Interlude (m. 36–38):
                                             – 20 –            M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                  Adagio with time signature in common time. The interlude modulates to F# minor
                  and also features suspensions and more chromaticism than in the preceding
                  sections. The performance follows the structure but with its own embellishments
                  such as cadential trills.

Allegro:          D major 12/8 – The fast movement is sectional but is, as often in Baroque works
                  such as this, an integrated texture based on core motifs.

Broadly, the movement may be shown as follows. The motifs/figures are labelled (a)–(c) in order of
appearance on the recording.

A (m. 1–8):       Motif (a) on solo trumpet which is echoed antiphonally by ripieno violins. The
                  violins continue (a) in regular 12/8, a figure which features repeating high notes
                  (E string, hence “spiccato”) while the trumpet plays a countermelody (c) in whole
                  beats preceded by a beat rest, closing on the dominant. Each antiphonal phrase
                  is contrasted by a “loud–soft” dynamic. The solo trumpet also adds mordents
                  and accacciature or, more generally, embellishes in the manner of Baroque
                  performance. The perfect cadence marks the end of the section although there is
                  no other separation and the music continues seamlessly.

B (m. 9–14):      The figures in A are continued but in the dominant key and with related variants
                  of the trumpet’s countermelody (c) which is doubled also in the string ensemble.
                  Further embellishments are performed by both solo and group.

C/A2 (m. 15–23b3):
               The principal motif (a) is used in a more consistently antiphonal way in a
               developmental way. The key is returned to the tonic major. There is a transitional
               excursion to B minor/relative minor at 19–21. Notably, the antiphonal response
               by strings (violins) develops the antecedent from the trumpet (2:1 bars). As the
               antiphonal exchanges progress, the countermelody (b) is present in the string
               ensemble.

Codetta (m. 23b4–28):
                The section may be heard as a codetta even though, once again, there is no
                clear separation. There is, however, a renewed drive to the final tonic cadence
                which is marked by the reiteration of the principal motif (a) first by violins (bar 22)
                answered by the solo trumpet and then the “spiccato” figure on strings. There is
                one measure of timpani solo between mm. 26–27 in this performance, and the
                final cadence is punctuated by timpani and a final roll.

NB: The form of the extract is continuous but made comprehensible by its tonal structure which
reflects root progressions from the cycle of fifths as well as the interweaving of the principle
motif/figure. The Allegro might be thought of as a jig with its constant 12/8 rhythms.

The soloist and upper strings are mainly in dialogue together, while the ensemble sometimes
shares their ideas and at other times provides a homophonic harmonic foundation along with the
basso continuo. That being the case, the short Allegro shares common ground with the developing
solo concerto of the time and the ensemble could also be described as having a solo concertino
and an ensemble ripieno structure.

Musical terminology
 Diatonic
 Compound time
 Concerto/concertino
                                           – 21 –           M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


   Ripieno
   Basso continuo
   Improvisation/improvisatory
   Embellishments/mordent/accacciatura/grace notes
   Homophonic
   Triadic
   Tonic/dominant/relative minor/subdominant

Musical context
 The violinist composer Giuseppe Torelli (1658–1709) was active in the orchestra of the
  Bolognese Basilica di San. Petronio, the architecture and acoustic of which was very suited to
  brass sounds.
 Torelli wrote several works variously called “sonatas” or “sinfonias” which would have been
  performed at different points in the Mass.
 Torelli wrote over 36 such works, the style contributing to the emergent forms of concerto
  grosso and solo concerto.
 Mainly, sinfonie follow the plan slow–fast–slow
 Sinfonia in D dates from around 1693
 Torelli was significantly influenced by Gabrieli
 Period of Baroque (c. 1600–1750)
                                                  – 22 –             M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   SL
5.   HL (Note: this section refers to question 4 at SL and question 5 at HL.)

     Symphony No 8 in C minor, Movement II (Scherzo, Allegro moderato) by Anton Bruckner
     (Identified piece, no score provided)

     Musical elements
      Large, late Romantic orchestra (triple wind, generous string and brass sections, timpani) though
       without “colouristic” instruments such as harp or extra percussion
      Begins C minor, but modulates through various keys and ends in E-flat major
      ¾ time (but at beginning difficult to tell whether 6/8)
      Allegro moderato marking (on recording crotchet = ca 108)
      Scherzo movement

     Musical structure
     Beginning of scherzo and trio in conventional ABA form; extract is actually “exposition” of a sonata-
     like structure, modulating from C minor to relative major. Falls clearly into distinct sections, each
     based on 1- or 2-bar phrases which are mostly repeated (often in ostinato fashion) or treated
     sequentially to form larger units:

     00:00:   2 bars, 2x 1-bar ideas repeated twice: A (horn) and B (violins tremolando):


              A.                                   B.




              00:04: 4 bars. A and B continue, violas and cellos introduce new ostinato motif C.
              Crescendo–diminuendo.



              C.




     00:11:   4 bars; 2-bar phrase, repeated twice. Pedal point in cellos and basses; tremolando
              figures based on dominant seventh arpeggio in violins and violas; motif A in oboes.

     00:17:   4 bars; 2-bar phrase, repeated major second higher (sequence). Arpeggio on
              diminished 7th chord in even quarter notes (lower strings); rising scalar patterns in
              tremolando violins; new motif based on diminished 7th chord in solo clarinet.

     00:24:   4x1 bars, each subsequent measure one scale degree higher (sequence). Arpeggios
              based on chord notes in even quarters in bass; rising quaver figure in tremolando violins
              and higher wind; new figure in viola (trem.) and clarinet. Crescendo.

     00:30:   6 bars, 3x2. (1.) 1-bar phrase repeated: motif A (horns); version of B (tremolando strings,
              horns, clarinets and flutes); new figure in oboes and first vln (trem.); variant of C (trumpet).
              (2.) Above repeated one scale degree higher (sequence). (3.) Begins as repetition one
                                             – 23 –            M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


         scale degree higher still, but ends as series of parallel triads (motif B) running down scale.
         Crescendo – diminuendo.

00:40:   8 bars, 2x2 + 4x1. (1.) 2-bar phrase: C in solo horn answered in next bar by oboe and
         clarinet; version of B in trem. strings; sustained minor chord in lower instruments.
         Repeated in major, semitone higher (sequence). (2.) 1-bar phrase: motif C (horn);
         pattern B (strings); new idea in eighth notes on beats 2+3 (oboe and clarinet). Essentially
         repeated and varied over chromatically rising bass, crescendo.

00:52:   4 bars. 1-bar phrase: A (horns and trombones), C (horns, trumpets, violas and cellos), B
         (woodwind and trem. violins) over pedal note in bass; A major, forte. Repeated 3 times,
         then transition bar based on B leads to:

00:59:   4 bars, 4x1. Similar to above, but E major, fortissimo. B now in horns, clarinets and
         omnipresent string tremolando; C in low horns, bassoons, basses and tuba; violin I (trem.)
         has inverted pedal note. 3x 1-bar phrases as above, with fourth bar based on B as
         transition to next section.

01:05:   8 bars, diminuendo followed by crescendo.. E-flat major. 4x 2-bar phrases, each (except
         last) consisting of one measure repeated twice. First phrase based on falling scalar
         figure; (pattern B) second and third on variants of it, each starting on a higher degree of
         the scale; trumpets counterpoint this with fanfare-like arpeggio figures deriving from C.
         Fourth phrase begins same as third, but in second bar continues scalar movement
         downward, leading to:

01:18:   4 bars. Sustained forte A-flat minor chord in brass and strings (trem.) with long
         suspension on B-flat (horns, vln trem.) that only resolves on last beat of final bar. Motif C
         (initial note omitted) repeated four times in trumpets; timpani, bassoons and basses
         oscillate between A-flat and E-flat, first in characteristic rhythmic ostinato, then in even
         eighth notes.

01:26:   8 bars: 2 x 4-bar phrases, ff. First 4 bars essentially repeat B and C four times in E-flat
         major, with accompaniment based on rhythmic ostinato of previous passage. Second 4-
         bar phrase reduces motif C to first and last two notes, again repeating it four times against
         repeated statements of B and the rhythmic ostinato.

01:39:   Extract closes with tutti E-flat major chord over timpani roll. Beginning of ensuing
         “development” section can be heard as track fades out.

Musical terminology
 accaciatura/acciacatura (grace note)
 motif
 tremol(and)o
 diminished seventh
 sequence/sequential
 inversion
 harmonic parallelism
 (inverted) pedal note
 arpeggio
 chromatic(ism)
 suspension
 (rhythmic) ostinato
                                            – 24 –           M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Musical context
Written 1887 (revised 1890) by Anton Bruckner (1824–1896), Austrian organist and composer,
chiefly remembered for his sacred music and symphonic works. His nine symphonies, epic in
scope and Romantic in their expressive language, clearly reveal his admiration for Wagner, but
their structural rigour at the same time reflects his strict training and debt to Renaissance church
music and the Austro-German classics. Clues to context can be found in: monumental size of
orchestral forces; use of valved brass (melodies given to trumpet); expressive, chromatic harmony;
constant dynamic changes, particularly diminuendo and crescendo, the latter often leading to huge
orchestral climaxes; and a somewhat “organ-like” deployment of the orchestra, with thick doublings
resembling “registration” rather than use of instrumental colour for its own sake – reflecting both
Bruckner’s own specific background and the general preferences of Austro-German composers at
this period.

NB: A useful score download of the 1892 Eulenburg edition, which is close enough to the
performing edition used on the recording (1890 version, ed. Haas) can be found at:

http://javanese.imslp.info/files/imglnks/usimg/2/23/IMSLP30702-PMLP16220-Bruckner-
WAB108FSeu.pdf
                                                 – 25 –           M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


5.   SL
6.   HL (Note: this section refers to question 5 at SL and question 6 at HL.)

     7 Days of Falling by Esbjorn Svensson
     (Unidentified piece, no score provided)

     Musical elements
      F minor in section A with use of modal harmony (F Phrygian over D-flat pedal bass note) in
       section B
      Use of 4/4 and 3/4 time signatures
      Andante moderato (crotchet/quarter note = 104)
      Piano, double bass, drum kit, percussion (including various cymbals, bells, tuned gongs) and
       electronics
      Use of subtle electronic processing
      Economic writing with distinctive and exploratory use of instrumental colour
      Introduction + ABA form
      Multi-layered texture
      Opening bass solo sets up a riff giving a sense of rhythmic and harmonic drive
      Melodically not complex
      Rhythmically varied and syncopated in places
      Use of pedal notes in section B
      Use of ostinato
      Use of improvisation
      Extensive use of major 7th chords, chromaticisms and upper triad structures. For example G-
       flat major 13/B-flat and G-flat major 7#11 in bar/measure 26 (01:10–01:12)
      Repetitive yet complex harmonic structure
      4-bar/measure phrases in section A and 5-bar/measure phrases in section B
      Transition from B into reprise of A using chordal vamp on piano

     Musical structure
     There are many possible interpretations of the structure of this excerpt. Here is one of them:

     0:00    Introduction: Starts with a repeated 4-bar/measure pizzicato harmonic ostinato for
             double bass. The piano enters on beat 3 of the 4th bar/measure (0:08) during the first
             time through with syncopated minim/half note block chords. The drums enter at the same
             place and set up an earthy groove characterized by use of wire brushes, rim-shots and
             wood block.

     0:16    A: Double bass continues harmonic ostinato with piano introducing the main melody using
             syncopation, triplet quarter notes; mainly conjunct melody but distinguished by use of
             larger intervals such as perfect 4ths and 5ths. Left hand continues to support harmonic
             changes with minim/half note block chords.

     0:42    After a brief turnaround that exposes the bass harmonic ostinato (0:34) the main melody
             is repeated by the piano, initiated by a broken chord but this time transposed up an
             octave.

     0:43    Using small suspended cymbals the drums add a gentle sustained cymbal crash to the
             groove using soft mallets (this sounds like it could be electronically modified to increase
             the duration and quality of sound), adding sonic variation by creating an enveloping
             metallic wash of sound.
                                            – 26 –           M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


0:59    B: Piano modulates to modal tonality (F Phrygian over a D-flat bass pedal note) via an
        abrupt F major chord introducing a new harmonic ostinato based on 5 chords using
        complex major 7th chords, added 13ths and sharpened 11ths. However, the bass note of
        the chords in the piano remains constant, almost like a rhythmic pedal note on D-flat.
        (This chord sequence is repeated 5 times throughout this section.) Double bass fills in
        with a few pizzicato improvisatory notes adding interest and maintaining harmonic
        stability.

1:13    Time signature changes to 3/4 for one bar/measure and then back to 4/4 for four
        bars/measures; double bass solo begins pianissimo, distorted by the use of Fx-pedal for
        guitar, with a gradual crescendo through the phrases. Using one pitch in each phrase, the
        bass plays arco, achieving a surging and dramatic crescendo/diminuendo effect,
        employing a glissando to link each phrase together.

1:22    Time signature changes to 3/4 then 4/4 as before. This happens three more times, at
        1:32, 1:42 and 1:52

2:01    Piano plays a wide-ranging arpeggio leading into double bass solo. Double bass is given
        lots of solo space to grow in intensity and explore the timbre of the instrument and special
        electronic effects, creating a haunting, wailing sound quality. Double bass plays solo on
        one pitch (F above middle C) for 3 bars/measures before piano joins (2:10) with a new
        chord sequence reminiscent of the harmonic shape used in section A, which acts as
        transition from a modal tonality back to diatonic F minor/A-flat major bi-tonality. Short
        piano improvisation over this riff leads to…

2.27    A: Opening material presented by full band. Double bass has harmonic ostinato,
        syncopated melody is presented in the piano, and drums provide rhythmic groove

2.35    Fade.

Musical terminology
Some of the words that could be relevant to criterion C include but are not limited to: harmonic
ostinato, riff, vamp, harmonics, fuzzed line (reminiscent of progressive rock guitar), groove,
syncopation, pedal note, electronica, timbre, arco, pizzicato, vibrato, improvisation, counter-
rhythms, harmonic language, jazz, pop, rock, Fx pedal, distortion, reverb, chorus, multi-layered
texture, ballad.

Musical context
 A contemporary jazz/pop fusion piece composed by Swedish musician Esbjorn Svensson and
  played by EST (Esbjorn Svensson Trio).
 Had the unusual distinction of charting on both the top jazz and popular music charts. Praised
  for its accessibility
 Studio recording.
 Release date: 2003.
 Stylistically, EST borrow from jazz, rock, electronica, contemporary western art music
  and Americana.
 Contemporary jazz/pop origin suggested by combination of almost pop-like thematic simplicity
  with intriguing harmonic twists and metric challenges. Harmonic choices mainly diatonic and
  triadic with many upper extensions and chromatic alterations.
 Appears to have been influenced by pianists such as Bill Evans and Keith Jarrett and the modal
  jazz music of Miles Davis.
                                                 – 27 –            M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


6.   SL
7.   HL (Note: this section refers to question 6 at SL and question 7 at HL.)

     Tavsan Hasag by The Ensemble Egschiglen (contemporary interpretation of traditional folk
     songs and dances from Mongolia)
     (Unidentified piece, no score provided)

     Musical elements
      Ensemble with plucked, bowed and struck instruments and throat singing. Plucked instruments
       include swan-necked lute (Tobshuur), long-necked spiked lute (Shanz) and possibly a bamboo
       mouth harp (Khel Khuur); bowed instruments include horse-head fiddle (Marin Khuur), bass
       horse-head fiddle (Ikh Khuur) and struck instruments include hammered dulcimer/zither
       (Youchin) and what sounds like a small tambourine-like instrument or some kind of monastic
       finger cymbals. [Note: candidates would not be expected to describe these instruments using
       these specific names.]
      Throat singing or overtone singing (Khoomii), involves the production of two distinctly audible
       pitches at the same time. Various techniques of throat singing are used:
       ► Chest Khoomii: a relatively bright basic note which sounds like whistling
       ► Throat Khoomii: creates a rough, almost rasping sound
       ► Kharkira Khoomii: uses the full resonance of the chest, creating a note an octave lower than
           that of throat khoomii
      Vocal melody based on interval of a fifth with added “passing notes”, vocal slides, grace notes,
       harmonics and flourishes.
      Wide vocal pitch range.
      Ostinato patterns.
      6/8 with steady pulse.
      Tempo: Allegro moderato, ca dotted crotchet/quarter note = 72.
      Repetitive motifs and phrases.
      Repetitive rhythmic patterns.
      Harmonic structure based on intervallic cadential relationship between tonic and dominant.
      Drone-like vocal quality.
      Agogic nuance/rhythmic emphasis placed on dotted crotchet/dotted quarter notes on beats 1
       and 4 by the Ikh Khuur, and quaver/eighth note beats 2, 3 and 5, 6 by tambourine-like
       instrument during the vocal sections, seems to give a sense of a gentle galloping movement
       one might experience when riding a horse.

     Musical structure
     There are many possible interpretations of the structure of this excerpt. Here is one of them:

     0:00    Instrumental introduction: Bass horse-head fiddle (Ikh Khuur), hammered dulcimer and
             tambourine-like instrument play ostinato motif based on interval of a fifth (four
             bars/measures long).

     0:08    Horse-head fiddle (Marin Khuur) enters with melodic motif (four bars/measure long).

     0:15    Melodic motif repeated but with variation in timbre and dynamics.

     0:21    Abrupt silence heralded by accented slap on tambourine-like instrument.

     0:22    Verse 1: Solo male voice enters using Khoomii throat-singing technique, with a new
             melodic motif echoing the initial ostinato motif set up in the introduction by the bass horse-
             head fiddle. Voice adds various notes and large interval leaps within a pentatonic
                                             – 28 –           M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


         framework (approximately F [tonic] – A-flat – B-flat – C – E-flat). Ostinato patterns
         continue in the instrumental accompaniment (four bars long).

0:30     Vocal melody repeated with some variation/melodic embellishments (four bars long).

0:37     Verse 2: Second solo male voice enters using Kharkhira Khoomi chest/throat singing,
         repeating vocal melody heard in verse 1 but sounding an octave lower, with overtones
         and with varied timbre (four bars long).

0:44     Vocal melody reiterates the 4-bar/measure phrase.

0:52     First solo male voice joins in with repeated melodic motif as at 0:22 (four bars/measures).

0:58     First solo male voice reiterates the 4-bar/measure melodic motif.

1:05     Second solo male voice enters with same melodic motif (minus anacrusis) an octave
         lower with overtones (four bars long) – repeated at 1:12.

1:19     Verse 3: Solo female vocalist enters with a delicate high throat singing – sounds almost
         like a whistle – with new melodic motif almost like a counter-melody or obbligato (almost
         electronic sounding or reminiscent of theremin sound quality) over the repetitive
         instrumental accompaniment including the swan-necked lute (Tobshuur) (four bars –
         repeated at 1:26).

1:33     Abrupt silence signaled by accent on tambourine-like instrument.

1:35     Verse 4: first and second male voices sing together mostly in octave unison with
         overtones – some individual alteration of melodic pitches and embellishments on the
         original melodic motif; repeated at 1:42.

1:49     Another vocal timbre is added to create a melodic motif an octave lower with overtones –
         giving the impression that three people are singing. Motif is repeated four times and ends
         rather abruptly, seemingly mid-phrase, by repeating final bar.

Musical terminology
Some of the words that could be relevant to criterion C include but are not limited to: ostinato,
throat singing (Khoomii), vocal overtones, horse-head fiddle (Marin Khuur and Ikh Khuur), swan-
necked lute (Tobshuur), melodic motifs, vocal timbre, vocal tessitura, hammered dulcimer or zither
(Youchin), melodic repetition, pentatonic, folk music, unison, traditional music, ensemble, virtuosic.

Musical context
 Mongolian folk song. Some candidates may mention other musical cultures which use similar
  vocal techniques (Tuvan, Tibetan), but examiners will have to use their judgement as to how
  persuasively they have argued for them.
 Song tells about five Kazakhs who robbed cattle from rich people and distributed them among
  the poor. Candidates may comment on ‘narrative’ or ‘dramatic’ nature of the piece, with its
  alternation between different voices.
 Contemporary interpretation and sophisticated arrangement of indigenous folk music
 Likely performed in community gatherings as a means of communicating news or re-telling
  a story
 Mongolian verb “to sing” is related to their word for “a way of speaking”. Instruments usually
  have only an accompanying role in folk songs although modern folklore ensembles such as the
  Egschiglen Ensemble have made attempts to restore and elevate instrumental function
                                          – 29 –           M17/6/MUSIC/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


 Mongolian music is comprised of various types of epic and lyrical songs and instrumental
  ensembles to accompany dancing.
