© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Biology
Standard level
Paper 1

8 November 2023

Zone A morning    Zone B morning   Zone C morning


45 minutes

Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y Answer all the questions.
y For each question, choose the answer you consider to be the best and indicate your choice on
  the answer sheet provided.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [30 marks].




                                                                                             8823 – 6010
     18 pages                                            © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
                                                  –2–                                           8823 – 6010


1.   Undifferentiated cells can become specialized to perform specific functions in a multicellular
     organism.




     What accounts for the differences in these cells?

     A.   Their chromosome number differs.

     B.   Their proteomes are different.

     C.   They have slightly different genomes.

     D.   They express different chromosomes.


2.   What was observed by electron microscopy that led to the falsification of the Davson–Danielli
     model and acceptance of the Singer–Nicolson model for cell membranes?

     A.   Peripheral proteins on the membrane surface

     B.   A phospholipid bilayer

     C.   The presence of transmembrane proteins

     D.   The outward orientation of the hydrophilic phospholipid heads
                                                  –3–                                            8823 – 6010


3.   In an experiment, a student placed five fresh potato cylinders of equal size in solutions of varying
     sucrose concentrations.

       Boiling tube



               Rack



      Fresh potato
      cylinder
                                0.00          0.25           0.50          0.75          1.00


                                             Sucrose solution concentration / M

     On completion of the experiment, the student concluded that the concentration of sucrose isotonic
     with the potato was 0.30 M. In how many of the solutions did the potato cylinders lose mass?

     A.    1

     B.    2

     C.    3

     D.    4




                                                                                                Turn over
                                                     –4–                                       8823 – 6010


4.   Pasteur boiled broth in swan-necked flasks. He then broke the neck of one flask (X) and left
     another one (Y) unbroken.




                      X                  Y                      X               Y

     What observations did he make about the broth in the flasks with broken and unbroken necks that
     led him to conclude that spontaneous generation does not occur?


                  X                  Y

     A.      Cloudy          Cloudy

     B.      Cloudy          Not cloudy

     C.      Not cloudy      Cloudy

     D.      Not cloudy      Not cloudy



5.   A microscope slide of an onion (Allium cepa) root tip shows the number of cells in different stages
     of mitosis.

                                  Stage of mitosis         Number of cells

                                     Interphase                  30

                                     Prophase                    10

                                    Metaphase                       3

                                     Anaphase                       5

                                     Telophase                      2

     What is the mitotic index?

     A.   0.2

     B.   0.3

     C.   0.4

     D.   0.6
                                                    –5–                                      8823 – 6010


6.   What distinguishes alpha-D-glucose from beta-D-glucose molecules?

     A.   The orientation of OH groups

     B.   The number of OH groups present

     C.   The number of carbon atoms in the ring

     D.   The position of the CH2OH group


7.   Water and methane molecules have different thermal properties despite similarities in mass.

                                                            water        methane

                   Properties



                   Density / g cm3 -1                         1.00          0.46

                   Boiling point / °C                       100.00      -161.00
                   Freezing point / °C                        0.00      -182.00
                   Specific heat capacity / J g-1 °C-1        4.19          2.20


                          Key:           carbon           oxygen     hydrogen

     What is a reason water remains in a liquid state over a larger range of temperature than methane?

     A.   Water molecules are non-polar.

     B.   Water molecules occupy less space.

     C.   There are fewer covalent bonds within water molecules.

     D.   There are stronger attractions between water molecules.


8.   In what units would body mass index (BMI) be measured?

     A.   kg m2

     B.   kg m-2

     C.   m kg2

     D.   m kg-2




                                                                                            Turn over
                                                     –6–                                  8823 – 6010


9.    The diagram shows the structure of the amino acid methionine with some atoms labelled.
      Which atom(s) would be removed when two molecules of methionine join to form a dipeptide?

                                                           B.
                                A.                                 C.


                                                                     D.




10.   Pancreatic amylase is an enzyme that breaks down starch into maltose. The graph shows how the
      rate of reaction of pancreatic amylase changes as the concentration of substrate increases.

                             Rate of reaction




                                             Concentration of substrate

      What causes the rate of reaction to level off?

      A.   Maltose is reducing the activity of the enzyme.

      B.   The concentration of starch is too low.

      C.   The active sites of pancreatic amylase are saturated.

      D.   All the pancreatic amylase has been consumed in the reaction.
                                                  –7–                                          8823 – 6010


11.   Which subunits would be connected by hydrogen bonds in a DNA molecule?

      A.   Phosphate to deoxyribose sugar

      B.   Thymine to deoxyribose sugar

      C.   Adenine to uracil

      D.   Cytosine to guanine


12.   The diagram shows the arrangement of the apparatus used to carry out an experiment with
      germinating seeds. The levels of coloured water in the glass tubes show the results at the end of
      the experiment. Initially, the levels of coloured water in the glass tubes were equal.


                                          Glass
                                           tube




              Germinating                                                      Sterilized
                seeds                                                         dead seeds




      Potassium hydroxide                                                     Potassium hydroxide
            solution                                                                solution
                                             Coloured water

      What does the experiment show?

      A.   Potassium hydroxide has absorbed the oxygen produced by photosynthesis.

      B.   Oxygen has been absorbed by the seeds in aerobic respiration.

      C.   Anaerobic respiration takes place during seed germination.

      D.   Heat is produced by germinating seeds during respiration.




                                                                                               Turn over
                                                 –8–                                           8823 – 6010


13.   The image shows the separation of photosynthetic pigments in a spinach leaf by thin layer
      chromatography and the colours that appear on a chromatogram.

                                       Solvent front        Key:
                                                            Pigment             Colour
                                                             carotene          Orange
                                        carotene
                                                            Chlorophyll a       Blue-green
                                                            Chlorophyll b       Yellow-green
                                                            Xanthophylls        Yellow
                                       chlorophyll a


                                       chlorophyll b



                                       xanthophylls




                                       Origin




      What colour is the pigment with Rf value 0.2?

      A.   Yellow

      B.   Yellow-green

      C.   Blue-green

      D.   Orange
                                                    –9–                                            8823 – 6010


14.   All chromosomes present in a bacterial cell and a unicellular fungus were extracted and their
      structure analyzed.

      What would be a common feature of chromosomes found in both types of cells?

      A.    They form pairs.

      B.    They are bound to histone proteins.

      C.    They contain the same bases.

      D.    They have centromeres.


15.   What occurs during the first division of meiosis?

      A.    Replication of DNA

      B.    Separation of chromatids

      C.    Production of two identical cells

      D.    Halving of the chromosome number


16.   Cystic fibrosis is a genetic disorder that leads to lung damage. Two parents both have a recessive
      allele of the gene for cystic fibrosis and have no signs or symptoms of the disease. Their first child
      has cystic fibrosis. What is the probability that their second child will have the disease?

      A.    0%

      B.    25 %

      C.    50 %

      D.    100 %




                                                                                                  Turn over
                                                 – 10 –                                   8823 – 6010


17.   The diagram shows the DNA profile of two couples and two children.

                        Couple X             Couple Y
                   [ Mother Father ]     [ Mother Father ]       Child 1    Child 2




      What is the most probable relationship between them?

      A.   Couple X are the parents of both children.

      B.   Couple Y are the parents of both children.

      C.   Couple X are the parents of child 1 and couple Y are the parents of child 2.

      D.   Couple X are the parents of child 2 and couple Y are the parents of child 1.
                                                     – 11 –                                       8823 – 6010


18.   Mycena interrupta lives in small colonies on moist, rotting dead wood in rainforests. It feeds on this
      plant material by breaking it down with enzymes before ingestion.

      What best describes the mode of nutrition of this species?

      A.    Detritivore

      B.    Saprotroph

      C.    Consumer

      D.    Herbivore


19.   The pyramid of energy shows the annual gross productivity for each trophic level in the
      Silver Springs ecosystem in Florida.

                                                               Energy / kJ m−2 y−1

                                                                          88

                                                                         1609

                                                                        14 146

                                                                        87 402



      What does the pyramid show?

      A.    Most energy is lost by the autotrophs.

      B.    There are a larger number of herbivores than carnivores.

      C.    The biggest loss of energy is when sunlight reflects from plants.

      D.    The energy in the trophic levels is affected by seasonal changes.


20.   What conditions favour peat formation?


      A.        acidic        aerobic

      B.        acidic       anaerobic

      C.       alkaline       aerobic

      D.       alkaline      anaerobic




                                                                                                  Turn over
                                                                                          – 12 –                                     8823 – 6010


21.   The graph shows how the worldwide use of fossil fuels has increased from 1800 to 2019.

                                                    140
       World use of fossil fuels / Petawatt-hours



                                                    120
                                                                                                                                   Gas
                                                    100


                                                     80

                                                                                                                                   Oil
                                                     60


                                                     40


                                                     20                                                                            Coal


                                                      0
                                                       1800             1850             1900              1950             2019

                                                                                            Year

      How has the increased combustion of fossil fuels contributed significantly to global warming?

      A.                                            The heat released raises the temperature of the air.

      B.                                            The products of combustion absorb long wave radiation.

      C.                                            Carbon dioxide produced by combustion prevents radiation from the Sun reaching Earth.

      D.                                            Combustion causes ozone depletion, which enhances the greenhouse effect.


22.   What is a result of natural selection?

      A.                                            Variation among members of a species

      B.                                            Heritable mutations occurring in the gametes

      C.                                            A decrease in the frequency of certain characteristics

      D.                                            Production of more offspring than survive to reproductive age
                                                 – 13 –                                        8823 – 6010


23.   The starry thyme-moss (Mnium stellare) and the badge moss (Plagiomnium insigne) are both
      bryophytes in the order Bryales. What must they have in common?

      A.   They have vascular tissue to transport water.

      B.   They reproduce by producing seeds.

      C.   They are classified into the same class.

      D.   They are classified into the same genus.


24.   The wings of bats and insects have both evolved for flight. The bats have bones to strengthen their
      wings and the insects have veins.




                      Bat wing                                           Insect wing

      What is a valid comparison of bat and insect wings?

      A.   They are homologous structures formed by adaptive radiation.

      B.   They are analogous structures evolving from a common ancestor.

      C.   They are homologous structures as both have strengthened wings.

      D.   They are analogous structures as both allow flight.




                                                                                               Turn over
                                                  – 14 –                                        8823 – 6010


25.   A mixture of starch solution and amylase was placed in dialysis tubing in a beaker of water to
      simulate digestion and absorption.




                                                                        dialysis tubing

                                                                        starch solution
                                                                        and amylase


                                                                        distilled water




      What changes would be expected in the concentrations of sugar and starch in the distilled water
      and inside the dialysis tubing after one hour?


             Starch in distilled water    Sugar in dialysis tubing     Sugar in distilled water

      A.             increased                   unchanged                    unchanged

      B.            unchanged                     increased                    decreased

      C.            unchanged                     increased                    increased

      D.            unchanged                    unchanged                     increased
                                                   – 15 –                                          8823 – 6010


26.   What is a reason antibiotics are not used to treat the strains of viruses that cause influenza?

      A.    Influenza is caused by many different strains of virus.

      B.    Viruses have become resistant to antibiotics.

      C.    Viruses lack a metabolism.

      D.    Antigens of viruses have a high rate of mutation.


27.   The body has developed various methods to fight against infectious disease.

            I.     Fibrinogen is converted to fibrin, which prevents the entry of bacteria and loss of blood.
            II.    Phagocytic white blood cells recognize pathogens and ingest and destroy them.
            III.   Lymphocytes produce antibodies in response to pathogens in the blood.

      Which provides specific immunity to disease?

      A.    I and II only

      B.    II and III only

      C.    I, II and III

      D.    III only




                                                                                                  Turn over
                                                 – 16 –                                     8823 – 6010


28.   The spirometer reading shows the change of volume of the lungs during normal breathing.

                        3.0

                        2.5

                        2.0

      Lung volume / L   1.5

                        1.0

                        0.5

                        0.0
                                        4          8         12          16

                                                  Time / s

      What are the tidal volume and the ventilation rate?


               Tidal volume / L       Ventilation rate / breaths min-1

      A.              3.0                               4

      B.              3.0                              15

      C.              0.5                               4

      D.              0.5                              15
                                                – 17 –                                          8823 – 6010


29.   The use of neonicotinoid pesticides in agriculture has been restricted because they reduce the
      survival of useful insect populations such as bees. A study compared the distance moved in one
      day by bees poisoned with neonicotinoid and healthy bees.


                                        1.2                              Key:

                                                                                 Healthy bees
                                        1.0
                                                                                 Bees poisoned
                                                                                 with neonicotinoid
                                        0.8
                   Mean relative
                   distance covered     0.6
                   by bees per day

                                        0.4


                                        0.2


                                        0.0
                                                 Bee groups

      What explains the results obtained for the bees poisoned with neonicotinoids?

      A.   Muscle stimulation decreased because acetylcholine secretion was blocked.

      B.   Muscles were overstimulated as acetylcholine accumulated in synaptic clefts.

      C.   Muscle paralysis resulted from acetylcholine denaturation.

      D.   Muscle contraction decreased as less acetylcholine could bind to receptors.




                                                                                             Turn over
                                                  – 18 –                                          8823 – 6010


30.   The hormone leptin has been tested on patients with clinical obesity to try to treat the disease.
      From where is leptin secreted, where does it act and what is its function?


                Secreted from              Acts on                 Function

      A.        adipose tissue          hypothalamus          inhibits appetite

      B.        hypothalamus            adipose tissue        inhibits appetite

      C.        hypothalamus            small intestine       inhibits absorption

      D.        adipose tissue          small intestine       inhibits absorption
Disclaimer:
Content used in IB assessments is taken from authentic, third-party sources. The views expressed within them belong to their
individual authors and/or publishers and do not necessarily reflect the views of the IB.

References:
13.    Motten, AF, 1995. Diversity of photosynthetic pigments. [PDF online] Available at: https://www.ableweb.org/biologylabs/
       wp-content/uploads/volumes/vol-16/6-motten.pdf [Accessed 31 August 2022]. Source adapted.
17.    Barral, M, 2020. The Birth of Genetic Fingerprinting, an Invaluable Tool for CSI. [online] Available at:
       https://www.bbvaopenmind.com/en/science/scientific-insights/the-birth-of-genetic-fingerprinting-an-invaluable-tool-for-csi/
       [Accessed 1 September 2022]. Source adapted.
21.    Hannah Ritchie and Pablo Rosado (2017) - “Fossil Fuels” Published online at OurWorldInData.org. Retrieved from:
       https://ourworldindata.org/fossil-fuels [Online Resource]. Data source: Energy Institute Statistical Review of World Energy
       (2023).
24.    Bat image: Mike's Birds from Riverside, CA, US. Flying Fox, Cairns, Queensland, Australia, Jan. 6, 2017. Accessed at:
       https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fruit_Bat_(31871913674).jpg.
       Dragonfly image: Nonenmacher, R. A. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Dragonfly_ran-103.jpg. Licensed under
       CC BY-SA 3.0 DEED: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/deed.en.
29.    Charreton M, et al, 2015. A Locomotor Deficit Induced by Sublethal Doses of Pyrethroid and Neonicotinoid Insecticides
       in the Honeybee Apis mellifera. PLoS ONE 10(12): e0144879. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0144879. Licensed
       under https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
All other texts, graphics and illustrations © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
