© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Biology
Higher level
Paper 1

8 November 2023

Zone A morning    Zone B morning   Zone C morning


1 hour

Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y Answer all the questions.
y For each question, choose the answer you consider to be the best and indicate your choice on
  the answer sheet provided.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [40 marks].




                                                                                             8823 – 6007
     20 pages                                            © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
                                                   –2–                                           8823 – 6007


1.   Stargardt’s is an inherited disease caused by the mutation of a gene associated with vitamin A
     processing in the eye. It results in degeneration of receptor cells and loss of vision. For what
     reason are stem cells suitable to treat this disease?

     A.    They can be taken from the eye of an embryo and transplanted into a patient.

     B.    They can produce vitamin A in newborn babies.

     C.    They can develop into receptor cells and prevent blindness.

     D.    They can be removed from an embryo to detect early onset of the disease.


2.   What is a function of cholesterol in the cell membrane?

     A.    To regulate fluidity

     B.    To store energy

     C.    To provide a channel for transport

     D.    To hold adjacent cells together


3.   In an experiment, a student placed five fresh potato cylinders of equal size in solutions of varying
     sucrose concentrations.

       Boiling tube



               Rack



      Fresh potato
      cylinder
                                  0.00          0.25         0.50          0.75          1.00


                                             Sucrose solution concentration / M

     On completion of the experiment, the student concluded that the concentration of sucrose isotonic
     with the potato was 0.30 M. In how many of the solutions did the potato cylinders lose mass?

     A.    1

     B.    2

     C.    3

     D.    4
                                                  –3–                                           8823 – 6007


4.   Water striders of the Gerridae family of insects have areas of their legs covered with a
     hydrophobic substance.




     What property of water makes it possible for them to walk on its surface?

     A.   Adhesion of water molecules

     B.   Cohesion of water molecules

     C.   High specific heat capacity

     D.   High density


5.   What is the function of the primers in the polymerase chain reaction (PCR)?

     A.   To separate the two strands of DNA

     B.   To bind to the complementary strands of DNA

     C.   To determine the region of DNA that will be copied

     D.   To activate the Taq DNA polymerase




                                                                                                Turn over
                                                 –4–                                          8823 – 6007


6.   The diagram shows the arrangement of the apparatus used to carry out an experiment with
     germinating seeds. The levels of coloured water in the glass tubes show the results at the end of
     the experiment. Initially, the levels of coloured water in the glass tubes were equal.


                                         Glass
                                          tube




             Germinating                                                      Sterilized
               seeds                                                         dead seeds




     Potassium hydroxide                                                     Potassium hydroxide
           solution                                                                solution
                                            Coloured water

     What does the experiment show?

     A.   Potassium hydroxide has absorbed the oxygen produced by photosynthesis.

     B.   Anaerobic respiration takes place during seed germination.

     C.   Oxygen has been absorbed by the seeds in aerobic respiration.

     D.   Heat is produced by germinating seeds during respiration.


7.   How does the study of rock deposition provide evidence of when organisms first started to
     photosynthesise?

     A.   Fossils of leaves were found from the first plants to photosynthesise.

     B.   Analysis of the rocks for magnesium indicate when chlorophyll could be synthesised.

     C.   The carbon content of rock indicates the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.

     D.   Rocks of a different colour were deposited when oxygen was released by photosynthesis.
                                                  –5–                                8823 – 6007


8.   The table shows the approximate genome size of four species of organisms.

                                                                     Genome size /
                     Species                  Type of organism
                                                                       bp × 106

            Escherichia coli                      Bacterium                      5

            Drosophila melanogaster                 Insect                  140

            Homo sapiens                          Mammal                   3000

            Paris japonica                          Plant               150 000

     What can be deduced from this information?

     A.   Plants have more chromosomes than humans.

     B.   The genetic code is universal.

     C.   The amount of functional DNA varies between organisms.

     D.   The genome size does not always indicate the complexity of the organism.


9.   What occurs during the first division of meiosis?

     A.   Replication of DNA

     B.   Separation of chromatids

     C.   Halving of the chromosome number

     D.   Production of two identical cells




                                                                                     Turn over
                                                 –6–                                      8823 – 6007


10.   The diagram shows the DNA profile of two couples and two children.

                        Couple X             Couple Y
                   [ Mother Father ]     [ Mother Father ]       Child 1    Child 2




      What is the most probable relationship between them?

      A.   Couple X are the parents of child 1 and couple Y are the parents of child 2.

      B.   Couple X are the parents of child 2 and couple Y are the parents of child 1.

      C.   Couple X are the parents of both children.

      D.   Couple Y are the parents of both children.
                                                    –7–                                         8823 – 6007


11.   Which factor(s) would be expected to vary in a closed terrestrial mesocosm?

           I.       Carbon content
           II.      Temperature
           III.     Biomass

      A.   I only

      B.   I and II only

      C.   II and III only

      D.   I, II and III


12.   The pyramid of energy shows the annual gross productivity for each trophic level in the
      Silver Springs ecosystem in Florida.

                                                             Energy / kJ m−2 y−1

                                                                        88

                                                                       1609

                                                                      14 146

                                                                      87 402



      What does the pyramid show?

      A.   Most energy is lost by the autotrophs.

      B.   There are a larger number of herbivores than carnivores.

      C.   The biggest loss of energy is when sunlight reflects from plants.

      D.   The energy in the trophic levels is affected by seasonal changes.




                                                                                                Turn over
                                                                                             –8–                                     8823 – 6007


13.   The graph shows how the worldwide use of fossil fuels has increased from 1800 to 2019.

                                                    140
       World use of fossil fuels / Petawatt-hours



                                                    120
                                                                                                                                   Gas
                                                    100


                                                     80

                                                                                                                                   Oil
                                                     60


                                                     40


                                                     20                                                                            Coal


                                                      0
                                                       1800             1850                1900           1950             2019

                                                                                              Year

      How has the increased combustion of fossil fuels contributed significantly to global warming?

      A.                                            The heat released raises the temperature of the air.

      B.                                            Combustion causes ozone depletion, which enhances the greenhouse effect.

      C.                                            Carbon dioxide produced by combustion prevents radiation from the Sun reaching Earth.

      D.                                            The products of combustion absorb long wave radiation.


14.   Dogs are descended from the grey wolf, Canis lupus, by selective breeding and are thought to be
      first domesticated about 30 000 years ago. What is a result of this selective breeding?

      A.                                            Many different species of dogs exist.

      B.                                            The legs of different breeds of dogs show discrete variation.

      C.                                            Dogs have a variety of phenotypes.

      D.                                            The tails of dogs are analogous structures.
                                                  –9–                                     8823 – 6007


15.   How does overuse of antibiotics make them less effective?

      A.   It makes patients develop antibiotic resistance.

      B.   It can cause a mutation in bacteria.

      C.   It causes antibiotics to change due to natural selection.

      D.   It increases the number of bacteria better adapted for survival.


16.   The starry thyme-moss (Mnium stellare) and the badge moss (Plagiomnium insigne) are both
      bryophytes in the order Bryales. What must they have in common?

      A.   They are classified into the same class.

      B.   They are classified into the same genus.

      C.   They have vascular tissue to transport water.

      D.   They reproduce by producing seeds.


17.   The image shows a model of a human heart with one chamber labelled R.




      Which statement is most accurate?

      A.   When the pressure in R increases the semilunar valve closes.

      B.   R contains the sinoatrial node, which initiates heartbeat.

      C.   Blood passes from R into the pulmonary artery.

      D.   Deoxygenated blood in the vena cava flows directly into R.


                                                                                          Turn over
                                                 – 10 –                                     8823 – 6007


18.   The spirometer reading shows the change of volume of the lungs during normal breathing.

                        3.0

                        2.5

                        2.0

      Lung volume / L   1.5

                        1.0

                        0.5

                        0.0
                                        4          8         12          16

                                                  Time / s

      What are the tidal volume and the ventilation rate?


               Tidal volume / L       Ventilation rate / breaths min-1

      A.              3.0                               4

      B.              3.0                              15

      C.              0.5                               4

      D.              0.5                              15
                                                   – 11 –                                         8823 – 6007


19.   Four electrical stimuli of increasing size are applied to a neuron at times t1 to t4. The graph shows
      the effects of each electrical stimulus on the membrane potential of the neuron at the point where
      the stimulus is applied.


                         30


                           0


       Membrane
       potential / mV



                        −70



                                 t1     t2        t3           t4

                                                   Time / ms

      What can be concluded from the graph?

      A.    The stronger the stimulus, the greater the action potential.

      B.    Only the stimulus at t4 causes a change in membrane potential.

      C.    The stimulus at t4 caused a total increase of membrane potential of 30 mV.

      D.    The threshold potential is approximately -40 mV.


20.   The hormone leptin has been tested on patients with clinical obesity to try to treat the disease.
      From where is leptin secreted, where does it act and what is its function?


                Secreted from                Acts on                Function

      A.        adipose tissue          hypothalamus           inhibits appetite

      B.        hypothalamus            adipose tissue         inhibits appetite

      C.        hypothalamus            small intestine        inhibits absorption

      D.        adipose tissue          small intestine        inhibits absorption




                                                                                                 Turn over
                                                  – 12 –                                      8823 – 6007


21.   What enzyme removes the RNA primers and replaces them with DNA during DNA replication?

      A.   DNA polymerase I

      B.   DNA polymerase III

      C.   DNA gyrase

      D.   DNA primase


22.   Sanger sequencing uses nucleotides containing dideoxyribose instead of deoxyribose. How do
      these nucleotides block DNA replication?

      A.   They inhibit DNA polymerase.

      B.   They prevent the formation of base pairs.

      C.   They prevent the formation of sugar–phosphate bonds.

      D.   They hold the two DNA strands together.


23.   What happens to mRNA after transcription in eukaryotic cells?

      A.   Binding to the large subunit of the ribosome

      B.   Removal of introns

      C.   Addition of exons

      D.   Attachment of an amino acid


24.   What is a feature of enzyme inhibition?

      A.   In the pathway that converts threonine to isoleucine, end-product inhibition occurs when
           isoleucine binds to threonine.

      B.   Increasing the amount of substrate will increase the amount of product when a reaction is
           inhibited by non-competitive inhibitors.

      C.   Competitive inhibitors prevent catalysis by binding to an allosteric site.

      D.   Non-competitive inhibitors are a different shape from the substrate.
                                                 – 13 –                                     8823 – 6007


25.   Aerobic cell respiration using glucose can be summarized with an equation.

                                    C6H12O6 + 6O2 → 6CO2 + 6H2O

      At what stage(s) is carbon dioxide produced?

                                  Link reaction          Electron
                Glycolysis
                                 and Krebs cycle     transport chain

      A.                                  ü

      B.            ü                                       ü

      C.                                  ü                 ü

      D.            ü                     ü



26.   Scientists discovered from an electron tomogram of a mitochondrion that the inner membrane of a
      mitochondrion invaginates to form cristae through narrow tubes. How does an image produced by
      tomography differ from an image produced by conventional electron microscopy?

      A.   Organelles can be viewed in colour.

      B.   Tomography provides greater magnification.

      C.   Three-dimensional images can be produced.

      D.   Live tissue can be observed.




                                                                                            Turn over
                                               – 14 –                                      8823 – 6007


27.   The diagram shows the apparatus used by Calvin in his experiments to determine the biochemical
      details of photosynthesis.


                                                                  Suspension of
                                                                  Chlorella algae

                                  Light
                                                            Radioactive carbon dioxide
                                                            injected into ‘lollipop’




                                                        Alcohol




      In what compound(s) was radioactive carbon found?

           I.       Ribulose bisphosphate
           II.      Glycerate 3-phosphate
           III.     Glucose

      A.   I only

      B.   III only

      C.   I and III only

      D.   I, II and III
                                                    – 15 –                                 8823 – 6007


28.   The diagram shows a potometer.




                        Leafy shoot

                                                                     Air bubble




      Under what weather conditions would the air bubble move fastest towards the shoot?

      A.   Warm and humid

      B.   Warm and dry

      C.   Cold and humid

      D.   Cold and dry


29.   What happens in the transport of organic compounds in plants?

      A.   High hydrostatic pressure is created at the source.

      B.   Organic compounds are loaded into phloem sieve tubes by diffusion.

      C.   A raised hydrostatic pressure at the sink causes a flow of solutes.

      D.   Mass flow occurs from an area of low to an area of high pressure.


30.   What is an advantage of micropropagation?

      A.   Production of plants without application of hormones

      B.   Genetically modified plants are obtained

      C.   Allows development of hybrids

      D.   Production of virus-free plant strains




                                                                                           Turn over
                                                                  – 16 –                                  8823 – 6007


31.   The graph shows the percentage of plants that flower according to the period of light for
      two different plant species, Kalanchoe blossfeldiana and Lolium perenne, one of which is a
      short-day plant.

                                              100                                    Key:
                    Flowering induction / %                                                 Kalanchoe blossfeldiana
                                                                                            Lolium perenne



                                               50




                                               0
                                                    10    12     14     16      18

                                                         Light period / hours

      Which plant would be described as a short-day plant?

      A.    Kalanchoe blossfeldiana, as flowering is stimulated by long nights

      B.    Kalanchoe blossfeldiana, as flowering is stimulated by short days

      C.    Lolium perenne, as flowering is stimulated by long nights

      D.    Lolium perenne, as flowering is stimulated by short days


32.   How do cells at the end of meiosis I differ from cells at the end of meiosis II?

      A.    DNA at the end of meiosis I differs from DNA at the end of meiosis II due to crossing over.

      B.    There is less DNA at the end of meiosis I, due to separation of homologous chromosomes.

      C.    The cells are diploid at the end of meiosis I and haploid at the end of meiosis II.

      D.    There are more chromatids per cell at the end of meiosis I than at the end of meiosis II.
                                                  – 17 –                                         8823 – 6007


33.   Mendel crossed pea plants with round yellow seeds with pea plants with wrinkled green seeds and
      found that all the pea plants in the F1 generation had round yellow seeds. In the F2 generation,
      556 pea plants were produced. Assuming independent assortment, what is the most probable
      number of round green seeds produced?

      A.   0

      B.   32

      C.   101

      D.   556


34.   Some species could potentially hybridize but never do in the wild. What could be an example of
      temporal isolation?

      A.   Different song patterns by grasshoppers of the genus Chorthippus

      B.   Sage plants Salvia apiana and Salvia mellifera, pollinated by different species of insects

      C.   Cicadas Magicicada tredecim become sexually mature every 13 years and
           Magicicada septedecim every 17 years

      D.   Pygmy three-toed sloths (Bradypus pygmaeus), isolated on the island of Escudo de
           Veraguas from mainland sloths


35.   Allergic conjunctivitis can be stimulated by exposure to pollen and leads to watery, itchy and
      red eyes. What is the cause of this condition?

      A.   White blood cells release antihistamines in response to allergens.

      B.   Allergens in pollen stimulate the release of histamines.

      C.   White blood cells produce antibodies to destroy pollen.

      D.   There is a similar structure between the antigens of pollen and pathogens.




                                                                                                 Turn over
                                                 – 18 –                                          8823 – 6007


36.   Blood groups depend on the presence and absence of antigens on the surface of red blood cells.
      Antibodies in blood plasma react against foreign antigens, causing agglutination. The table shows
      the antigens and antibodies present in each blood group.

           Blood group            A              B             AB            O

           Antigens               A              B             A and B       none

           Antibodies             anti-B         anti-A        none          anti-A and anti-B

      What deductions can be made?

      A.    A person of blood group O can receive blood of any blood type.

      B.    A person of blood group B can receive O blood.

      C.    A child whose parents are blood groups AB and O will have two types of antibodies.

      D.    A child whose parents are both blood group A can only produce anti-B antibodies.


37.   What occurs during skeletal muscle contraction?

      A.    Myosin and actin filaments decrease in length.

      B.    Calcium ions bind to troponin.

      C.    ATP binds to actin heads.

      D.    The dark band gets shorter.
                                                 – 19 –                                     8823 – 6007


38.   The diagram shows blood flowing through a hemodialyser to treat kidney failure. The arrows show
      the direction of blood flow.




                                                            Dialyser




                   X                                                           Y




                       Blood pump




      Which statement describes what happens in blood during hemodialysis?

      A.   Useful substances are selectively reabsorbed.

      B.   More urea will be found in the blood at Y than at X.

      C.   Hemodialysis removes all salts from the blood.

      D.   Glucose can diffuse into or out of the blood during hemodialysis.




                                                                                            Turn over
                                                 – 20 –                                       8823 – 6007


39.   What stage of spermatogenesis produces haploid cells from diploid cells?

      A.   Spermatogonia to primary spermatocytes

      B.   Primary spermatocytes to secondary spermatocytes

      C.   Secondary spermatocytes to spermatids

      D.   Spermatids to sperm cells


40.   The diagram shows the location of the zona pellucida, a layer of glycoproteins on the human ovum.



                                                                             zona pellucida




      What is the main function of the zona pellucida?

      A.   To prevent polyspermy

      B.   To form polar bodies

      C.   To provide amino acids

      D.   To release FSH
Disclaimer:
Content used in IB assessments is taken from authentic, third-party sources. The views expressed within them belong to their
individual authors and/or publishers and do not necessarily reflect the views of the IB.

References:
4.     Pérez, Nicolás. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:02_Villaverde_de_Pontones_Rio_Aguanaz_Gerris_lacustris_
       Ni.jpg. Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0 DEED https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/deed.en. Image adapted.
10.    Barral, M, 2020. The Birth of Genetic Fingerprinting, an Invaluable Tool for CSI. [online] Available at:
       https://www.bbvaopenmind.com/en/science/scientific-insights/the-birth-of-genetic-fingerprinting-an-invaluable-tool-for-csi/
       [Accessed 1 September 2022]. Source adapted.
13.    Hannah Ritchie and Pablo Rosado (2017) – “Fossil Fuels” Published online at OurWorldInData.org. Retrieved from:
       https://ourworldindata.org/fossil-fuels [Online Resource]. Data source: Energy Institute Statistical Review of World Energy
       (2023). CC BY 4.0 DEED.
17.    Patrick J Lynch; illustrator; C Carl Jaffe; MD; cardiologist Yale University Center for Advanced Instructional Media Medical
       Illustrations by Patrick Lynch, generated for multimedia teaching projects by the Yale University School of Medicine,
       Center for Advanced Instructional Media, 1987–2000. Accessed at: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Heart_
       anterior_exterior_view.jpg Licensed under CC BY 2.5 DEED: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.5/. Image
       adapted.
28.    Wikibooks, 2020. School Science/Potometer. [online] Available at: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/School_Science/
       Potometer [Accessed 12 September 2022]. Drawn by Theresa Knott and Rachel Knott. CC BY-SA 3.0.
31.    Engelmann, W, 2015. Photoperiodism: The Calendar of Plants. In: Mancuso, S and Shabala, S (eds) Rhythms in Plants.
       Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-20517-5_8. Source adapted.
40.    Vandyke Carter, H and Gray, H, 1918. Human ovum. [online] Available at: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Egg_cell
       [Accessed 12 September 2022]. Source adapted.
All other texts, graphics and illustrations © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
