© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Design technology
Standard level
Paper 1

2 November 2023

Zone A morning    Zone B morning   Zone C morning


45 minutes

Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y Answer all the questions.
y For each question, choose the answer you consider to be the best and indicate your choice on
  the answer sheet provided.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [30 marks].




                                                                                             8823 – 6202
     17 pages                                            © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
                                                –2–                                         8823 – 6202


1.   Which of the following anthropometric considerations apply to the sandal shown in Figure 1?

                                          Figure 1: Sandal




          I.     Reach
          II.    Range of sizes
          III.   Adjustability

     A.   I and II only

     B.   I and III only

     C.   II and III only

     D.   I, II and III
                                                 –3–                                         8823 – 6202


2.   What is the percentile used to determine distance D (floor to handle) in supermarket shopping
     carts, such as the one shown in Figure 2?

                              Figure 2: A supermarket shopping cart




           D




                                   [Source: 3DMAVR / Shutterstock.com]

     A.   5th

     B.   50th

     C.   95th

     D.   5th–95th




                                                                                             Turn over
                                                  –4–                          8823 – 6202


3.

                                       Figure 3: A kitchen tool




                                     [Source: FreeImages.com/geezerpk]

     Surface texture is added to kitchen tool handles (Figure 3) to improve…

     A.   aesthetics.

     B.   tolerances.

     C.   grip.

     D.   alertness.


4.   Anthropometrics is the study of a human’s…

     A.   relationships with objects, systems and environments.

     B.   body measurements.

     C.   bodily tolerances.

     D.   abilities and senses.


5.   What is a major challenge for resource management in the 21st century?

     A.   Development of renewable and sustainable resources

     B.   Installation of end-of-pipe technologies

     C.   Dematerialization of complex designs

     D.   Increased reconditioning
                                                 –5–                                           8823 – 6202


6.   Petit Pli® is a company that designs clothes for children as they grow. This means the child can
     wear the same pair of trousers (pants) from 9 months up to 4 years (48 months), see Figure 4.

                                     Figure 4: Petit Pli® trousers




     09    months                                      48        months




     This is an example of…

     A.   reduce.

     B.   re-engineering.

     C.   repairing.

     D.   recycling.


7.   What is the main advantage of hydrogen fuel cell-powered trains compared to electric-
     powered trains?

     A.   Zero CO2 emissions

     B.   Lower set-up costs

     C.   Faster transportation

     D.   Recharge ability


8.   In green design, the prevention principle refers to…

     A.   providing absolute proof of environmental damage.

     B.   remedying environmental harm that has been done.

     C.   waiting for environmental damage to occur.

     D.   the avoidance of environmental hazards.




                                                                                               Turn over
                                                   –6–                                            8823 – 6202


9.    31 % of plastic waste ends up in landfills, 39 % is incinerated (burned) and only 30 % is recycled.
      The ideal waste mitigation strategy to combat this problem is:

      A.    Dematerialization

      B.    Circular economy

      C.    Re-engineering

      D.    Reconditioning


10.

                              Figure 5: A combined coffee pot and toaster




                                     Removed for copyright reasons




      The combined coffee pot and toaster shown in Figure 5 is an example of…

      A.    process innovation.

      B.    reconditioning.

      C.    converging technology.

      D.    bio-mimicry.
                                                  –7–                                          8823 – 6202


11.   Figure 6 shows a 3D printed guitar body that was manufactured as a single part.

                                  Figure 6: A 3D printed guitar body




      Which of the following would be the best method to 3D print the guitar body?

      A.   Stereolithography (SLA)

      B.   Selective laser sintering (SLS)

      C.   Laminated object manufacturing (LOM)

      D.   Fused deposition modelling (FDM)


12.   Aesthetic models may be used to evaluate…

      A.   density.

      B.   strength.

      C.   texture.

      D.   hardness.


13.   Accurate safety testing of a new car design using finite element analysis (FEA) is best performed
      using a…

      A.   virtual prototype.

      B.   surface computer aided design (CAD) model.

      C.   scale model.

      D.   physical prototype.




                                                                                               Turn over
                                                       –8–                                        8823 – 6202


14.   Which mechanical property is most relevant to pins such as the ones shown in Figure 7?

                                         Figure 7: Examples of pins




				                    [Source: FreeImages.com/SteveTaint]   [Source: FreeImages.com/antkevyv]

      A.   Compressive strength

      B.   Toughness

      C.   Elasticity

      D.   Density
                                                 –9–                                          8823 – 6202


15.   Figure 8 shows an innovative footwear solution using smart material technology. The sole of the
      shoe charges mobile devices when in use.

                                      Figure 8: Smart footwear




                                                                                    Smart material
                                                                                    technology


                                                                                    Rubber sole
                                                                                    with USB port




      Which smart material property releases an electrical discharge when deformed by the walking
      action of the user?

      A.   Shape memory alloy

      B.   Piezoelectricity

      C.   Thermoelectricity

      D.   Electro-rheostatic




                                                                                             Turn over
                                                  – 10 –                                         8823 – 6202


16.   Which of the following scales of production is most suited to the manufacture of plastic drinks
      bottles such as those shown in Figure 9?

                                     Figure 9: Plastic drinks bottles




      A.   One-off production

      B.   Batch production

      C.   Continuous flow

      D.   Mass customization


17.   Teams of robots are used in car manufacturing to achieve…

      A.   faster production.

      B.   a larger working envelope.

      C.   machine to machine (M2M) communication.

      D.   a higher load capacity.
                                                 – 11 –                  8823 – 6202


18.   Metal physical properties can be modified by:

           I.     Alloying
           II.    Work hardening
           III.   Tempering

      A.   I and II only

      B.   I and III only

      C.   II and III only

      D.   I, II and III


19.   Which of the following materials is used to make swimming suits?

      A.   Silk

      B.   Cotton

      C.   Wool

      D.   Lycra®


20.   Trademarks protect:

      A.   Brands

      B.   Inventions

      C.   Literary works

      D.   Product aesthetics




                                                                         Turn over
                                                    – 12 –                                   8823 – 6202


21.   Sir James Dyson was dissatisfied with existing vacuum cleaners that lost suction when dust was
      trapped in their bags. At a factory he saw how sawdust was removed from the air by industrial
      extraction systems (cyclones). He was inspired to engineer the cyclone technology and produce
      the world’s first bagless vacuum cleaner, see Figure 10.

                                 Figure 10: Dyson’s cyclone technology




                                 [Source: ©Dyson Technology Limited 1992 – 2023]

      Which strategy for innovation applies to Dyson’s cyclone technology?

      A.   Constructive discontent

      B.   Chance

      C.   Technical curiosity

      D.   Adaptation
                                                  – 13 –                                       8823 – 6202


22.   The Echo Dot features the Alexa virtual assistant which enables users to carry out tasks such as
      controlling lighting, playing music, checking the weather or setting an alarm.

                                        Figure 11: The Echo Dot




      Complex products, such as the Echo Dot shown in Figure 11, have most likely been developed by:

      A.    Multidisciplinary teams

      B.    Lone inventors

      C.    Product champions

      D.    Entrepreneurs


23.   At which stage of a product’s life cycle are sales consistent?

      A.    Introduction

      B.    Growth

      C.    Maturity

      D.    Decline




                                                                                              Turn over
                                                 – 14 –                                        8823 – 6202


24.   In 1913, Henry Ford introduced the assembly line for the production of the Model T Ford car.

                                     Figure 12: The Model T Ford




      Which characteristic has contributed the most to the Model T Ford, see Figure 12, reaching
      classic design status?

      A.   Defies obsolescence

      B.   Mass production

      C.   Ubiquitous

      D.   Dominant design
                                                  – 15 –                                     8823 – 6202


25.   When working on the design of a suspension system for cars, George Carwardine invented
      a mechanism that could be easily set in a number of positions. This led him to design the
      Anglepoise Lamp, see Figure 13.

                                    Figure 13: The Anglepoise Lamp




      Which of the following best applies to the design of this lamp?

      A.   Form follows function

      B.   Function follows form

      C.   Psychological function

      D.   Retro-styling


26.   Which of the following statements best applies to classic designs?

      A.   Values form over function

      B.   Has a timeless appeal

      C.   Are the result of multidisciplinary teamwork

      D.   Rarely retro-styled




                                                                                            Turn over
                                                – 16 –                                       8823 – 6202


Questions 27–30 relate to the following case study. Please read the case study carefully and answer
the questions.

Figure 14 and Figure 15 show the N30 wireless mouse, inspired by the Nintendo® games controller
shown in Figure 16, which was popular in the 1980s.

                                                                      Figure 15: How the N30
              Figure 14: N30 wireless mouse                           wireless mouse works




              Removed for copyright reasons                       Removed for copyright reasons




                               Figure 16: Nintendo® games controller




Daniel Jansson, who designed the mouse, describes it as functional, nostalgic and joyful. The mouse
offers a better website navigation experience with page up, page down, upward and forward buttons
on the side.
                                                   – 17 –                                      8823 – 6202


27.   Which type of plastic was most likely used for the casing of the N30 wireless mouse?

      A.   Polyethylene terephthalate (PET)

      B.   Low-density polyethylene (LDPE)

      C.   Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS)

      D.   Polyvinyl chloride (PVC)


28.   Which of the following design for manufacture (DfM) strategies has the greatest impact on how well
      the mouse can be recycled at the end of its life?

      A.   Design for materials

      B.   Design for process

      C.   Design for assembly

      D.   Design for disassembly


29.   Which manufacturing technique was most likely used in the commercial production of the
      navigation buttons on the mouse?

      A.   Vacuum forming

      B.   Rotational forming

      C.   Injection moulding

      D.   Blow moulding


30.   Which modelling technique would have enabled the designer to understand how accurately the
      buttons responded to being pressed?

      A.   Aesthetic model

      B.   Orthographic projection

      C.   Finite element analysis (FEA)

      D.   Instrumented modelling
Disclaimer:
Content used in IB assessments is taken from authentic, third-party sources. The views expressed within them belong to their
individual authors and/or publishers and do not necessarily reflect the views of the IB.

References:
Figure 1      Muralinath, n.d. Indian Made Men’s sandals – stock photo. [image online] Available at: https://www.gettyimages.
              co.uk/detail/photo/indian-made-mens-sandals-royalty-free-image/1161700112?adppopup=true [Accessed 22 July
              2022].
Figure 2      3DMAVR / Shutterstock.com.
Figure 3      geezerpk. Free veggie peeler stock photo. [image online] Available at: https://www.freeimages.com/photo/veggie-
              peeler-1459982 [Accessed 10 September 2020].
Figure 4      Images with permission from Petit Pli.
Figure 6      Image with permission from ODD Guitars.
Figure 7      Antkevyv, 2009. Free set of knobs stock photo. [image online] Available at: https://www.freeimages.com/photo/set-
              of-knobs-1148189 [Accessed 10 September 2020].
              SteveTaint, 2006. Free drawing pins 3 stock photo. [image online] Available at: https://www.freeimages.com/
              photo/drawing-pins-3-1240402 [Accessed 10 September 2020].
Figure 8      Image with permission from Compound Footwear.
Figure 9      Bjørn Erik Pedersen. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Coca_Cola-flasker_i_et_kj%C3%B8leskap.jpg.
              Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/deed.en. Image adapted.
Figure 10     ©Dyson Technology Limited 1992 – 2023.
Figure 11     Echo Dot (5th Gen). https://www.amazon.com/All-New-release-Smart-speaker-Charcoal/dp/B09B8V1LZ3. Image
              by Amazon.com, Inc.
Figure 12     ModelTMitch. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:1925_Ford_Model_T_touring.jpg. Licensed under CC
              BY-SA 4.0 DEED https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/deed.en.
Figure 13     Image with permission from Anglepoise.
Figure 16     [Nintendo Entertainment System NES Controller] 2016. [image online] Available at: https://commons.wikimedia.
              org/wiki/File:Nintendo-Entertainment-System-NES-Controller-FL.jpg [Accessed 10 September 2020].


All other texts, graphics and illustrations © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
