Sports, exercise and health science guideSports, exercise and health science guide
International Baccalaureate , Baccalauréat International , Bachillerato Internacional   
and IB logos are registered trademarks of the International Baccalaureate Organization.Published February 2024
Published by the International Baccalaureate Organization, a not-for-profit educational 
foundation of Rue du Pré-de-la-Bichette 1, 1202 Genève, Switzerland.  
Website: ibo.org
© International Baccalaureate Organization 2024
The International Baccalaureate Organization (known as the IB) offers four high-quality 
and challenging educational programmes for a worldwide community of schools, aiming 
to create a better, more peaceful world. This publication is one of a range of materials 
produced to support these programmes.
The IB may use a variety of sources in its work and check information to verify accuracy 
and authenticity, particularly when using community-based knowledge sources such as 
Wikipedia. The IB respects the principles of intellectual property and makes strenuous 
efforts to identify and obtain permission before publication from rights holders of all 
copyright material used. The IB is grateful for permissions received for material used 
in this publication and will be pleased to correct any errors or omissions at the earliest 
opportunity.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the IB’s prior written 
permission, or as expressly permitted by the Rules for use of IB Intellectual Property .
IB merchandise and publications can be purchased through the IB Store   
(email: sales@ibo.org ). Any commercial use of IB publications (whether fee-covered or 
commercial) by third parties acting in the IB’s ecosystem without a formal relationship 
with the IB (including but not limited to tutoring organizations, professional development 
providers, educational publishers and operators of curriculum mapping or teacher 
resource digital platforms, etc.) is prohibited and requires a subsequent written licence 
from the IB. Licence requests should be sent to copyright@ibo.org . More information can 
be obtained on the IB public website .Diploma Programme
Sports, exercise and health science guideIB mission statement
The International Baccalaureate aims to develop inquiring, knowledgeable and caring young people who 
help to create a better and more peaceful world through intercultural understanding and respect.
To this end the organization works with schools, governments and international organizations to develop 
challenging programmes of international education and rigorous assessment.
These programmes encourage students across the world to become active, compassionate and lifelong  
learners who understand that other people, with their differences, can also be right.IB learner profile I
profile IB learner parner profile IB leaile IB learner profiIB learner profile Ier profile IB learne
© International Bac calaur eate Or ganiza tion 2017
International Bac calaur eate® | Bac calaur éat International® | Bachiller ato Internacional®
The IB learner pro/f_ile represents 10 attributes valued by IB World Schools. We believe these attributes, and others 
like them, can help individuals and groups become responsible members of local, national and global communities.We nurture our curiosity, developing skills for inquiry and 
research. We know how to learn independently and with others. 
We learn with enthusiasm and sustain our love of learning 
throughout life.
We develop and use conceptual understanding, exploring 
knowledge across a range of disciplines. We engage with issues 
and ideas that have local and global signi/f_icance. 
We use critical and creative thinking skills to analyse and take 
responsible action on complex problems. We exercise initiative in 
making reasoned, ethical decisions.
We express ourselves con/f_idently and creatively in more than one 
language and in many ways.  We collaborate eﬀectively, listening 
carefully to the perspectives of other individuals and groups.
We act with integrity and honesty, with a strong sense of 
fairness and justice, and with respect for the dignity and rights 
of people everywhere. We take responsibility for our actions 
and their consequences.We critically appreciate our own cultures and personal histories, 
as well as the values and traditions of others. We seek and evaluate 
a range of points of view, and we are willing to grow from the 
experience.
We show empathy, compassion and respect. We have a 
commitment to service, and we act to make a positive diﬀerence 
in the lives of others and in the world around us.
We understand the importance of balancing diﬀerent aspects of 
our lives /emdash.capintellectual, physical, and emotional/emdash.cap to achieve 
well-being for ourselves and others. We recognize our interde-
pendence with other people and with the world in which we live.
We thoughtfully consider the world and our own ideas and expe-
rience. We work to understand our strengths and weaknesses in order to support our learning and personal development.We approach uncertainty with forethought and determination; we work independently and cooperatively to explore new ideas and innovative strategies. We are resourceful and resilient in the face of challenges and change.IB learner profile
The aim of all IB programmes is to develop internationally minded people who, recognizing their common 
humanity and shared guardianship of the planet, help to create a better and more peaceful world.
As IB learners we strive to be:THE IB LEARNER PROFILEIntroduction 1
Purpose of this document 1
The Diploma Programme 2
Nature of science 6
Nature of sports, exercise and health science 9
Approaches to learning and approaches to teaching SEHS 15
Collaborative sciences project 20
Aims 21
Assessment objectives 22
Assessment objectives in practice 23
Syllabus 24
Syllabus outline 24
Syllabus roadmap 25
Syllabus format 27
Skills in the study of SEHS 28
Syllabus content 33
Assessment 52
Assessment in the Diploma Programme 52
Assessment outline—SL 54
Assessment outline—HL 55
External assessment 56
Internal assessment 58
Appendices 68
Glossary of command terms 68
Bibliography 70
Contents
Sports, exercise and health science guide
This  publication  is intended  to guide  the planning,  teaching  and  assessment  of sports,  exercise  and  health 
science  (SEHS)  in schools.  Subject  teachers  are the primary  audience,  although  it is expected  that  teachers 
will use the guide to inform students and parents about the subject.
This guide can be found on the subject page of the Programme Resource Centre (PRC) at resources.ibo.org , 
a password-protected  International  Baccalaureate  (IB) website  designed  to support  IB teachers.  It can also 
be purchased from the IB store at store.ibo.org .
Additional resources
Additional  publications  such  as specimen  papers  and  markschemes,  teacher  support  material  (TSM), 
subject  reports  and  grade  descriptors  can also  be found  on the PRC.  Past  examination  papers  as well  as 
markschemes can be purchased from the IB store.
Teachers  are encouraged  to check  the PRC  for additional  resources  created  or used  by other  teachers. 
Teachers  can provide  details  of useful  resources,  for example:  websites,  books,  videos,  journals  or teaching 
ideas.
Acknowledgement
The IB wishes  to thank  the educators  and  associated  schools  for generously  contributing  time  and 
resources to the production of this guide.
First assessment 2026
Introduction
Purpose of this document
1 Sports, exercise and health science guide
The Diploma  Programme  (DP)  is a rigorous  pre-university  course  of study  designed  for students  in the 
16 to 19 age range.  It is a broad-based  two-year  course  that  aims  to encourage  students  to be 
knowledgeable  and  inquiring,  but also  caring  and  compassionate.  There  is a strong  emphasis  on 
encouraging  students  to develop  intercultural  understanding,  open-mindedness,  and  the attitudes 
necessary for them to respect and evaluate a range of points of view.
The Diploma Programme model
The course  is presented  as six academic  areas  enclosing  a central  core  (see  figure  1). It encourages  the 
concurrent  study  of a broad  range  of academic  areas.  Students  study  two  modern  languages  (or a modern 
language  and  a classical  language),  a humanities  or social  science  subject,  an experimental  science, 
mathematics  and  one  of the creative  arts.  It is this comprehensive  range  of subjects  that  makes  the DP a 
demanding  course  of study  designed  to prepare  students  effectively  for university  entrance.  In each  of the 
academic  areas  students  have  flexibility  in making  their  choices,  which  means  they  can choose  subjects 
that particularly interest them and that they may wish to study further at university.
Figure 1
Diploma Programme model
Introduction
The Diploma Programme
2 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Choosing the right combination
Students are required to choose one subject from each of the six academic areas, although they can, 
instead  of an arts  subject,  choose  two  subjects  from  another  area.  Normally,  three  subjects  (and  not 
more  than  four)  are taken  at higher  level  (HL),  and  the others  are taken  at standard  level  (SL).  The IB 
recommends 240 teaching hours for HL subjects and 150 hours for SL. Subjects at HL are studied in greater 
depth and breadth than at SL.
At both levels, many skills are developed, especially those of critical thinking and analysis. At the end of the 
course,  students’  abilities  are measured  by means  of external  assessment.  Many  subjects  contain  some 
element of coursework assessed by teachers.
The core of the Diploma Programme model
All DP students participate in the three course elements that make up the core of the model.
Theory  of knowledge  (TOK)  is a course  that  is fundamentally  about  critical  thinking  and  inquiry  into  the 
process of knowing rather than about learning a specific body of knowledge. The TOK course examines the 
nature  of knowledge  and  how  we know  what  we claim  to know.  It does  this by encouraging  students  to 
analyse  knowledge  claims  and  explore  questions  about  the construction  of knowledge.  The task  of TOK  is 
to emphasize  connections  between  areas  of shared  knowledge  and  link them  to personal  knowledge  in 
such  a way  that  an individual  becomes  more  aware  of their  own  perspectives  and  how  they  might  differ 
from others.
In TOK, students explore the means of producing knowledge within the core theme of “knowledge and the 
knower”  as well  as within  various  optional  themes  (knowledge  and  technology,  knowledge  and  politics, 
knowledge  and  language,  knowledge  and  religion,  and  knowledge  and  indigenous  societies)  and  areas  of 
knowledge  (the  arts,  natural  sciences,  human  sciences,  history  and  mathematics).  The course  also 
encourages  students  to make  comparisons  between  different  areas  of knowledge  and  reflect  on how 
knowledge is arrived at in the various disciplines, what the disciplines have in common and the differences 
between them.
Creativity,  activity,  service  (CAS)  is at the heart  of the DP. The emphasis  in CAS  is on helping  students  to 
develop  their  own  identities,  in accordance  with  the ethical  principles  embodied  in the IB mission 
statement  and  the IB learner  profile.  It involves  students  in a range  of activities  alongside  their  academic 
studies  throughout  the DP. The three  strands  of CAS  are creativity  (arts  and  other  experiences  that  involve 
creative  thinking),  activity  (physical  exertion  contributing  to a healthy  lifestyle)  and  service  (an unpaid  and 
voluntary  exchange  that  has a learning  benefit  for the student).  Possibly,  more  than  any other  component 
in the DP, CAS  contributes  to the IB’s mission  to create  a better  and  more  peaceful  world  through 
intercultural understanding and respect.
The extended essay  (EE), including the world studies EE, offers the opportunity for IB students to investigate 
a topic  of special  interest,  in the form  of a 4,000-word  piece  of independent  research.  The area  of research 
undertaken  is chosen  from  one  of the students’  six DP subjects,  or in the case  of the interdisciplinary  world 
studies  essay,  two  subjects,  and  acquaints  them  with  the independent  research  and  writing  skills  expected 
at university.  This  leads  to a major  piece  of formally  presented,  structured  writing,  in which  ideas  and 
findings  are communicated  in a reasoned  and  coherent  manner,  appropriate  to the subject  or subjects 
chosen. It is intended to promote high-level research and writing skills, intellectual discovery and creativity. 
An authentic  learning  experience,  it provides  students  with  an opportunity  to engage  in personal  research 
on a topic of choice, under the guidance of a supervisor.
Approaches to learning and approaches to 
teaching
Approaches  to learning  and  approaches  to teaching  across  the DP refers  to deliberate  strategies,  skills  and 
attitudes  that  permeate  the learning  and  teaching  environment.  These  approaches  and  tools,  intrinsically 
linked  with  the learner  profile  attributes,  enhance  student  learning  and  assist  student  preparation  for the The Diploma Programme
3 Sports, exercise and health science guide
DP assessment  and  beyond.  The aims  of approaches  to learning  and  approaches  to teaching  in the DP are 
to:
• empower teachers as teachers of learners as well as teachers of content
• empower teachers to create clearer strategies for facilitating learning experiences in which students 
are more meaningfully engaged in structured inquiry and greater critical and creative thinking
• promote both the aims of individual subjects (making them more than course aspirations) and linking 
previously isolated knowledge (concurrency of learning)
• encourage students to develop an explicit variety of skills that will equip them to continue to be 
actively engaged in learning after they leave school, and to help them not only obtain university 
admission through better grades but also prepare for success during tertiary education and beyond
• enhance further the coherence and relevance of the students’ DP experience
• allow schools to identify the distinctive nature of an IB DP education, with its blend of idealism and 
practicality.
The five approaches  to learning  (developing  thinking  skills,  social  skills,  communication  skills,  self-
management  skills  and  research  skills)  along  with  the six approaches  to teaching  (teaching  that  is inquiry-
based,  conceptually  focused,  contextualized,  collaborative,  differentiated  and  informed  by assessment) 
encompass the key values and principles that underpin IB pedagogy.
The IB mission statement and the IB learner profile
The DP aims  to develop  in students  the knowledge,  skills  and  attitudes  they  will need  to fulfil  the aims  of 
the IB, as expressed  in the organization’s  mission  statement  and  the learner  profile.  Learning  and  teaching 
in the DP represent the reality in daily practice of the organization’s educational philosophy.
Academic integrity
Academic  integrity  in the DP is a set of values  and  behaviours  informed  by the attributes  of the learner 
profile.  In teaching,  learning  and  assessment,  academic  integrity  serves  to promote  personal  integrity, 
engender  respect  for the integrity  of others  and  their  work,  and  ensure  that  all students  have  an equal 
opportunity to demonstrate the knowledge and skills they acquire during their studies.
All coursework—including  work  submitted  for assessment—is  to be authentic,  based  on the student’s 
individual  and  original  ideas  with  the ideas  and  work  of others  fully  acknowledged.  Assessment  tasks  that 
require  teachers  to provide  guidance  to students  or that  require  students  to work  collaboratively  must  be 
completed in full compliance with the detailed guidelines provided by the IB for the relevant subjects.
For further  information  on academic  integrity  in the IB and  the DP, please  consult  the IB publications 
Academic  integrity  policy , Effective  citing  and  referencing , Diploma  Programme:  From  principles  into  practice 
and  the general  regulations  in Diploma  Programme  Assessment  procedures  (updated  annually).  Specific 
information  regarding  academic  integrity  as it pertains  to external  and  internal  assessment  components  of 
this DP subject can be found in this guide.
Acknowledging the ideas or work of another 
person
Coordinators  and  teachers  are reminded  that  candidates  must  acknowledge  all sources  used  in work 
submitted for assessment. The following is intended as a clarification of this requirement.
DP candidates submit work for assessment in a variety of media that may include audiovisual material, text, 
graphs,  images  and  data  published  in print  or electronic  sources.  If a candidate  uses  the work  or ideas  of 
another  person,  the candidate  must  acknowledge  the source  using  a standard  style  of referencing  in a 
consistent  manner.  A candidate’s  failure  to acknowledge  a source  will be investigated  by the IB as a 
potential breach of regulations that may result in a penalty imposed by the IB final award committee.The Diploma Programme
4 Sports, exercise and health science guide
The IB does not prescribe which style(s) of referencing or in-text citation should be used by candidates; this 
is left to the discretion  of appropriate  faculty/staff  in the candidate’s  school.  The wide  range  of subjects, 
response  languages  and  the diversity  of referencing  styles  make  it impractical  and  restrictive  to insist  on 
particular styles. In practice, certain styles may prove most commonly used, but schools are free to choose a 
style  that  is appropriate  for the subject  concerned  and  the language  in which  candidates’  work  is written. 
Regardless of the reference style adopted by the school for a given subject, it is expected that the minimum 
information  given  includes:  name  of author,  date  of publication,  title  of source  and  page  numbers  as 
applicable.
Candidates  are expected  to use a standard  style  and  use it consistently  so that  credit  is given  to all sources 
used,  including  sources  that  have  been  paraphrased  or summarized.  When  writing  text  candidates  must 
clearly  distinguish  between  their  words  and  those  of others  by the use of quotation  marks  (or other 
method, such as indentation) followed by an appropriate citation that denotes an entry in the bibliography. 
If an electronic  source  is cited,  the date  of access  must  be indicated.  Candidates  are not expected  to show 
faultless  expertise  in referencing,  but are expected  to demonstrate  that  all sources  have  been 
acknowledged.  Candidates  must  be advised  that  audiovisual  material,  text,  graphs,  images  and  data 
published  in print  or in electronic  sources  that  is not their  own  must  also  attribute  the source.  Again,  an 
appropriate style of referencing/citation must be used.
Learning diversity and learning support 
requirements
Schools  must  ensure  that  equal  access  arrangements  and  reasonable  adjustments  are provided  to 
candidates  with  learning  support  requirements  that  are in line with  the IB documents  Access  and  inclusion 
policy  and Learning diversity and inclusion in IB programmes: Removing barriers to learning .
The publications  Meeting  student  learning  diversity  in the classroom  and  The  IB guide  to inclusive  education:  A 
resource  for whole  school  development  are available  to support  schools  in the ongoing  process  of increasing 
access and engagement by removing barriers to learning.
Programme standards and practices
The programme  standards  and  practices  are a set of principles  for schools  to ensure  quality  and  fidelity  in 
the implementation  of IB programmes.  Learning  and  teaching  are important  markers  of quality  and 
effective practice in schools; thus the expectations teachers and learners share across all IB programmes can 
be found in the programme standards and practices.
The programme  standards  and  practices  provide  a framework  to help  teachers  understand  their  rights  and 
responsibilities  in IB World  Schools  as they  develop  learning  environments  and  experiences  for their 
students. The IB recognizes that in order for effective teaching to take place, teachers must be supported in 
their  understanding,  well-being,  environment  and  resources.  Teachers  use the core  tenets  of IB philosophy 
and  pedagogy  (approaches  to learning,  approaches  to teaching,  the learner  profile  and  international-
mindedness)  to design  learning  experiences  that  prepare  learners  to fulfil  the aims  and  objectives  outlined 
in this guide.
To learn  more  about  teachers’  rights  and  responsibilities,  please  see the IB publication  Programme 
standards and practices  on the PRC.The Diploma Programme
5 Sports, exercise and health science guide
What is nature of science?
Nature  of science  (NOS)  is an overarching  theme  in the biology,  chemistry,  physics  and  SEHS  courses  that 
seeks  to explore  conceptual  understandings  related  to the purpose,  features  and  impact  of scientific 
knowledge.
What do we want to know in science?
Nobel  laureate  and  influential  popularizer  of science,  Richard  Feynman,  once  described  the process  of 
science  using  the analogy  of watching  an unknown  board  game  being  played  “... and  you don’t  know  the 
rules  of the game,  but you’re  allowed  to look  at the board  from  time  to time.  And  from  these  observations, 
you try to figure out what the rules are of the game, [and] the rules of the pieces moving”.
(Feynman,  R., Leighton,  R., & Sands,  M. (1963).  The Feynman  lectures  on physics.  California  Institute  of 
Technology, Gottlieb, M. A., & Pfeiffer, R. https://www.feynmanlectures.caltech.edu/I_02.html)
What is the scientific endeavour?
Classifying  such  observations  and  underlying  patterns  in the natural  world  is the essence  of what  scientists 
do, underpinned  by the assumption  that  the universe  exists  as an external  reality  accessible  to the human 
experience.  The varied  and  often  non-linear  processes  used  in scientific  methodologies  have  several  key 
features  in common  to maximize  the validity  and  reliability  of knowledge  produced.  The development  of 
falsifiable  hypotheses,  a requirement  for replicable  data,  and  the utilization  of peer  review  may  be among 
the most  essential  of these  and  help  differentiate  a scientific  process  from  a pseudoscientific  one.  The 
communal  and  collaborative  nature  of this approach  further  strengthens  the objectivity  of science  by 
ensuring the inclusion of diverse perspectives and shared responsibility for its outcomes.
What type of knowledge do we produce?
Formal  scientific  knowledge  may  encompass  several  categories  including  representative  models, 
explanatory  theories  and  descriptive  laws.  As the focus  of each  discipline  of natural  science  differs,  so too 
does  the balance  of their  contributions  to each  category.  What  remains  constant,  however,  is the 
acknowledgement  of assumptions,  exceptions  and  limitations  of scientific  knowledge  to provide  realistic 
parameters  to our understanding  of the natural  world.  Claims  of certainty  are treated  with  caution  given 
the presence of paradigmatic shifts throughout the history of science.
What is the impact of scientific knowledge?
As well  as the pursuit  of knowledge  for its own  sake,  it is useful  to consider  the interplay  of science  with 
other  areas  of society.  Although  advances  in technology  traditionally  fuelled  great  leaps  in scientific 
understanding,  in recent  times  it may  be more  common  to see science  as a driver  of technological 
development.  In addition,  the implications  of science  within  environmental,  political,  social,  cultural  and 
economic domains can also be profound. These connections illustrate the importance of local, national and 
international  scientific  bodies  that  engage  with  the public  understanding  of science  and  heighten  the 
responsibility of scientists to adhere to principles of academic integrity in their research.
Introduction
Nature of science
6 Sports, exercise and health science guide
How is NOS different from TOK?
In contrast  to the specificity  of understanding  of science,  the TOK  course  encourages  students  to think 
critically  about  the concepts  that  underpin  knowledge  production.  For example,  peer  review  is used  as a 
tool  to support  objectivity  in scientific  research.  Through  the study  of TOK,  students  question  the 
limitations  of the peer  review  process  and  extend  their  thinking  to an assessment  of objectivity  in other 
areas of knowledge.
Table 1
Aspects of nature of science
Aspects How are scientific knowledge claims generated, tested, communicated, 
evaluated and used? What issues arise from these actions?
Observations Scientists act as observers, looking at Earth and all other parts of the universe, to 
obtain data about natural phenomena. Observations can be made directly using 
human senses, or with the aid of instruments such as electronic sensors. 
Unexpected or unplanned observations can open up new research fields.
Patterns and trends Scientists analyse their observations, looking for patterns or trends, and try to draw 
general conclusions by inductive reasoning. They also look for discrepancies. 
Scientists classify objects through pattern recognition. A trend may take the form 
of a positive or negative correlation between variables. Correlations may be based 
on a causal relationship, but correlation does not prove causation.
Hypotheses Scientists make provisional explanations for the patterns that they have observed 
in natural phenomena. These hypotheses can be tested, with further observations 
or experiments, to obtain support for a hypothesis or show that it is false.
Experiments Scientists design and perform experiments to obtain data, which can be used to 
test hypotheses. The quality of experimental evidence depends on careful control 
of variables and on the quantity of data generated. Progress in science often 
follows technological developments that allow new experimental techniques. 
Creativity and imagination play a role in experimental design, interpretation and 
conclusion.
Measurement Quantitative measurements are more objective than qualitative observations, but 
all measurements are limited in precision and accuracy. Measurements are 
repeated to strengthen the reliability of data. Random errors in measurement due 
to unknown or unpredictable differences lead to imprecision and uncertainty, 
whereas systematic errors lead to inaccuracy.
Models Scientists construct models as artificial representations of natural phenomena. 
They are useful when direct observation or experimentation is difficult. Models are 
simplifications of complex systems and can be physical representations, abstract 
diagrams, mathematical equations or algorithms. All models have limitations that 
need to be considered in their application.
Evidence Scientists adopt a sceptical attitude to claims and evaluate them using evidence. 
Some claims cannot be tested using verifiable evidence, so cannot be falsified. 
They are therefore not scientific. Scientific knowledge must be supported by 
evidence.
Theories Scientists develop general explanations that are widely applicable, based on 
observed patterns or tested hypotheses. Predictions can be generated from these 
theories by deductive reasoning. If these predictions are tested, they may 
corroborate a theory or show that it is false and should be rejected. Paradigm shifts 
take place when a new theory replaces an old one. The term “law” is sometimes Nature of science
7 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Aspects How are scientific knowledge claims generated, tested, communicated, 
evaluated and used? What issues arise from these actions?
used for statements that allow predictions to be made about natural phenomena 
without explaining them.
Falsification Scientists can use evidence to falsify a claim formulated as a hypothesis, theory or 
model, but they cannot prove with certainty that such a claim is true. There is 
therefore inherent uncertainty in all scientific knowledge. Nonetheless, many 
theories in science are corroborated by strong evidence and allow for prediction 
and explanation. Scientists must remain open-minded with respect to new 
evidence.
Science as a shared 
endeavourScientists communicate and collaborate throughout the world. Agreed 
conventions and common terminology facilitate unambiguous communication. 
Peer review is essential to verify the research methods of knowledge claims prior 
to their publication in journals.
Global impact of 
scienceScientists have an obligation to assess the risks associated with their work and 
must aim to do no harm. Developments in science may have ethical, 
environmental, political, social, cultural and economic consequences that must be 
considered during decision-making. The pursuit of science may have unintended 
consequences. Research proposals are often filtered through ethics boards. 
Scientists have a responsibility to communicate their findings to the public with 
honesty and clarity.Nature of science
8 Sports, exercise and health science guide
What is SEHS?
A human and experimental science
SEHS  is a human  science  driven  by curiosity  about  what  makes  humankind  flourish,  both  physically  and 
mentally.  Spanning  multiple  disciplines,  it is the formal  study  of the impacts  of physiology,  biomechanics 
and  psychology  on human  health  and  athletic  performance.  Its most  prominent  advances  have  occurred 
from  the late 19th  century  onwards,  in tandem  with  similar  advances  in other  scientific  and  technological 
fields.
Like  other  DP sciences,  SEHS  is also  an experimental  science  that  combines  academic  study  with  the 
acquisition  of practical  and  investigative  skills.  Students  undertake  practical  experimental  investigations  in 
both  laboratory  and  field  settings.  This  helps  them  to acquire  the knowledge  and  understanding  necessary 
to apply scientific principles to the critical analysis of humankind and its sporting endeavours.
Three key themes
The course  is divided  into  three  themes:  “Exercise  physiology  and  nutrition  of the human  body”, 
“Biomechanics” and “Sports psychology and motor learning”. Each of these themes is explored through the 
dual lenses of health and performance.
In “Exercise physiology and nutrition of the human body”, students explore three topics:
• Communication
• Hydration and nutrition
• Response
They  may  explore  guiding  questions  such  as: “How  does  our body  respond  to changes  in lifestyle, 
environment and qualities of training?”
In “Biomechanics”, students delve into three topics:
• Generating movement in the body
• Forces, motion and movement
• Injury
Guiding  questions  include:  “What  are the primary  causes  of musculoskeletal  injury?”  and  “How  can they  be 
prevented and treated?”
The third theme is “Sports psychology and motor learning”, where students probe five topics:
• Individual differences
• Motor learning
• Motivation
• Stress and coping
• Psychological skills
Guiding  questions  may  include:  “What  characteristics  explain  how  and  why  some  individuals  succeed  and 
experience well-being in sport and health contexts more than others?”
Introduction
Nature of sports, exercise and health science
9 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Why study SEHS?
Thriving through sports
By studying  SEHS,  students  explore  what  it means  to thrive  in terms  of physical  activity,  athletic 
performance  and  personal  health.  Uniquely  among  the DP sciences,  the course  has immediate  everyday 
applicability  outside  the classroom.  Students  can apply  what  they  have  learned  to their  daily  lives, 
positively impacting their personal health and sporting performance.
Excelling  in sports  requires  a mixture  of innate  ability  and  the dedicated  pursuit  of self-improvement. 
Sporting  excellence  is best  achieved  through  a planned,  incremental,  long-term  programme  of physical 
and  mental  training  and  skills  development.  This  also  needs  to be accompanied  by appropriate  nutrition, 
rest and  sleep.  Planning  such  a programme  is the role  of the sports,  exercise  and  health  scientist  who, 
regardless  of the sport  involved,  must  be equipped  with  the necessary  knowledge  to perform  this task 
competently.  The design  of a training  programme  should  be considered  and  analytical,  requiring  careful 
consideration  of the physiological,  biomechanical  and  psychological  demands  of the individual  and  the 
activity they will be involved in.
Through  the lenses  of both  health  and  performance,  students  can apply  the concepts  and  skills  they 
develop  in this course  to their  own  sporting  endeavours,  demonstrating  agency  in making  informed 
personal  choices.  They  can also  apply  these  to their  broader  community.  In a world  where  millions  are 
physically  inactive  and  afflicted  by chronic  disease  and  ill health,  the sports,  exercise  and  health  scientist 
can be as proficient in prescribing exercise for general health and well-being as they can be in prescribing it 
for an aspiring  athlete.  SEHS  is therefore  an excellent  grounding  for more  advanced  courses  in higher  or 
further  education  related  to sports,  fitness  and  health,  and  serves  as useful  preparation  for employment  in 
physical activity fields.
Distinction between SL and HL
Students at SL and HL share the following.
• An understanding of science through a stimulating experimental programme
• The nature of science as an overarching theme
• The study of a concept-based syllabus
• One piece of internally assessed work, the scientific investigation
• The collaborative sciences project
The SL course  provides  students  with  a fundamental  understanding  of SEHS  and  experience  of the 
associated  skills.  The HL course  requires  students  to increase  their  knowledge  and  understanding  of the 
subject, and so provides a solid foundation for further study at university level.
The SL course  has a recommended  150 teaching  hours,  compared  to 240 hours  for the HL course.  This 
difference  is reflected  in the additional  content  studied  by HL students.  Some  of the HL content  is 
conceptually  more  demanding  and  explored  in greater  depth.  The distinction  between  SL and  HL is 
therefore  one  of both  breadth  and  depth.  The increased  breadth  and  depth  at HL result  in increased 
networked  knowledge,  requiring  the student  to make  more  connections  between  diverse  areas  of the 
syllabus.
SEHS and the core
SEHS and theory of knowledge
The TOK  course  plays  a special  role  in the DP by providing  opportunities  for students  to reflect  on the 
nature,  scope  and  limitations  of knowledge  and  the process  of knowing  through  an exploration  of 
knowledge questions.Nature of sports, exercise and health science
10 Sports, exercise and health science guide
The areas  of knowledge  (AOK)  are specific  branches  of knowledge,  each  of which  can be seen  to have  a 
distinct  nature  and  sometimes  use different  methods  of gaining  knowledge.  In TOK,  students  explore  five 
compulsory AOK: history, the human sciences, the natural sciences, mathematics and the arts.
There are several different ways in which aspects of the SEHS course can be connected to the exploration of 
knowledge.  During  the learning  and  teaching  of the SEHS  course,  teachers  and  students  evaluate 
knowledge  claims  by exploring  questions  concerning  their  validity,  reliability,  credibility  and  certainty,  as 
well as individual and cultural perspectives on them.
Exploration  of the relationship  between  knowledge  and  TOK  concepts  can help  students  to deepen  their 
understanding  and  make  connections  between  disciplines.  For example,  when  discussing  motivational 
theories in SEHS, students can explore the concepts of certainty, interpretation and culture.
Many  aspects  of the SEHS  course  lend  themselves  to the exploration  of knowledge  questions.  Some 
examples are provided in the following table.
Table 2
Examples of knowledge questions
Learning opportunities Knowledge questions
A.2.2 Fuelling for health and 
performanceWhat role does personal experience play in the formation of 
knowledge claims?
C.3 Motivation What beliefs, if any, are independent of culture?
Can personal experience be equated with knowledge? To what 
extent can it be shared knowledge?
A.1.1 Inter-system communication How can we establish whether hormones are an “active ingredient” 
impacting performance?
Under what circumstances might doubt undermine the construction 
or acquisition of knowledge?
How important is visual or perceivable proof in the natural sciences?
A.2.2.3 Gut microbiome How do we distinguish science from pseudoscience?
How is it possible that scientific knowledge changes over time?
What role do paradigm shifts play in the progression of scientific 
knowledge?
B.3 Injury What constitutes an acceptable level of risk in sport?
B.1.3 Muscular function How can we trust knowledge that we cannot see?
C.2.1 Motor learning processes How should scientists choose between conflicting theories?
For more  information,  please  refer  to the Theory  of knowledge  guide  and  the Theory  of knowledge  teacher 
support material .
SEHS and the extended essay
Students  who  choose  to write  an EE in SEHS  undertake  independent  research  as part  of an in-depth  study 
of a focused  topic.  The topic  for study  may  be generated  from  the SEHS  course  or may  relate  to a subject 
area  beyond  the syllabus  content.  This  detailed  study  will help  develop  research,  thinking,  self-
management  and  communication  skills,  which  will support  students’  learning  in the SEHS  course,  and  in 
further studies.
Examples of areas for research topics
• Motivational climate—how different types of feedback may affect serving technique in volleyball.
• Inter-system communication—the effects of the menstrual cycle on perceived or actual performance 
in some athletes.Nature of sports, exercise and health science
11 Sports, exercise and health science guide
• Recovery from training—methods for optimal recovery following high-intensity interval training (HIIT).
Students and supervisors must ensure that an EE does not duplicate other work submitted for the diploma. 
For more  information,  please  refer  to the Extended  essay  guide  and  the Extended  essay  teacher  support 
material .
SEHS and creativity, activity, service
The CAS  component  of the DP core  provides  many  opportunities  for students  to link science,  sport  and 
health  concepts  and  topics  to practical  experiences.  Teachers  can highlight  how  knowledge  and 
understanding  developed  through  the course  might  inform  meaningful  experiences.  Outside  the 
classroom,  CAS  experiences  might  also  ignite  students’  passion  for addressing  topics  inside  the SEHS 
classroom.
Some examples of relevant CAS experiences are as follows.
• Organizing a sports club for students in lower years
• Implementing health initiatives within the school or local community: for example, a nutrition and 
exercise awareness day
• Organizing or participating in a social media outreach or advocacy campaign: for example, on an 
environmental issue or health concern
CAS  experiences  can be a single  event  or may  be an extended  series  of events.  It is important  that  CAS 
experiences be distinct from and not submitted as part of a SEHS assessment.
For more  information,  please  refer  to the Creativity,  activity,  service  guide  and  the Creativity,  activity,  service 
teacher support material .
SEHS and international-mindedness
Science has been, and continues to be, a truly international endeavour. From the beginnings of seismology 
in China,  through  material  science  in Mesopotamia  to astronomy  in the Islamic  Golden  Age,  the search  for 
an objective  understanding  of the natural  world  transcends  the limitations  imposed  by national 
boundaries. The scientific process, requiring curiosity, insight and an open-minded approach, benefits from 
the widest possible participation across genders and cultures through inclusivity and diversity.
Given  the global  nature  of many  scientific  issues,  international  organizations  often  have  a focus  on the 
engagement of science with the public domain. The World Health Organization and the Intergovernmental 
Panel  on Climate  Change  are two  well-known  examples  that  model  a responsibility  to inform  nations  of 
scientific  progress  on an equitable  basis.  Underlying  this responsibility  is the interest  of promoting  a 
peaceful and sustainable future.
Advancements  in technology,  along  with  the cost  of modern  research  facilities,  continues  to reinforce  the 
role  of international  collaborative  work.  Both  the Human  Genome  Project  and  the Human  Microbiome 
Project are good examples of international collaboration.
The importance  of collaboration  in contemporary  science  is reflected  by the large  number  of international 
organizations  tasked  with  collating  and  sharing  data  with  the scientific  community.  Access  to shared 
knowledge  through  websites  and  databases  must  be integrated  into  classroom  teaching  as it plays  an 
important role in validating experimental work.
In addition to integrating technology and collaborative work, the collaborative sciences project provides an 
excellent opportunity for students to engage with global issues.
Teachers  are encouraged  to consider  the resources  developed  in the TSM,  to allow  students  to reflect  on 
where  and  how  science  might  interact  with  society.  These  conversations  may  also  introduce  ethical 
questions such as those identified in the TOK syllabus.
SEHS and the IB learner profile
Each  box provides  an example  of how  each  learner  profile  attribute  could  be modelled  by learners  and 
teachers.Nature of sports, exercise and health science
12 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Example attribute
• Learners who best embody the attribute with reference to science.
• Directing teachers with possible routes to develop the attribute in the classroom.
• Practical ways in which learners demonstrate the attribute in the process of “doing” science.
Attributes of the IB learner profile
Inquirer
• Inquirers are curious, they actively use research skills, work independently and show enthusiasm 
about the world around them.
• Teachers facilitate skill development and promote inquiry; they provide students with opportunities 
to ask questions, search for answers and experiment.
• Learners use their inquiry skills to extend their scientific knowledge and engage with research.
Knowledgeable
• Learners explore concepts, ideas and issues related to science in order to broaden and deepen their 
understanding of factual and procedural knowledge.
• Access to a variety of resources and opportunities provides learner agency to develop scientific 
knowledge and understanding.
• Learners apply their knowledge to unfamiliar contexts and make connections between concepts and 
facts to illustrate their understanding of science.
Thinker
• Learners are eager to solve complex problems and reflect on their thinking strategies.
• Teachers provide opportunities for learners to critically analyse their approaches and methods, and 
deepen their understanding of science, allowing them to be creative in finding solutions to problems.
• Learners practise reasoning and critical thinking by testing assumptions, formulating hypotheses, 
interpreting data and drawing conclusions from the evidence provided.
Communicator
• Learners collaborate effectively with others and use a variety of modes of communication to express 
their ideas and opinions.
• Teachers facilitate group work, encourage open discussions and the use of scientific language to 
provide models for successful communication.
• Learners demonstrate effective communication skills as part of collaborative activities through 
listening to others and sharing ideas.
Principled
• Learners take responsibility for their work, promote shared values and act in an ethical manner.
• Teachers can provide opportunities to model principled behaviour including acknowledging the 
work of others and citing sources. The collaborative sciences project provides opportunities for 
learners to take a principled stance.
• Learners appreciate the importance of integrity in data collection and consider all data, even that 
which does not match their original hypothesis.Nature of sports, exercise and health science
13 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Open-minded
• Open-minded learners accept that different perspectives, models or hypotheses exist, and these can 
be used to enhance scientific understanding.
• Teachers can provide models that were at the time supported by data or observations, but through 
reasoning, deduction or falsification may be rejected or refined.
• Learners need to be prepared to have their perspectives and ideas challenged through the study of 
science.
Caring
• Learners act to protect the environment and to improve the lives of others.
• Teachers can draw attention to how daily choices have consequences by challenging learners to 
adopt sustainable practice and providing support to help fellow learners. Reference should be made 
to the Sciences experimentation guidelines .
• Learners can connect curriculum content to global challenges such as healthcare, energy supply or 
food production. The collaborative sciences project provides an opportunity for learners to support 
each other to enable their group to achieve their goal successfully.
Risk-taker
• Risk-takers seek new opportunities to develop their learning and explore new approaches to solve 
problems. They actively thrive on challenges.
• Teachers can provide support and guidance for learners, encouraging them to explore new 
techniques or methods of learning. This might include scaffolds for the use of language, the design of 
experiments and the analysis of data. As learners grow in confidence, these supports can be phased 
out giving them more freedom to choose their own approach.
• Learners should be prepared for the next set of experimental data to falsify their ideas as uncertainty 
is a feature of science. They understand that this is a step forward in their understanding.
Balanced
• Balanced learners look holistically at all aspects of their development and ensure that various tasks 
are given appropriate attention without focusing on one to the detriment of others.
• Teachers should encourage learners to consider a balanced perspective on scientific issues without 
bias.
• Learners need to organize their own time effectively, giving themselves sufficient time to complete 
all parts of their learning without negatively impacting on the emotional and social aspects of their 
lives.
Reflective
• Reflective learners consider why and how they achieve success, and also how they could change their 
approach when learning is difficult.
• Teachers provide opportunities for learners to continually review strategies, methods, techniques 
and approaches to problem-solving in order to improve their conceptual understandings in science. 
Assessment criteria or checklists can help learners to consider the quality of their work in a guided 
way.
• Learners develop skills and concepts throughout the course, networking their knowledge by 
continually reflecting on their understanding.Nature of sports, exercise and health science
14 Sports, exercise and health science guide
The approaches to learning framework
What are approaches to learning skills and why do we teach them?
The approaches  to learning  framework  seeks  to develop  in students  affective,  cognitive  and  metacognitive 
skills  that  will support  their  learning  processes  during  and  beyond  their  IB experience.  The development  of 
approaches  to learning  skills  is closely  connected  with  the IB learner  profile  attributes  and  therefore  helps 
to advance  the IB mission.  The approaches  to learning  skills  are an integral  part  of IB learning  and  teaching 
that should be developed across the whole programme—it is not expected that a single course should ever 
address all of them.
How are they organized?
The approaches  to learning  framework  for IB programmes  consists  of five general  skill categories:  thinking 
skills,  communication  skills,  social  skills,  research  skills  and  self-management  skills.  Each  of these  categories 
covers  a broad  range,  as shown  by the examples  presented  in the table  below.  The approaches  to learning 
skill categories  are closely  linked  and  interrelated  and  therefore  individual  skills  may  be relevant  to more 
than one category.
How do we teach them?
Approaches  to learning  skills  can be learned  and  taught,  improved  with  practice  and  developed 
incrementally.  The table  below  illustrates,  through  a number  of examples,  how  the SEHS  course  can 
support  approaches  to learning  skills  development.  The examples  shown  in the table  are not exhaustive. 
Teachers  are encouraged  to adapt  them  for use in their  school  context  and  collaboratively  identify  further 
examples of approaches to learning skills development.
Further  information  on the approaches  to learning  framework  and  strategies  for the development  of the 
approaches to learning skills can be found in the SEHS teacher support material  and the Diploma Programme 
Approaches to teaching and learning website .
Table 3
Approaches to learning skills and development
Skill category Examples of approaches to learning skills development in the classroom
Thinking skills • Being curious about the natural world
• Asking questions and framing hypotheses based upon sensible scientific 
rationale
• Designing procedures and models
• Reflecting on the credibility of results
• Providing a reasoned argument to support conclusions
• Evaluating and defending ethical positions
• Combining different ideas in order to create new understandings
• Applying key ideas and facts in new contexts
• Engaging with, and designing, linking questions
• Experimenting with new strategies for learning
• Reflecting at all stages of the assessment and learning cycle
Introduction
Approaches to learning and approaches to teaching 
SEHS
15 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Skill category Examples of approaches to learning skills development in the classroom
Communication skills • Practising active listening skills
• Evaluating extended writing in terms of relevance and structure
• Applying interpretive techniques to different forms of media
• Reflecting on the needs of the audience when creating engaging 
presentations
• Clearly communicating complex ideas in response to open-ended 
questions
• Using digital media for communicating information
• Using terminology, symbols and communication conventions consistently 
and correctly
• Presenting data appropriately
• Delivering constructive criticism appropriately
Social skills • Working collaboratively to achieve a common goal
• Assigning and accepting specific roles during group activities
• Appreciating the diverse talents and needs of others
• Resolving conflicts during collaborative work
• Actively seeking and considering the perspective of others
• Reflecting on the impact of personal behaviour or comments on others
• Constructively assessing the contribution of peers
Research skills • Evaluating information sources for accuracy, bias, credibility and 
relevance
• Explicitly discussing the importance of academic integrity and full 
acknowledgement of the ideas of others
• Using a single, standard method of referencing and citation
• Comparing, contrasting and validating information
• Using search engines and libraries effectively
Self-management skills • Breaking down major tasks into a sequence of stages
• Being punctual and meeting deadlines
• Taking risks and regarding setbacks as opportunities for growth
• Avoiding unnecessary distractions
• Drafting, revising and improving academic work
• Setting learning goals and adjusting them in response to experience
• Seeking and acting on feedback
Experimental programme
Integral  to the student  experience  of a SEHS  course  is the learning  that  takes  place  through  scientific 
inquiry  within  the classroom,  laboratory  or in the field.  Experimentation  through  a variety  of forms  can be 
used  to introduce  a topic,  address  a phenomenon,  or allow  students  to consider  and  examine  authentic 
questions and curiosities.
A school’s  experimental  programme  should  allow  students  to experience  the full breadth  and  depth  of the 
course,  develop  scientific  skills  and  demonstrate  safe,  competent  and  methodical  use of a range  of tools, 
techniques and equipment. Students should therefore be encouraged to develop investigations to support 
their  learning  through  open-ended  inquiry  with  a focus  on laboratory  and  fieldwork  experiments, 
databases, simulations and modelling.Approaches to learning and approaches to teaching SEHS
16 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Conceptual learning
Concept-based learning and teaching is encouraged across the continuum of IB programmes.
Concepts  are mental  representations  of categories.  They  are constructed,  modified  and  activated  by the 
learner  through  learning  experiences.  Concepts  do not exist  in isolation  but are interrelated.  Conceptual 
understanding is always a work in progress—it is continually being developed and refined.
Conceptual  understanding  is therefore  an outcome  of a non-linear,  ongoing  process  of evolving 
understandings,  adapting  previous  understandings,  and  identifying  and  dispelling  misconceptions.  It 
consists  of making  connections  between  prior  and  new  knowledge  to construct  and  build  an awareness  of 
this network of knowledge.
Concepts vary in their level of abstraction and universality.
• They can be organizing ideas that are applicable in many contexts and have relevance both within and 
across subject areas.
• They can provide a deep understanding of specific knowledge fields (or fields of knowledge) and help 
to organize knowledge further, as well as reveal connections between different areas of the subject.
For example,  consider  the following  sequence  of three  concepts,  which  shows  the more  specific  focus  of 
each concept.
Change → Training → Personality
In other  words,  personality  is a component  in understanding  training,  which  in turn  helps  to develop  an 
understanding  of change  in an athlete’s  performance.  The sequence  could  be extended  further  to look  at 
concepts  such  as openness,  extraversion  and  neuroticism,  all of which  provide  a basis  for understanding 
personality.
Outcomes of a concept-based approach
Fostering critical thinking, the outcome of a concept-based approach is that students are able to:
• identify examples of a concept
• organize, reflect on, modify and expand their network of knowledge
• apply concepts to existing and future knowledge
• apply their conceptual understanding as a scientific thinking tool for predicting outcomes, justifying 
conclusions and evaluating knowledge claims.
Structure of the syllabus and conceptual understanding
The structure of this SEHS syllabus is intended to promote concept-based learning and teaching.
There are three broad organizing themes in the SEHS roadmap:
• exercise physiology and nutrition of the human body
• biomechanics
• sports psychology and motor learning.
Inherently,  the three  themes  are highly  intertwined.  They  can therefore  be taught  in any order  to promote 
conceptual  understanding  and  to suit the needs  of students  and  teachers  within  their  particular  school’s 
environment.
The content  in each  theme  is further  arranged  into  topics,  each  with  a guiding  question.  The guiding 
question  gives  a sense  of what  is covered  in the topic,  but more  importantly,  it is a signpost  to promote 
inquiry.  Guiding  questions  are therefore  not straightforward  and  are best  answered  once  the associated 
understandings  have  been  acquired.  Teachers  and  students  are encouraged  to create  their  own  guiding 
questions to capture the content of topics of study.
Several  linking  questions  are associated  with  each  subtopic  throughout  this guide.  Linking  questions 
strengthen  students’  understanding  by making  connections.  They  are intended  to promote  skills  in the 
study  of SEHS  and  the nature  of science,  and  highlight  links  between  the course  understandings.  They Approaches to learning and approaches to teaching SEHS
17 Sports, exercise and health science guide
encourage students to look at an understanding from a different perspective, originating in a different part 
of the course. The ideal outcome of answering the linking questions is networked knowledge.
The linking  questions  in the guide  are not exhaustive.  Students  and  teachers  may  conceive  of other 
connections  between  understandings  and  concepts  in the syllabus,  leading  them  to create  their  own 
linking questions.
Teaching SEHS in context
The study  of SEHS  enables  constructive  engagement  with  topical  scientific  issues.  By contextualizing  SEHS 
concepts,  scientific  knowledge  claims  can be evaluated  more  effectively,  and  informed  choices  on issues 
like human health can be made. Research has brought innovation and benefit to many fields and continues 
to be at the heart  of seeking  effective  solutions  to many  global  challenges.  It is therefore  important  to 
explore  applications  of SEHS  in our world  while  teaching  the course  to elicit  interest,  understanding  and 
curiosity.
Teaching  the content  of the course  in relation  to specific  contexts  supports  the pedagogical  principle  of 
teaching in local and global contexts as part of the approaches to teaching framework and offers a number 
of advantages. First, it helps students relate their learning to genuine applications of SEHS, highlighting the 
relevance  to global  issues  as well  as the significance  in students’  own  contexts.  Second,  it develops  an 
appreciation  for the interaction  between  scientific  solutions  and  their  implications,  be it ethical, 
environmental or economic. Third, it helps to illustrate some of the NOS features underpinning the course.
The SEHS teacher support material  highlights possible areas that could be visited throughout the course and 
that  may  provide  context  for some  topics  to stimulate  the application  of ideas  and  problem-solving  skills. 
Consideration  of these  and  related  areas  may  help  provide  ideas  for the scientific  investigation,  the 
collaborative sciences project, TOK exhibition, CAS, or an EE in SEHS or world studies.
Engaging with sensitive topics
Students  and  teachers  are encouraged  to engage  with  exciting,  stimulating  and  personally  relevant  topics 
and  issues  that  may  be, at times,  sensitive  or personally  challenging.  Teachers  should  be aware  of this and 
provide  guidance  on how  to engage  with  such  topics  in a responsible  manner.  Consideration  should  be 
given to the personal, political and spiritual values of others.
Prior learning
Past experience shows that students will be able to study SEHS at SL successfully with no background in, or 
previous  knowledge  of, science.  Their  approach  to learning,  characterized  by the IB learner  profile 
attributes, will be significant here.
However,  for most  students  considering  the study  of SEHS  at HL, while  there  is no intention  to restrict 
access,  some  previous  exposure  to formal  science  education  would  be necessary.  Specific  topic  details  are 
not specified  but students  who  have  undertaken  the IB Middle  Years  Programme  (MYP)  or studied  an 
equivalent national science qualification or a school-based science course would be well prepared for an HL 
subject.
Links to the Middle Years Programme
The MYP  sciences  courses  seek  to promote  skills  and  attitudes  needed  to apply  scientific  knowledge  in 
theoretical,  experimental  and  authentic  contexts.  A strong  foundation  is established  for DP sciences  in 
which  learners  will capitalize  on—and  continue  advancing—their  skills  and  attitudes  to develop 
knowledge and understanding commensurate with pre-university level science.
The MYP offers a framework for learning and teaching while maintaining flexibility with curriculum content. 
The content  in MYP  sciences  courses  can therefore  vary  greatly  from  one  school  to another.  Content  in DP 
sciences  courses  is more  prescribed,  and  this is one  of the main  differences  teachers  will notice  when 
comparing the two programmes.Approaches to learning and approaches to teaching SEHS
18 Sports, exercise and health science guide
A connected,  conceptual  curriculum  where  learning  is inquiry-based  and  contextualized  are the 
pedagogical  principles  that  underpin  both  programmes  and  indeed  the entire  IB continuum  (International 
Baccalaureate, 2019).
Conceptual  learning  focuses  on organizing  ideas  and  their  interconnections.  A conceptual  approach  is 
encouraged in IB programmes because it promotes deep learning and facilitates the construction of further 
knowledge. Conceptual understanding aids the application of knowledge in unfamiliar and novel contexts. 
This skill is reflected in the aims and assessment objectives of both programmes.
Broad  concepts  frame  MYP  learning  and  teaching  with  the purpose  of unifying  ideas  across  subject  areas. 
Discipline-specific related concepts are intended to provide disciplinary depth (International Baccalaureate, 
2014). Key and related concepts are not required in the DP, although some teachers may find that they wish 
to continue  developing  a curriculum  around  them.  In DP sciences,  overarching  concepts  are manifested  in 
the course  roadmaps  and  the NOS.  DP sciences  seek  to highlight  the interconnectedness  of the course 
understandings.  The intention  is to promote  conceptual  understanding  and  further  the construction  of 
learners’ knowledge networks.
Both  MYP  and  DP teaching  involve  inquiry-based  approaches,  which  foster  a high  degree  of student 
engagement,  collaboration  and  interaction.  The inquiry,  design,  experimental,  analysis,  evaluation  and 
communication  skills  encouraged  by criteria  B and  C will serve  students  well  as they  prepare  to undertake 
the scientific  investigation  for the internal  assessment  (IA).  In addition,  MYP  students  will gain  familiarity 
with  criterion-related  assessment  and  the use of assessment  criteria,  which  will further  support  their 
understanding of the DP sciences IA criteria.
IB programmes encourage the exploration of scientific principles in connection to local and global contexts. 
Doing  so helps  students  ground  abstract  concepts  in more  concrete  local  and  global  real-world  situations 
as well  as cultivating  international-mindedness  (see  the “Approaches  to teaching”  section  in Diploma 
Programme Approaches to teaching and learning website ). Teachers should therefore weave opportunities for 
contextualization  into  the curriculum.  MYP  sciences  criterion  D analyses  the real-world  application  of 
science.  In the DP, sciences  teachers  are encouraged  to frequently  anchor  their  teaching  in real-world 
applications that are invoked throughout the course of the programme.
In addition  to equipping  students  with  scientific  knowledge  and  skills,  the MYP  and  DP sciences  courses 
share similar guiding principles that seek to develop in students the learner profile attributes.
Links to the Career-related Programme
In the Career-related  Programme  (CP),  students  study  at least  two  DP subjects,  a core  consisting  of four 
components and a career-related study, which is determined by the local context and aligned with student 
needs.  The CP has been  designed  to add  value  to the students’  career-related  studies.  This  provides  the 
context for the choice of DP courses. The SEHS course can assist CP students planning careers in a variety of 
professional  fields  where,  for example,  a sound  understanding  of science  skills  is important.  These  include 
healthcare  and  numerous  careers  in the sport  industry,  such  as coaching.  While  SEHS  helps  students 
understand  the underlying  science  in sport  and  health,  it also  encourages  the development  of strong 
problem-solving, critical thinking and ethical approaches that will assist students in the global workplace.Approaches to learning and approaches to teaching SEHS
19 Sports, exercise and health science guide
The collaborative sciences project is an interdisciplinary sciences project, providing a worthwhile challenge 
to DP and  CP students,  addressing  real-world  problems  that  can be explored  through  the sciences.  The 
nature  of the challenge  should  allow  students  to integrate  factual,  procedural  and  conceptual  knowledge 
developed through the study of their disciplines.
Through  the identification  and  research  of complex  issues,  students  can develop  an understanding  of how 
interrelated systems, mechanisms and processes impact a problem. Students will then apply their collective 
understanding  to develop  solution-focused  strategies  that  address  the issue.  With  a critical  lens  they  will 
evaluate and reflect on the inherent complexity of solving real-world problems.
Students  will develop  an understanding  of the extent  of global  interconnectedness  between  regional, 
national  and  local  communities,  which  will empower  them  to become  active  and  engaged  citizens  of the 
world. While addressing local and global issues, students will appreciate that the issues of today exist across 
national boundaries and can only be solved through collective action and international cooperation.
The collaborative  sciences  project  supports  the development  of students’  approaches  to learning  skills, 
including  teambuilding,  negotiation  and  leadership.  It facilitates  an appreciation  of the environment,  and 
the social and ethical implications of science and technology.
Full details of the requirements are in the Collaborative sciences project guide .
Introduction
Collaborative sciences project
20 Sports, exercise and health science guide
The course enables students, through the overarching theme of the NOS, to:
1. develop conceptual understanding that allows connections to be made between different areas of the 
subject, and to other DP sciences subjects
2. acquire and apply a body of knowledge, methods, tools and techniques that characterize science
3. develop the ability to analyse, evaluate and synthesize scientific information and claims
4. develop the ability to approach unfamiliar situations with creativity and resilience
5. design and model solutions to local and global problems in a scientific context
6. develop an appreciation of the possibilities and limitations of science
7. develop technology skills in a scientific context
8. develop the ability to communicate and collaborate effectively
9. develop awareness of the ethical, environmental, economic, cultural and social impact of science.
Introduction
Aims
21 Sports, exercise and health science guide
The assessment  objectives  for SEHS  reflect  those  parts  of the aims  that  will be formally  assessed  either 
internally  or externally.  It is the intention  of this course  that  students  are able  to fulfil  the following 
assessment objectives.
1. Demonstrate knowledge of:
a. terminology, facts and concepts
b. skills, techniques and methodologies.
2. Understand and apply knowledge of:
a. terminology and concepts
b. skills, techniques and methodologies.
3. Analyse, evaluate and synthesize:
a. experimental procedures
b. primary and secondary data
c. trends, patterns and predictions.
4. Demonstrate the application of skills necessary to carry out insightful and ethical investigations.
Introduction
Assessment objectives
22 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Assessments  align  with  the course’s  aims,  objectives  and  conceptual  approach;  the NOS,  and  subject-
specific  skills  are also  assessed.  This  allows  students  to demonstrate  learning  effectively  through  varied 
tasks that are reliably and accurately marked or moderated by subject-area educators and experts.
Assessment objective Which component addresses 
this assessment objective?How is the assessment objective 
addressed?
AO1  Demonstrate knowledge Paper 1
Paper 2
Scientific investigationStudents respond to a range of 
multiple-choice, short-answer 
questions and extended-response 
questions.
Students investigate and answer a 
research question that is their 
own.
AO2  Understand and apply 
knowledgePaper 1
Paper 2
Scientific investigationStudents respond to a range of 
multiple-choice, short-answer, 
data-based and extended-
response questions.
Students investigate and answer a 
research question that is their 
own.
AO3  Analyse, evaluate and 
synthesizePaper 1
Paper 2
Scientific investigationStudents respond to a range of 
multiple-choice, short-answer, 
data-based and extended-
response questions.
Students investigate and answer a 
research question that is their 
own.
AO4  Demonstrate the application 
of skills necessary to carry out 
insightful and ethical 
investigationsScientific investigation Students investigate and answer a 
research question that is their 
own.
Component Approximate weighting of assessment objectives (%)
AO1 + AO2 AO3
Paper 1 50 50
Paper 2 50 50
Internal assessment Covers AO1, AO2, AO3 and AO4
Introduction
Assessment objectives in practice
23 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Syllabus component Teaching hours
SL HL
Syllabus content
A. Exercise physiology and nutrition of the human body
B. Biomechanics
C. Sports psychology and motor learning110
47
30
33180
69
57
54
Experimental programme
Practical work
Collaborative sciences project
Scientific investigation40
20
10
1060
40
10
10
Total teaching hours 150 240
The recommended  teaching  time  is 150 hours  to complete  courses  at standard  level  (SL) and  240 hours  to 
complete  courses  at higher  level  (HL),  as stated  in the general  regulations  (in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures ).
Syllabus
Syllabus outline
24 Sports, exercise and health science guide
The aim of the syllabus  is to integrate  concepts,  topic  content  and  the nature  of science  (NOS),  through 
inquiry.  Students  and  teachers  are encouraged  to personalize  their  approach  to the syllabus  according  to 
their circumstances and interests.
Syllabus
Syllabus roadmap
25 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Figure 2
SEHS roadmap via the interconnected organizing themes
Syllabus roadmap
26 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Syllabus
Syllabus format
27 Sports, exercise and health science guide
The skills  and  techniques  students  must  experience  through  the course  are encompassed  within  the tools. 
These support the application and development of the inquiry process in the delivery of the SEHS course.
Tools
• Tool 1:  Experimental techniques
• Tool 2:  Technology
• Tool 3:  Mathematics
Inquiry process
• Inquiry 1:  Exploring and designing
• Inquiry 2:  Collecting and processing data
• Inquiry 3:  Concluding and evaluating
Teachers  are encouraged  to provide  opportunities  for students  to encounter  and  practise  the skills 
throughout the programme. Rather than being taught as stand-alone topics, they should be integrated into 
the teaching  of the syllabus  when  they  are relevant  to the syllabus  topics  being  covered.  The skills  in the 
study of SEHS can be assessed through internal and external assessment.
The approaches to learning provide the framework for the development of these skills.
Figure 3
Skills for SEHS
Syllabus
Skills in the study of SEHS
28 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Tools
Tool 1: Experimental techniques
Skill Description
Addressing safety of self, others 
and the environment• Recognize and address relevant safety, ethical or environmental 
issues in an investigation.
Measuring variablesUnderstand how to accurately measure the following to an appropriate 
level of precision:
• mass
• volume
• time
• temperature
• length
• rate of physiological change (heart and respiration rates).
Make careful observations, including:
• counts
• relevant qualitative observations
• kinematic observations of motion.
Applying techniquesShow awareness of the purpose and practice of performance tests to 
measure individual components of fitness:
• aerobic capacity
• power
• strength
• muscular endurance
• balance
• body composition
• flexibility
• reaction
• coordination
• speed
• agility.
Methods to quantify perceived exertion.
Use of questionnaires to quantify psychological constructs.
Tool 2: Technology
Skill Description
Applying technology to collect 
data• Use sensors.
• Identify and extract data from databases.
• Generate data from models and simulations.Skills in the study of SEHS
29 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Skill Description
Applying technology to process 
data• Use spreadsheets to manipulate data.
• Represent data in a graphical form.
• Use computer modelling.
• Carry out image analysis.
Tool 3: Mathematics
Skill Description
Applying general mathematics • Use basic arithmetic and algebraic calculations to solve problems.
• Carry out calculations involving decimals, fractions, percentages, 
ratios and reciprocals.
• Calculate measures of central tendency: mean, median and mode.
• Apply measures of dispersion: range, standard deviation, 
coefficient of variation (relative standard deviation), standard 
error and interquartile range.
• Use and interpret scientific notation (for example, 3.5 × 106).
• Use approximation and estimation.
• Appreciate when some effects can be ignored and why this is 
useful.
• Compare and quote values to the nearest order of magnitude.
• Understand direct and inverse proportionality, as well as positive 
and negative correlations between variables.
• Calculate and interpret percentage change and percentage 
difference.
• Calculate and interpret percentage error and percentage 
uncertainty.
• Distinguish between continuous and discrete variables.
• Apply the t-test.
Using units, symbols and 
numerical values• Apply and use International System of Units (SI) prefixes and units.
• Identify and use symbols stated in the guide and the SEHS data 
booklet .
• Express quantities and uncertainties to an appropriate number of 
significant figures or decimal places.
Processing uncertainties • Understand the significance of uncertainties in raw and processed 
data.
• Record uncertainties in measurements as a range (±) to an 
appropriate level of precision.
• Express measurement and processed uncertainties to an 
appropriate number of decimal places or level of precision.
• Apply the coefficient of determination ( R2) to evaluate the fit of a 
trend line or curve.
• Interpret values of the correlation coefficient ( r), identify 
correlations as positive or negative, and compare the values to a 
critical value table.Skills in the study of SEHS
30 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Skill Description
• Apply and interpret appropriate tests of statistical significance (for 
example, the t-test) and understand the p = 0.05 level.
Graphing • Sketch graphs, with labelled but unscaled axes, to qualitatively 
describe trends.
• Construct and interpret tables, charts and graphs for raw and 
processed data, including bar and pie charts, histograms, scatter 
graphs, and line and curve graphs.
• Plot linear and non-linear graphs showing the relationship 
between two variables with appropriate scales and axes.
• Draw lines or curves of best fit.
• Interpret features of graphs including gradient, changes in 
gradient, intercepts, maxima and minima, and areas.
• Draw and interpret ranges, degrees of precision, standard error or 
standard deviations as uncertainty bars.
• Extrapolate and interpolate graphs.
Inquiry process
Inquiry 1: Exploring and designing
Skill Description
Exploring • Demonstrate independent thinking, initiative, and insight.
• Consult a variety of sources.
• Select sufficient and relevant sources of information.
• Formulate research questions and hypotheses.
• State and explain predictions using scientific understanding.
• Understand null and alternative hypotheses.
Designing • Demonstrate creativity in the designing, implementation and 
presentation of the investigation.
• Develop investigations that involve hands-on laboratory 
experiments, databases, simulations and modelling.
• Identify and justify the choice of dependent, independent and 
control variables.
• Justify the range and quantity of measurements.
• Design and explain a valid methodology.
• Pilot methodologies.
Controlling variables Appreciate when and how to:
• reduce bias in study design:
a. choose representative random samples
b. single and double blinding
c. cross-over study design including randomized allocation 
of participants to conditions
d. placebo effectSkills in the study of SEHS
31 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Skill Description
• reduce the confounding effects of human factors on 
physiological performance
• calibrate measuring apparatus.
Inquiry 2: Collecting and processing data
Skill Description
Collecting data • Identify and record relevant qualitative observations.
• Collect and record sufficient relevant quantitative data.
• Identify and address issues that arise during data collection.
Processing data • Carry out relevant and accurate data processing.
Interpreting results • Interpret qualitative and quantitative data.
• Interpret diagrams, graphs and charts.
• Identify, describe and explain patterns, trends and relationships.
• Identify and justify the removal or inclusion of outliers in data 
(no mathematical processing is required).
• Assess accuracy, precision, reliability and validity.
Inquiry 3: Concluding and evaluating
Skill Description
Concluding • Interpret processed data and analysis to draw and justify 
conclusions.
• Compare the outcomes of an investigation to the accepted 
scientific context.
• Relate the outcomes of an investigation to the stated research 
question or hypothesis.
• Discuss the impact of uncertainties on the conclusions.
Evaluating • Evaluate hypotheses.
• Identify and discuss sources and impacts of random and 
systematic errors.
• Evaluate the implications of methodological weaknesses, 
limitations and assumptions on conclusions.
• Explain realistic and relevant improvements to an investigation.
Data booklet
The IB publishes  an SEHS  data  booklet  that  contains  relevant  physical  equations,  constants  and  anatomy 
diagrams, specific to the course. Students must have access to a copy for the duration of the course, so that 
they can become familiar with its contents. Direct reference is made to the data booklet in the syllabus. This 
helps to maintain the emphasis on interpretation and application rather than memorization of data. A clean 
copy of the SEHS data booklet  must also be made available to candidates for all examination papers at both 
SL and HL.Skills in the study of SEHS
32 Sports, exercise and health science guide
A. Exercise physiology and nutrition of the human 
body
A.1 Communication
Guiding  question:  How  does  the body  send  and  receive  information  about  its internal  environment  to 
maintain optimal functioning conditions?
A.1.1 Inter-system communication
Standard level and higher level: 10 hours
A.1.1.1—The nervous system senses both internal and external conditions to coordinate the 
responses of the body’s physiological systems effectively.
The nervous system is divided into the central nervous system and the peripheral nervous system.
The efferent division is subdivided into the autonomic nervous system and the somatic nervous system.
The autonomic nervous system is divided into the sympathetic and the parasympathetic nervous systems.
Examples of the functions of each are required:
• cardiac function, which includes an understanding of the role of extrinsic factors and how they work 
with the intrinsic mechanisms controlling heart rate
• breathing and ventilation
• temperature control.
Proprioceptors, baroreceptors and chemoreceptors are specialized cells that respond to stimuli to initiate 
responses by the nervous system. The internal function of the various receptors is not assessed.
A.1.1.2—The endocrine system, made up of the body's glands and hormones, regulates all 
biological processes in the body.
Hormones are mediator molecules that are released in one part of the body but regulate the activity of 
cells in other parts of the body.
Epinephrine and norepinephrine cause changes in blood pressure, heart rate and blood sugar levels.
Insulin and glucagon regulate blood sugar concentration.
Antidiuretic hormone regulates water retention in the kidney.
Reproductive hormones impact health and athletic performance in the following ways:
• progesterone—a thermogenic effect on thermoregulation and sleep quality, and an effect on fuel 
availability
• oestrogen—effects on sparing glycogen and joint stiffness
• testosterone—effects on bone formation, protein synthesis and erythropoietin.
Linking question(s)
B.1.3—How does coordination between the nervous system and the muscular system result in the ability to 
produce various types of movement?
Additional higher level: None for A.1.1
Syllabus
Syllabus content
33 Sports, exercise and health science guide
A.1.2 Maintaining homeostasis
Standard level and higher level: 6 hours
A.1.2.1—Homeostasis is any self-regulating biological process aiming to produce a relatively stable, 
constant internal environment for optimal functioning of the body. In response to changing 
internal and external conditions, various mechanisms work constantly towards homeostasis.
Homeostasis generally occurs via negative feedback mechanisms that reverse a change back to a 
controlled condition.
Blood pH (hydrogen ion concentration) is influenced by carbon dioxide concentration. pH is monitored 
through the respiratory control centre of the brain and chemoreceptors throughout the body.
Regulation of the heart is dependent on intrinsic and extrinsic excitation. A diagram of the heart’s 
structure is found in the SEHS data booklet .
Regulation of temperature (thermoregulation) relies on the cardiovascular, muscular, nervous and 
integumentary systems working together to maintain a core body temperature of 37 ± 1°C.
Thermoregulation occurs via the sweat response, vasodilation, vasoconstriction, shivering and non-
shivering thermogenesis.
Factors that affect thermoregulation are training status, body composition, environment and sex 
differences (including hormonal phases).
Regulation of blood glucose relies on insulin and glucagon. Exercise limits the release of insulin and 
facilitates the uptake of glucose to regulate blood sugar levels.
Linking question(s)
A.2.2 and A.2.3—How does the endocrine system interact with the energy systems to maintain appropriate 
blood glucose levels?
Additional higher level: 5 hours
A.1.2.2—The body has acute and possible long-term responses to the environment in which it 
functions.
Short-term responses and long-term adaptations in the body can vary in response to the external 
environment (temperature, humidity, altitude).
The extent to which the environment impacts performance of an activity depends on the nature of the 
activity.
Different strategies can be used to support performance of an activity and acclimatize the body to 
variations in the immediate environment.
Linking question(s)
C.1.2—How  do the challenges  of performing  in varied  environments  influence  mental  toughness  and 
learning?
Tool  1, Inquiry  2—How  effective  are experimental  methods  in creating  double-blind  experiments  in varied 
environments?
A.1.3 Transport
Standard level and higher level: 7 hours
A.1.3.1—The cardiovascular system transports nutrients, hormones, gases, heat and waste to 
perform necessary bodily functions.
Heart rate, stroke volume, cardiac output, blood pressure and blood redistribution vary, and depend on 
factors such as age, sex differences, body size, level of fitness, type of activity and intensity of activity.
A diagram of the cardiovascular system is found in the SEHS data booklet .Syllabus content
34 Sports, exercise and health science guide
A.1.3.2—The respiratory system enables the exchange of gases between the external environment 
and the body, to facilitate cellular respiration.
Minute ventilation, tidal volume and change in respiration rate can vary, and depend on factors such as 
age, sex differences, body size, level of fitness, type of activity and intensity of activity.
A diagram of the respiratory system is found in the SEHS data booklet .
Linking question(s)
A.3.1—How  do specific  qualities  in long-term  training  influence  the structures  and  functions  of the 
cardiovascular system?
Tool 1, C.4.1—To what extent do cardiorespiratory measurements indicate stress and arousal levels?
Additional higher level: None for A.1.3
A.2 Hydration and nutrition
Guiding question:  How do nutritional and hydration status influence the body's ability to perform a variety 
of activities?
A.2.1Water and electrolyte balance
Standard level and higher level: 3 hours
A.2.1.1—Water and electrolyte balance is necessary for effective functioning of the body and is 
influenced by the environment.
Water and electrolyte intake occurs via the large intestine. Loss of fluids and electrolytes occurs via 
evaporation through the skin and the respiratory tract, and excretion via osmosis.
Dehydration, hypernatremia and hyponatremia are three states that can occur if water and electrolyte 
balance is not maintained. This will affect health and performance.
Water and electrolyte balance can be measured in a variety of ways, including body weight, urine colour 
and osmolarity.
Electrolyte balance is regulated by the hypothalamus, pituitary gland and kidneys. Knowledge of the 
function of the nephron and the structure of the kidneys are not assessed.
Cardiovascular drift is caused by water loss from the body or an increase in core body temperature during 
a prolonged steady state of submaximal (or aerobic) exercise in thermoneutral and hot environments.
Linking question(s)
NOS, A.1.1—How reliable is the sensation of thirst as an indicator of dehydration?
A.1.2 HL—What is the relationship between the external environment and electrolyte balance?
Tool  1, Inquiry  2 and  3—Which  techniques  are most  suitable  for generating  valid  and  reliable  data  on the 
internal conditions of the body during exercise?
Additional higher level: None for A.2.1
A.2.2 Fuelling for health and performance
Standard level and higher level: 6 hours
A.2.2.1—Macronutrients (carbohydrates, proteins and lipids) provide sources of energy to maintain 
bodily functions during growth, rest and physical activity.
Relative contributions of macronutrients to bodily functions depend on an individual’s body composition, 
age, sex differences and activity level.
The availability of macronutrients and their metabolization within our body influences health and 
performance.Syllabus content
35 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Nutritional strategies related to macronutrient consumption prior to and during exercise can affect 
gastrointestinal comfort and sporting performance. These can be adjusted for the specific demands of the 
activity and the sportsperson’s sex differences, age and activity level.
Low energy availability (LEA) is a state in which the body has insufficient energy to support physiological 
functions needed for optimal health. Relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S) is a consequence of 
prolonged LEA.
Linking question(s)
A.3.1—How should nutritional periodization be linked to training programmes?
Inquiry  1—How  can variables  be controlled  effectively  when  designing  experiments  on nutrition  for 
exercise and health?
A.3.1  HL—How  can an athlete  manage  fuel and  liquid  intake  during  an event  to minimize  the onset  of 
fatigue?
Additional higher level: 4 hours
A.2.2.2—Micronutrients play highly specific roles in facilitating energy transfer and tissue 
synthesis.
Iron is a component of haemoglobin and myoglobin, and helps both of them to transport oxygen for 
aerobic respiration.
Calcium is a component of bone and connective tissue and plays a role in muscle contraction.
Sodium and potassium are electrolytes that are essential to maintain water balance and proper muscle 
and nerve function.
Vitamins support tissue synthesis and act as regulators of metabolic reactions, which release energy. 
Specific knowledge of individual vitamins is not assessed.
A.2.2.3—The gut microbiome influences the health and performance of an individual.
Genetics, diet, medications and lifestyle influence the microbiome.
The gut microbiome affects the availability and uptake of nutrients, and therefore health and 
performance.
Linking question(s)
C.4.2—How does anxiety affect the gut microbiome?
A.2.3 Energy systems
Standard level and higher level: 7 hours
A.2.3.1—The body relies on the phosphagen, glycolytic and oxidative systems for energy 
production to sustain life and physical activity.
The energy systems have different fuel sources for ATP production, recovery capabilities, benefits and 
limitations during physical activity.
The energy continuum aids in describing the relative contribution of each energy system depending on 
the nature of the activity.
While at rest, and during extended periods of submaximal intensity, the oxidative system is the dominant 
supplier of ATP to support the body’s activities.
During both short- and high-intensity periods, and sudden increases of intensity, anaerobic ATP 
production (phosphagen and anaerobic glycolysis) supports the body’s functions.
Knowledge of biochemical details of the Krebs’s cycle and the electron transport chain are not assessed.Syllabus content
36 Sports, exercise and health science guide
A.2.3.2—Maximal oxygen consumption (VO2 max) is influenced by an individual’s age, sex 
differences, body composition, lifestyle factors and level of fitness.
Endurance performance is affected by VO2 max and efficiency of movement, e.g. running economy.
Linking question(s)
C.1.2—How does a person’s level of aerobic fitness affect their mental toughness?
B.1.3—How does a lack of ATP affect muscular contraction?
Additional higher level: 2 hours
A.2.3.3—The lactate inflection point is the maximum intensity at which the body can metabolize 
lactate at the same rate as its production.
A.2.3.4—Excess post-exercise oxygen consumption (EPOC) is required for the body to return to 
homeostasis and is dependent on the oxygen deficit incurred during exercise. EPOC is typically 
divided into two subsections: fast and slow.
Linking question(s)
A.1.2—How  might  exercising  in hot,  humid  conditions  for extended  periods  of time  influence  the 
predominant energy system used and the lactate inflection point?
C.1.2—Is there a relationship between mental toughness and the lactate inflection point?
A.3 Response
Guiding question:  How does our body respond to exercise or training?
A.3.1 Qualities of training
Standard level and higher level: 6 hours
A.3.1.1—The quality of training design and programme design are essential elements in developing 
a safe and effective programme for improving health or performance.
Common training principles direct programme design. These are: specificity, progressive overload 
(frequency, intensity and duration), recovery (rest principle), variety, reversibility and periodization.
Measuring baseline values and progress are important components of design.
Macrocycles, mesocycles and microcycles impact athletic performance.
An athlete’s adaptive responses to training will depend on the intensity and methods (anaerobic and 
aerobic) of training utilized, and well as inter-individual differences such as genetics (responders versus 
non-responders).
Training programmes need to consider:
• the individual’s current level of fitness
• age and sex differences (including reproductive status)
• hormonal changes during the menstrual cycle, based on an arbitrary natural 28-day cycle (a diagram 
of the menstrual cycle is found in the SEHS data booklet )
• the phase of the macrocycle.
Overreaching and overtraining are possible consequences of poorly designed or poorly maintained 
programmes.
Linking question(s)
C.3, C.4, Tool 2—How can monitoring inform an athlete’s readiness for training?
B.3.2—How  do the training  principles  of prehabilitation  and  appropriate  warm-up  protocols  support  injury 
reduction?Syllabus content
37 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Additional higher level: None for A.3.1
A.3.2 Benefits to health of being active
Standard level and higher level: 2 hours
A.3.2.1—An active lifestyle supports physical well-being.
A healthy level of physical activity for an individual varies with factors such as age and sex differences.
The basic components of energy balance include energy intake, energy consumption and energy storage.
Physical activity can positively or negatively affect muscular and immune system function.
The risk of developing osteoporosis, obesity, hypertension, cardiovascular diseases and type 2 diabetes 
can be reduced through an active lifestyle. Knowledge of ossification and osteoblasts is not assessed.
Additional higher level: 2 hours
A.3.2.2—Prescribing exercise for health and sporting performance needs careful consideration and 
planning.
Exercise intensity should progress appropriately to avoid injury risk.
For physical and mental health, the appropriateness of certain exercises for specific target groups needs to 
be considered. These include children and adolescents, older adults and individuals who are pregnant.
Linking question(s)
A.2.2.1—How might dietary intake impact perceived exertion and mental health?
C.4.2—How might exercise be part of a coping strategy for a pregnant or menopausal sportsperson?
A.3.3 Fatigue and recovery
Additional higher level: 9 hours
A.3.3.1—Fatigue can originate at different levels of the motor or energy pathway, possibly 
combining a variety of sources.
Central and peripheral neuromuscular mechanisms are responsible for fatigue.
Peripheral neuro-muscular mechanisms—including imbalance in pH, lack of hydration and insufficient 
fuel availability—can all contribute to fatigue.
Suboptimal availability of calcium, sodium and potassium can also contribute to fatigue.
A.3.3.2—Recovery from exercise.
Signs of recovery from exercise include:
• physiological indicators—for example, reduced blood lactate concentration
• symptomatic indicators—for example, reduced muscle soreness
• psychological indicators—for example, improved preparedness for the next session or competition.
Evaluation of nutritional strategies for recovery. These can include consumption of:
• water
• macronutrients—including protein and carbohydrates—which depend on the activity goal
• creatine monohydrate
• polyphenol-rich foods.
Evaluation of recovery techniques such as myofascial release, wearing compression garments and 
thermotherapy.
Evaluation of sleep for recovery.Syllabus content
38 Sports, exercise and health science guide
• The quality of sleep can affect both recovery and performance. The amount of sleep required beyond 
general recommendations is dependent on the training load.
• Travel, both across and within time zones, may affect sleep quality. There are methods that describe 
practices for adjusting sleep habits.
Linking question(s)
B.1.3—What is the impact of fatigue on muscular contraction?
C.3—What is the relationship between motivation and fatigue?
Inquiry 1—Do placebos positively affect recovery?
B. Biomechanics
B.1 Generating movement in the body
Guiding question:  How are the structure and function of the musculoskeletal system related to movement 
of the human body?
B.1.1 Anatomical position, planes and movement
Standard level and higher level: 3 hours
B.1.1.1—The human skeleton is divided into an axial component and an appendicular component. 
These have different primary functions.
Positional terminology is used to describe the relative positions of body parts. For example: superior, 
inferior, proximal, distal, anterior, posterior, medial, lateral and intermediate.
A diagram of the skeletal system is found in the SEHS data booklet .
B.1.1.2—Movements occur in one or more planes, and rotations occur along one or more axes.
Movements are described by a set of specific terms: flexion, extension, abduction, adduction, pronation, 
supination, protraction, retraction, opposition, reposition, inversion, eversion, elevation, depression, 
circumduction, rotation, plantarflexion, dorsiflexion, horizontal flexion and horizontal extension.
A diagram of the major planes is found in the SEHS data booklet .
Linking question(s)
C.2.1—Can  understanding  and  applying  the correct  anatomical  terms  of movement  increase  the rate  of 
learning a skill?
Additional higher level: 3 hours
B.1.1.3—Anthropometry, the measurement of body segments and proportions of the human body, 
has applications in many areas of sport and health science.
Anthropometric databases are used by equipment manufacturers for the design and sizing of equipment.
Ergonomic design improves efficiency during performance.
Linking question(s)
B.3.2—How does the use of anthropometry assist with the design of protective equipment?
C.2.1—Can the ergonomic design of sporting implements aid in skills acquisition?
B.1.2 Structure and function of connective tissues and joints
Standard level and higher level: 3 hoursSyllabus content
39 Sports, exercise and health science guide
B.1.2—The structure of connective tissues and joints are related to their function in enabling 
movement.
Connective tissues—bone, ligaments, cartilage, fascia and tendons—have functions that increase stability 
and permit movement.
The three main types of articulations—fibrous, cartilaginous and synovial—have different structures and 
functions.
The various types of joints, and classes of synovial joints, vary in the amount of stability and movement 
they provide.
Knowledge at the cellular level is not assessed.
Linking question(s)
A.3.1—How does training affect the stability and movement of connective tissue?
Additional higher level: None for B.1.2
B.1.3 Muscular function
Standard level and higher level: 4 hours
B.1.3.1—The body uses different types of muscular contractions to create movement and stability. 
Each type of contraction has a different function.
Muscles are organized in functional groupings called motor units that contract using the all-or-none 
principle.
Muscular contraction requires the metabolism of ATP within the muscle cells.
Motor units are differentiated by fibre type and neuron diameter: types I, IIa and IIx. Their recruitment 
patterns vary depending on the activity.
Hypertrophy and atrophy of muscle can cause alterations in a motor unit recruitment pattern.
Contractions can be described in four different ways: isometric, isotonic concentric, isotonic eccentric and 
isokinetic.
Muscles usually function in pairs, and act with reciprocal inhibition: their pairings are agonist and 
antagonist.
Linking question(s)
A.2.2—How does malnutrition affect muscular function?
B.1.4,  B.2.1—How  do different  types  of muscle  fibre  affect  our ability  to exert  forces  in a sporting 
environment?
Additional higher level: 2 hours
B.1.3.2—The sliding filament theory describes the interaction between myofilaments and the 
molecules responsible for sarcomere or muscle contraction.
Calcium, ATP and the proteins actin, myosin, troponin and tropomyosin have specific roles.
Diagrams of a sarcomere and a muscle fibre are found in the SEHS data booklet .
Linking question(s)
A.2.2.1,  A.2.2.2—How  can knowledge  of the sliding  filament  theory  be applied  to optimize  nutrient  intake 
and timing, to enhance muscle function, recovery and performance in athletes and active individuals?
NOS, Tool 2—How can technology be utilized to support our understanding of microscopic phenomena?
B.1.4 Levers in movement and sport
Standard level and higher level: 2 hoursSyllabus content
40 Sports, exercise and health science guide
B.1.4.1—Three different classes of levers, both within and outside the human body, work to create 
movements.
The relative positions of the effort, fulcrum and load determine the class, and the mechanical advantage 
and disadvantage, of the lever.
Levers inside the body work to create movement. They can be used to project an object that is outside the 
body or be used as an implement.
Levers outside the body can be used to enhance the functionality of movement in a physical activity or to 
enhance performance.
Linking question(s)
C.2.1—How can changing external levers (e.g. the pole length in a pole vault) affect skills acquisition?
Additional higher level: None for B.1.4
B.2 Forces, motion and movement
Guiding question:  How can the laws of motion be applied to explain the movement of bodies in sport and 
exercise, and be used to improve performance?
B.2.1 Newton’s laws of motion
Standard level and higher level: 5 hours
B.2.1.1—Linear and angular motion can be analysed using Newton's laws of motion.
The motion of an object can be described using speed, velocity and acceleration.
The resultant motion of an object is determined by the sum of the forces acting on it.
The following principles relate to applications of Newton’s laws.
• Stability—factors affecting stability include the height of the centre of mass relative to the 
supporting surface, the size of the support base, the position of the line of gravity relative to the 
support base and the mass.
• The principle of summing joint forces.
• Linear motion—the greater the impulse applied, the greater the change in momentum.
• The principle of impulse direction.
• Angular motion—this is produced by the application of a force acting at a distance from the centre of 
mass: an eccentric force.
• Angular momentum is conserved when an athlete or object is free of additional eccentric forces.
The equations for speed, linear velocity, angular velocity, acceleration and linear momentum are found in 
the SEHS data booklet .
The equation for force and weight is found in the SEHS data booklet .
The use of trigonometry is not assessed. Calculations are limited to three terms for SL and to four terms for 
HL.
Linking question(s)
B.2.1—How can coaches use Newton’s laws to improve the performance of their athletes?
Additional higher level: 12 hours
B.2.1.2—A collision results in a change in momentum in the colliding bodies.
The change in momentum is equal to the impulse applied to the object.
Collisions involving a ball are affected by its coefficient of restitution.
The equation of coefficient of restitution is found in the SEHS data booklet .Syllabus content
41 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Calculations in assessment will be limited to one dimension.
B.2.1.3—The force of friction is determined by the coefficient of friction.
The coefficients of static and dynamic friction depend on the materials in contact.
Frictional force can be modified to improve sports performance.
Equations for the coefficients of static and dynamic friction are found in the SEHS data booklet .
B.2.1.4—Work results from the application of a force over a distance.
When work is done, energy is transformed from one form to others.
Power is a measure of the rate at which work is done. Measuring power output can therefore be a measure 
of work intensity.
Power output can be optimized through correct technique and the effective design of sports equipment.
Equations for work and power are found in the SEHS data booklet .
Linking question(s)
NOS,  B.2.2—Can  the use of heated  runners  in bobsleigh,  or a sharkskin  swimsuit  in a swimming  pool,  be 
considered an unfair advantage?
B.2.2 Fluid mechanics
Standard level and higher level: 3 hours
B.2.2.1—The path of a projectile through air is determined by different factors and forces.
A projectile’s flight path is primarily determined by the initial velocity and angle of projection.
An object’s desired flight path is affected by the height of release relative to the target.
An object’s flight path is influenced by the ratio of weight to air resistance.
Linking question(s)
NOS, Tool 3, Inquiry 3—How can graphs provide evidence of systematic and random errors?
Additional higher level: 8 hours
B.2.2.2—Environmental conditions such as temperature, humidity, air pressure, wind, salinity of 
water and altitude affect the external forces acting on an object.
B.2.2.3—The forces of buoyancy, lift and drag acting on a body as it moves through a fluid (air or 
water) have a measurable effect on its path.
A projectile travelling through a fluid may be affected by Bernoulli’s principle, the angle of attack 
and the Magnus effect.
Buoyancy is dependent on the density of the fluid and the volume of the fluid displaced.
Drag includes surface drag, form drag and wave drag, and can be altered by manipulating the 
environment and the moving object.
There can be sporting, ethical and regulatory implications of these effects.
Linking question(s)
A.1.3—How can friction and drag be used to enhance training?
B.2.3 Movement analysis and its applications
Standard level and higher level: 3 hoursSyllabus content
42 Sports, exercise and health science guide
B.2.3.1—A phases-of-movement approach is used to break down and describe movements.
The phases are preparatory, force production and critical instant, with a phase called “follow through” for 
discrete skills and “recovery” for continuous skills.
Movement analysis can identify areas for improvement applicable to health, safety and sporting 
performance. These include, but are not limited to, rehabilitation and accessibility.
Linking question(s)
A.3.1,  B.3.1,  B.3.2—How  does  movement  analysis  help  a coach  design  a training  programme,  or a 
physiotherapist design a rehabilitation programme?
Additional higher level: None for B.2.3
B.3 Injury
Guiding  question : What  are the primary  causes  of musculoskeletal  injury,  and  how  can they  be prevented 
and treated?
B.3.1 Causes of injury
Standard level and higher level: 3 hours
B.3.1.1—The complex interaction of internal and external risk factors can predispose and make an 
individual susceptible to injury.
Internal factors—such as age, sex differences, pregnancy, the effects of training, congenital factors and 
previous injury—are considered individual variables.
External factors, such as the use of personal protective equipment, are considered environmental 
variables.
B.3.1.2—An acute trauma is caused by a sudden or excessive application of force, or by a force from 
an unexpected direction. A cumulative trauma is caused by the repeated application of force.
Trauma can lead to injuries of connective tissue, muscle, bone, skin and the brain.
Only functional concussion-like injury will be assessed for the brain.
Linking question(s)
A.3.1—Can overtraining lead to altered gait, in turn leading to injury?
A.3.1—How does training or participation in sport and exercise affect rates of injury?
Additional higher level: 2 hours
B.3.1.3—Chronic or overuse injuries are often related to technique.
Correcting biomechanical maladaptations can decrease the risk of injury.
Linking question(s)
C.2.1—How  can the constraint-led  approach  to skills  acquisition  be applied  to identify  and  correct 
biomechanical maladaptation?
B.3.2 Interventions related to injury
Standard level and higher level: 4 hours
B.3.2.1—Methods of lowering the risk of injury attempt to minimize the abnormal application of 
forces and maximize the ability of the body to absorb any such application of force.
Protective equipment can lower the risk of injury, including the risk of concussion.
Sporting equipment can be selected or adjusted to suit users of different body sizes and shapes.Syllabus content
43 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Flexibility training, proper warm-up and prehabilitation exercises can lower the risk of injury.
Learning and using correct technique and using developmentally appropriate rules are also effective.
B.3.2.2—The initial stages of injury treatment often involve mitigation of inflammation.
Serious injuries that involve complete tears or major fractures will sometimes require surgical 
repair.
In the healing process, therapeutic modalities (some managed by para-professionals) are provided 
to promote healing and a safe return to activity.
Compression, elevation, ice and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are examples of 
treatments for inflammation.
A balance is usually struck between the healing benefits of inflammation and the amelioration of pain.
B.3.2.3—Treatment of concussion varies based on the specifics of the injury. The pace of recovery is 
not always linear.
A return to normal daily activities, learning or sport is generally a staged process involving increasing 
levels of cognitive and physical demand.
Linking question(s)
C.1.2—To what extent may mental toughness affect recovery from injury?
C.3.2—How does the type of motivational climate (e.g. mastery oriented, performance oriented) impact the 
recovery process?
Additional higher level: None for B.3.2
C. Sports psychology and motor learning
C.1 Individual differences
Guiding  question:  What  characteristics  explain  how  and  why  some  individuals  succeed  and  experience 
well-being in sport and health contexts more than others?
C.1.1 Personality
Standard level and higher level: 2 hours
C.1.1.1—Personality refers to individual differences in characteristic patterns of thinking, feeling 
and behaving. Personality is typically understood to be an interaction between genetic traits and 
the environment.
Trait-based approaches present personality traits as relatively enduring, stable characteristics.
Traits are assessed using validated self-report questionnaires.
A common approach to assessing personality traits is through “the big five”.
• Openness to experience describes an individual’s willingness to try to new things, their ability to be 
vulnerable and their capacity for original thinking.
• Conscientiousness describes the tendency to control impulses, act in socially acceptable ways and act 
in ways that facilitate goal-directed behaviour.
• Extraversion (or its opposite, introversion) describes the extent to which individuals draw energy 
from interacting with other people (or find it draining).
• Agreeableness describes how well individuals relate to others and act in a way that will preserve 
relationships.Syllabus content
44 Sports, exercise and health science guide
• Neuroticism, or its opposite, emotional stability, describes the extent to which individuals perceive 
situations as distressing, or maintain emotional balance.
Linking question(s)
C.3—How do personality factors affect an individual’s motivation?
NOS,  Inquiry  1—What  are the confounding  variables  when  investigating  the impact  of personality  type  on 
performance outcomes for players of team sports?
Additional higher level: 2 hours
C.1.1.2—Social learning theory is a situational approach to understanding behaviour.
Individuals learn behaviours, attitudes and behavioural consequences from other individuals in their social 
environment.
Behaviours are learned from observation and imitation.
The regard with which the role model (the person being observed) is held by the follower determines the 
extent of replication of behaviours.
C.1.1.3—Personality can change over a long period of time.
Personality can be modified over a significant period of time through experience, coaching and reflection.
There is no personality profile that predicts sport performance.
Observed behaviours are an interaction of personality traits and social learning.
Linking question(s)
Inquiry 1—How can observer bias be controlled when undertaking interviews and observations?
C.1.2 Mental toughness
Standard level and higher level: 2 hours
C.1.2.1—Mental toughness is an aspect of personality that partly explains how individuals manage 
challenging and pressurized situations.
Mental toughness encompasses appraisal of challenges, commitment, confidence, perceived control and 
resilience.
Mental toughness contributes to successful sporting performance in high-pressure situations.
Mental toughness is a malleable personality trait. Studies suggest that mental toughness may be partly 
related to genetic traits, that in turn lead to personality traits. Studies also suggest that it can be developed 
further through training.
Mental toughness is difficult to observe, as it requires self-reported assessment.
Linking question(s)
C.4.2—How do mentally tough individuals cope with stress?
Inquiry  1—How  can utilizing  single-  and  double-blind  experiments  support  causal  claims  of how  mental 
toughness affects coping with stress?
Additional higher level: 4 hours
C.1.2.2—The theory of the “self-fulfilling prophecy” in sporting success suggests that a 
sportsperson’s perceived self-confidence results in greater persistence and effort, leading to an 
increased probability of eventual success.
“Learned helplessness” is associated with an individual’s self-perceived lack of control over their future.Syllabus content
45 Sports, exercise and health science guide
C.1.2.3—Mental toughness is positively associated with better health outcomes, including fewer 
depressive symptoms, fewer burnout symptoms and improved sleep quality.
C.1.2.4—Attribution theory illustrates how the locus of control and locus of stability can impact 
subsequent confidence.
Linking question(s)
A.2.3,  A.3.1—Do  mentally  tough  performers  last longer  on a maximal  test after  they  reach  their  theoretical 
maximum?
A.2.3,  A.3.1—How  can the strength  of relationships  between  mental  toughness  and  performance  in 
maximal physiological tests be determined?
C.2 Motor learning
Guiding question:  How are skills acquired, practised and perfected?
C.2.1 Motor learning processes
Standard level and higher level: 10 hours
C.2.1.1—Learning, including motor learning, is a relatively permanent change in behaviour brought 
about by experience, whereas performance is a temporary occurrence, fluctuating over time.
Two competing models of motor learning are the information processing model and the ecological model. 
These models are respectively exemplified by schema theory and by ecological dynamics theory.
Motor learning theories include non-linear pedagogy and traditional linear pedagogy.
Non-linear pedagogy is exemplified by:
• ecological systems theory and dynamical systems theory—these theories include the concepts of 
performance variability, degrees of freedom, perception–action coupling and self-organization
• a constraints-led approach to skills acquisition: types of constraints and practical examples.
Linear pedagogy is exemplified by:
• open-loop and closed-loop theory
• schema theory
• generalized motor patterns and subordinate motor patterns
• phases of learning that include cognitive, associative and autonomous phases
• the practical implications of coaching learners in each phase.
C.2.1.2—The psychological refractory period is the time in which response to a second stimulus is 
significantly slowed because a first stimulus is still being processed.
The psychological refractory period is commonly exploited in sport. An example is the use of deception, 
e.g. in movement: taking advantage in a second move of the time it took an opponent to react to a first 
“false” move.
C.2.1.3—Transfer of learning refers to the influence of previous experience performing a skill on the 
learning of a new skill.
Types of transfer include skill to skill, practice to performance, abilities to skills, bilateral, stage to stage and 
principles to skills.
Linking question(s)
A.3.1—To what extent do the training programmes developed by coaches reflect the stages of learning?
Tool 2, B.2.3—How can video technology be used to monitor or influence progress in acquiring a skill?Syllabus content
46 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Additional higher level: None for C.2.1
C.2.2 Attentional control
Standard level and higher level: 2 hours
C.2.2.1—The proficient execution of specific skills requires the correct attentional focus.
Attention can be internal or external, and broad or narrow.
Concentration is said to be “lost” when attention is directed away from relevant tasks. This is known as 
distraction.
• External distractors can be visual or auditory.
• Internal distractors are cognitions that are either negative or unrelated to the goal-directed 
behaviour.
Controlled distraction is a method used by athletes to improve attentional control.
Attentional narrowing occurs when an individual is in a high-arousal situation.
Self-talk and goal setting are frequently used to control attentional focus.
Linking question(s)
C.1.2—How can mental toughness training prevent attentional narrowing?
A.3.1—How do mentally tough individuals respond to overreaching?
Additional higher level: None for C.2.2
C.3 Motivation
Guiding  question:  What  are the psychological  processes  that  drive  human  behaviour,  and  how  can these 
be influenced?
C.3.1 Achievement motivation
Standard level and higher level: 3 hours
C.3.1.1—Need achievement theory posits that personality and situational factors interact to 
produce resultant factors, which create emotional factors, which drive behavioural factors.
Coaches, sport scientists and health professionals can change situational factors to encourage individuals 
to approach achievement situations.
C.3.1.2—Goal orientation theory assumes that individuals strive to feel successful.
The perception of success can be referenced to self (task-oriented) or norms (ego-oriented).
High task orientation is associated with greater perseverance and effort.
Linking question(s)
C.3.3—How can an athlete’s achievement orientation be manipulated by a motivational climate?
Inquiry 1—How can scientists use control groups to claim causation between achievement orientation and 
motivational climate?
C.3.2—How is goal orientation associated with self-determination?
Tool 2—To what extent can technology be used to enhance motivation?
Additional higher level: 2 hours
C.3.1.3—High ego orientation can be problematic if task orientation is low.
High ego orientation is non-problematic when the individual believes that others perceive their ability as 
high.Syllabus content
47 Sports, exercise and health science guide
However, high ego is likely to lead to anxiety, dropout or excuses if the individual believes others perceive 
their ability as low.
Individuals will seek to protect their ego and therefore become defensive if it is challenged.
Linking question(s)
B.3.1.1—How does an individual’s perceived ability impact their risk of injury?
C.3.2 Self-determination
Standard level and higher level: 3 hours
C.3.2.1—Self-determination theory hypothesizes that humans strive to satisfy needs of autonomy, 
competence and relatedness.
C.3.2.2—Motivation can be placed along a continuum from amotivation to controlled motivation to 
autonomous motivation.
Amotivation is the absence of motivation. This occurs when there is no perceived contingency between 
effort and reward.
Controlled motivation is extrinsic, i.e. when engaging in an activity is a means to an end.
Autonomous motivation is intrinsic (self-determined) when engaging in an activity is an end in itself. This 
could be motivation to know, to accomplish or to experience stimulation.
Intrinsic motivation is positively associated with enjoyment, self-regulation and persistence, while extrinsic 
motivation is positively associated with anxiety.
Linking question(s)
C.3.3—How can motivational climate affect self-determination?
A.1.2 HL—To what extent can the constraints posed by environmental conditions impact motivation?
Inquiry  1—How  do psychologists  decide  on an appropriate  sample  size when  investigating  the 
relationships between rewards and motivation?
Additional higher level: 6 hours
C.3.2.3—Self-determination theory is a meta-theory comprising six mini-theories, each explaining a 
facet of individual motivation.
Cognitive evaluation theory explains how informational rewards support intrinsic motivation.
Rewards aimed at influencing motivation can undermine intrinsic motivation, creating the 
overjustification effect and making the motivation become more extrinsic.
Organismic integration theory explains the increasing internalization of controlled motivation through 
four subtypes of extrinsic motivation.
• Extrinsic regulation is when behaviours are regulated by a sense of little or no choice (“I must”).
• Introjected regulation is when behaviours are regulated by preventing feelings of guilt (“I should”).
• Identified regulation is when behaviours are regulated by a desire to do something but as a means to 
an end, i.e. contingent on a reward (“I want to”).
• Integrated regulation is when the motivation has been largely internalized by aligning with personal 
goals, values or beliefs, but is still contingent on a reward.
Causal orientations theory identifies three types of causal orientations.
• Autonomy orientation—the individual acts out of interest in and valuing what is occurring.
• Control orientation—the focus is on rewards, gains and approval.
• Amotivation—this is characterized by anxiety concerning competence.
Basic psychological needs theory suggests that psychological well-being and optimal functioning are 
predicated on autonomy, competence and relatedness.Syllabus content
48 Sports, exercise and health science guide
• Well-being and performance are predicted by the extent to which these basic psychological needs 
are met or thwarted.
Goal contents theory distinguishes between extrinsic and intrinsic goals. Intrinsic goals are associated with 
greater well-being.
Relationships motivation theory argues that some amount of positive interpersonal interactions are not 
only desirable but essential for well-being.
Linking question(s)
C.3.3—How do the types of rewards help shape the motivational climate?
C.3.3 Motivational climate
Standard level and higher level: 2 hours
C.3.3.1—Motivational climate describes the psychological environment that the coach creates by 
designing sessions that provide instructions and feedback, which will help to motivate the athletes 
in training or competition.
There are two contrasting recognized motivational climates: mastery and ego.
• A mastery climate emphasizes individual or team development, supporting and recognizing effort, 
cooperation and improvement.
• An ego climate emphasizes winning at all costs, competition and comparison with others.
Mastery climates are most effective for enjoyment, teamwork and maximizing performance over time. Ego 
climates are anxiety-inducing and are typically only effective in the short term.
Coaches and psychologists often use the TARGET (task, authority, recognition, grouping, evaluation and 
time) approach to foster a mastery motivational climate.
Linking question(s)
C.4.1—Why might an ego motivational climate be anxiety-inducing?
C.1.2—Can the motivational climate lead to overtraining?
Additional higher level: None for C.3.3
C.4 Stress and coping
Guiding  question : How  do stress  and  anxiety  manifest  themselves  and  affect  performance  and  health? 
How can specific coping strategies be used to manage this?
C.4.1 Arousal and anxiety
Standard level and higher level: 3 hours
C.4.1.1—Arousal refers to the level of physical and psychological activation. This impacts on sport 
performance in the way that individuals attempt to manage their levels of intensity.
Traditional unidimensional theories of psychological arousal are drive theory and inverted U theory.
According to inverted U theory, athletes have their own individual zone of optimal functioning (IZOF). This 
is the zone where their psychological arousal is personally optimal for their sporting performance.
C.4.1.2—When anxiety is low, individuals experience positive emotions, such as excitement, desire 
and elation. High levels of anxiety induce negative emotions such as fear, worry and despondency.
Multidimensional approaches to anxiety recognize that activation level alone is insufficient to explain 
anxiety’s effects on performance.
Catastrophe theory suggests that when both cognitive and somatic anxiety are high, performance 
declines rapidly or is ended prematurely.Syllabus content
49 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Anxiety can be measured via subjective measures, e.g. self-reporting, or objective measures, e.g. variation 
in heart rate and blood pressure and galvanic skin response.
Linking question(s)
C.5.1—How can anxiety be managed through psychological skills training?
A.1.1, A.1.2—How do internal physiological regulatory processes impact anxiety or arousal?
C.1.1, C.3.2—Are certain personalities more likely to be anxious?
Additional higher level: None for C.4.1
C.4.2 Coping
Standard level and higher level: 2 hours
C.4.2.1—A stressor causes psychological strain. This can be positive, such as looking forward to an 
opportunity, or negative, such as fearing an outcome.
Individuals seek to manage stressors through coping strategies. These are categorized as:
• problem focused—strategies that seek to alter the stressor and include problem solving, removing 
the source of stress or information seeking
• emotion focused—strategies that do not alter the stressor but regulate the negative emotional 
response to it; they include relaxation, seeking emotional social support and self-talk
• avoidance focused—strategies that attempt to prevent the negative impact of a stressor by 
physically or psychologically distancing oneself from it; they include ignoring, procrastinating and 
quitting.
Self-talk is a simple coping technique that can be problem focused or emotion focused.
• Unintentional self-talk can be negative or positive.
• Practical mechanisms for self-talk include: recalling how positive experiences in the past felt, using an 
acronym of helpful phrases and describing a physical movement in a simple word.
Relaxation skills can be developed for greater control of heart rate.
Linking question(s)
C.1.1, C.1.2—Are certain personalities more likely to adopt specific stress responses?
A.1.2, Tool 1, Inquiry 1—What physiological measurements can we use to measure stress?
Additional higher level: 2 hours
C.4.2.2—Stressors can be considered as either controllable or uncontrollable.
Problem-focused coping is more effective for controllable stressors.
Emotion-focused coping is more effective when the stressor is uncontrollable.
C.4.2.3—Many coping strategies have been shown to be effective for athletes, although the 
effectiveness of each is specific to the individual and the situation.
Seeking support has been shown to be the most effective type of coping strategy for athletes.
Seeking support can be a problem-focused or emotion-focused coping strategy, depending on whom 
support is sought from.
Logical analysis, relaxation, mental imagery, thought control and effort expenditure are common effective 
coping strategies used by athletes.
Distraction can be a useful short-term emotion-focused coping strategy, but it is not effective for reaching 
goals.
Coping strategies involving disengagement, such as mental or physical withdrawal, venting unpleasant 
emotions and self-blame are maladaptive strategies.Syllabus content
50 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Linking question(s)
A.1.1, A.3.1—How do effective coping strategies enable more proficient kinematic aspects of movements?
Inquiry 1—How can psychological interventions be made reliable?
C.5 Psychological skills
Guiding question:  How can sport psychology interventions enhance sporting performance?
C.5.1 Goal setting
Standard level and higher level: 4 hours
C.5.1.1—Goal setting directs attention to a specific task. It is regularly used to enhance motivation 
in sport, exercise and health.
Outcome goals are norm-referenced and use an objective result as the target.
Learning-focused goals include performance goals and process goals.
Performance goals are self-referenced and specify a measurable target, representing an improvement in 
performance.
Process goals are self-referenced and focus on the technique or strategy required to execute a skill 
successfully.
The effectiveness of each type of goal depends on the individual and their achievement motivation.
Linking question(s)
C.1.1—How might individual differences mean that goal setting is less effective for some people?
Additional higher level: 2 hours
C.5.1.2—The goal-setting paradox explains that elite athletes often feel less satisfied when a higher 
goal is achieved than an easier goal. This is thought to be the result of feelings of deflation after 
success.
Goal adjustment is considered more important than goal setting.
Research suggests that some individuals perform best with “do-your-best” goals or “open” goals.
Linking question(s)
A.3.1—How does goal setting affect success in periodized training?
C.5.2 Imagery
Additional higher level: 3 hours
C.5.2.1—Imagery is an experience that mimics real experience. It involves using a combination of 
different sensory modalities in the absence of actual perception.
The purpose of imagery can be cognitive or motivational, specific or general.
The PETTLEP model—physical, environment, task, timing, learning, emotion, perspective—is used in sport 
to create the most functionally equivalent image possible.
Paivio’s imagery framework can be used to determine the appropriate function of imagery.
Linking question(s)
A.3.1—How can imagery be used to reduce the risk of overtraining?
Tool  1, Inquiry  1, C.4.1,  A.1.1,  A.1.2—To  what  extent  can an athlete  use training  in psychological  skills  to 
regulate their heart rate?Syllabus content
51 Sports, exercise and health science guide
General
Assessment  is an integral  part  of learning  and  teaching.  The most  important  aims  of assessment  in the 
Diploma  Programme  (DP)  are that  it should  support  curricular  goals  and  encourage  appropriate  student 
learning.  Both  external  and  internal  assessments  are used  in the DP. IB examiners  mark  work  produced  for 
external  assessment,  while  work  produced  for the internal  assessment  (IA) is marked  by teachers  and 
externally moderated by the IB.
There are two types of assessment identified by the IB.
• Formative assessment informs both learning and teaching. It is concerned with providing accurate and 
helpful feedback to students and teachers on the kind of learning taking place, and the nature of 
students’ strengths and weaknesses, in order to help develop students’ understanding and 
capabilities. Formative assessment can also help to improve teaching quality, as it can provide 
information to monitor progress towards meeting the course aims and objectives (0404-01).
• Summative assessment gives an overview of previous learning and is concerned with measuring 
student achievement at, or towards the end, of the course of study (0404-04).
A comprehensive  assessment  policy  is viewed  as being  integral  with  teaching,  learning  and  course 
organization. For further information, see the IB Programme standards and practices  publication.
The approach  to assessment  used  by the IB is criterion-related,  not norm-referenced.  This  approach  to 
assessment  judges  students’  work  by their  performance  in relation  to identified  levels  of attainment,  and 
not in relation  to the work  of other  students.  For further  information  on assessment  within  the DP please 
refer to the publication Assessment principles and practice—Quality assessments in a digital age .
To support  teachers  in the planning,  delivery  and  assessment  of the DP courses,  a variety  of resources  can 
be found  on the Programme  Resource  Centre  (PRC)  or purchased  from  the IB Store  (store.ibo.org ). 
Additional  publications  such  as specimen  papers  and  markschemes,  teacher  support  material  (TSM), 
subject  reports  and  grade  descriptors  can also  be found  on the PRC.  Past  examination  papers  as well  as 
markschemes can be purchased from the IB store.
Methods of assessment
The IB uses several methods to assess work produced by students.
Assessment criteria
Assessment  criteria  are used  when  the assessment  task  is open-ended.  Each  criterion  concentrates  on a 
particular  skill that  students  are expected  to demonstrate.  An assessment  objective  describes  what 
students should be able to do, and assessment criteria describe how well they should be able to do it. Using 
assessment criteria allows discrimination between different answers and encourages a variety of responses. 
Each  criterion  comprises  a set of hierarchically  ordered  level  descriptors.  Each  level  descriptor  is worth  one 
or more marks. Each criterion is applied independently using a best-fit model. The maximum marks for each 
criterion may differ according to the criterion’s importance. The marks awarded for each criterion are added 
together to give the total mark for the piece of work.
Markbands
Markbands  are a comprehensive  statement  of expected  performance  against  which  responses  are judged. 
They represent a single holistic criterion divided into level descriptors. Each level descriptor corresponds to 
Assessment
Assessment in the Diploma Programme
52 Sports, exercise and health science guide
a range  of marks  to differentiate  student  performance.  A best-fit  approach  is used  to ascertain  which 
particular mark to use from the possible range for each level descriptor.
Analytic markschemes
Analytic  markschemes  are prepared  for those  examination  questions  that  expect  a particular  kind  of 
response and/or a given final answer from students. They give detailed instructions to examiners on how to 
break down the total mark for each question for different parts of the response.
Marking notes
For some  assessment  components  marked  using  assessment  criteria,  marking  notes  are provided.  Marking 
notes give guidance on how to apply assessment criteria to the particular requirements of a question.
Inclusive access arrangements
Inclusive  access  arrangements  are available  for candidates  with  access  requirements.  Standard  assessment 
conditions may put candidates with assessment access requirements at a disadvantage by preventing them 
from  demonstrating  their  attainment  level.  Inclusive  access  arrangements  enable  candidates  to 
demonstrate their ability under assessment conditions that are as fair as possible.
The IB document  Access  and  inclusion  policy  provides  details  on all the inclusive  access  arrangements 
available  to candidates.  The IB document  Learning  diversity  and  inclusion  in IB programmes:  Removing 
barriers  to learning  outlines  the position  of the IB with  regard  to candidates  with  diverse  learning  needs  in 
the IB programmes. For candidates affected by adverse circumstances, the publication Diploma Programme 
Assessment  procedures  (updated  annually),  which  includes  the general  regulations,  provides  details  on 
access consideration.
Responsibilities of the school
The school  is required  to ensure  that  equal  access  arrangements  and  reasonable  adjustments  are provided 
to candidates  with  learning  support  requirements  that  are in line with  the IB documents  Access  and 
inclusion policy  and Learning diversity and inclusion in IB programmes: Removing barriers to learning .Assessment in the Diploma Programme
53 Sports, exercise and health science guide
First assessment 2026
Assessment component Weighting
External assessment (3 hours) 76%
Paper 1 (1 hour and 30 minutes)
Paper 1A—Multiple-choice questions
Paper 1B—Data-based questions
(Total 55 marks)36%
Paper 2 (1 hour and 30 minutes)
Short-answer and extended-response questions
(Total 50 marks)40%
Internal assessment (10 hours) 24%
The internal assessment consists of one task: the scientific investigation.
This component is internally assessed by the teacher and externally moderated by the IB at 
the end of the course.
(Total 24 marks)
Assessment
Assessment outline—SL
54 Sports, exercise and health science guide
First assessment 2026
Assessment component Weighting
External assessment (4 hours and 15 minutes) 76%
Paper 1 (1 hour and 45 minutes)
Paper 1A—Multiple-choice questions
Paper 1B—Data-based questions
(Total 65 marks)36%
Paper 2 (2 hours and 30 minutes)
Short-answer and extended-response questions
(Total 80 marks)40%
Internal assessment (10 hours) 24%
The internal assessment consists of one task: the scientific investigation.
This component is internally assessed by the teacher and externally moderated by the IB at 
the end of the course.
(Total 24 marks)
Assessment
Assessment outline—HL
55 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Detailed  markschemes  specific  to each  examination  paper  (paper  1 and  paper  2) are used  to assess 
students.
Examinations may require a general understanding and application of the nature of science (NOS).
External assessment details—SL
Paper 1
Duration: 1 hour and 30 minutes
Weighting: 36%
Marks: 55
Paper 1 is presented as two separate booklets.
Paper 1A—30 marks
• 30 multiple-choice questions on standard level material only.
• No marks are deducted for incorrect answers.
Paper 1B—25 marks
• Data-based questions.
• Questions on experimental work.
Paper 1A and paper 1B are to be completed together without interruptions.
The questions on paper 1 test assessment objectives 1, 2 and 3.
The use of calculators is permitted. See the Calculators guidance for examinations booklet  on the PRC.
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the SEHS  data  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  the International  Baccalaureate  Information  System 
(IBIS) or the PRC, and to ensure that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Paper 2
Duration: 1 hour and 30 minutes
Weighting: 40%
Marks: 50
• Short-answer and extended-response questions on standard level material only.
The questions on paper 2 test assessment objectives 1, 2 and 3.
The use of calculators is permitted. See the Calculators guidance for examinations booklet  on the PRC.
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the SEHS  data  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the PRC  and  to ensure  that  there  are sufficient 
copies available for all students.
External assessment details—HL
Paper 1
Duration: 1 hour and 45 minutes
Assessment
External assessment
56 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Weighting: 36%
Marks: 65
Paper 1 is presented as two separate booklets.
Paper 1A—40 marks
• 40 multiple-choice questions on standard level and additional higher level material.
• No marks are deducted for incorrect answers.
Paper 1B—25 marks
• Data-based questions.
• Questions on experimental work.
Paper 1A and paper 1B are to be completed together without interruptions.
The questions on paper 1 test assessment objectives 1, 2 and 3.
The use of calculators is permitted. See the Calculators guidance for examinations booklet  on the PRC.
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the SEHS  data  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility of the school to download a copy from IBIS or the PRC, and to ensure that there are sufficient 
copies available for all students.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours and 30 minutes
Weighting: 40%
Marks: 80
• Short-answer and extended-response questions on standard level and additional higher level material.
The questions on paper 2 test assessment objectives 1, 2 and 3.
The use of calculators is permitted. See the Calculators guidance for examinations booklet  on the PRC.
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the SEHS  data  booklet  during  the examination.  It is the 
responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the PRC  and  to ensure  that  there  are sufficient 
copies available for all students.External assessment
57 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Purpose of internal assessment
The IA is an integral part of the course and is compulsory for both SL and HL students. It enables students to 
demonstrate  the application  of their  skills  and  knowledge,  and  to pursue  their  personal  interests,  without 
the time  limitations  and  other  constraints  that  are associated  with  written  examinations.  The IA should,  as 
far as possible,  be woven  into  normal  classroom  teaching  and  not be a separate  activity  conducted  after  a 
course has been taught.
The IA requirements at SL and at HL are the same.
Guidance and authenticity
The scientific  investigation  (SL and  HL) submitted  for the IA must  be the student’s  own  work.  However,  it is 
not the intention that students should decide upon a title or topic and be left to work on the IA component 
without  any further  support  from  the teacher.  The teacher  should  play  an important  role  during  both  the 
planning  stage  and  the period  when  the student  is working  on the internally  assessed  work.  It is the 
responsibility of the teacher to ensure that students are familiar with:
• the requirements of the type of work to be internally assessed
• the Sciences experimentation guidelines  publication
• the assessment criteria; students must understand that the work submitted for assessment must 
address these criteria effectively.
Teachers and students must discuss the internally assessed work. Students should be encouraged to initiate 
discussions  with  the teacher  to obtain  advice  and  information,  and  students  must  not be penalized  for 
seeking guidance. As part of the learning process, teachers should read and give advice to students on one 
draft  of the work.  The teacher  should  provide  oral  or written  advice  on how  the work  could  be improved, 
but not edit the draft. The next version handed to the teacher must be the final version for submission.
It is the responsibility of teachers to ensure that all students understand the basic meaning and significance 
of concepts  that  relate  to academic  integrity,  especially  authenticity  and  intellectual  property.  Teachers 
must  ensure  that  all student  work  for assessment  is prepared  according  to the requirements  and  must 
explain  clearly  to students  that  the internally  assessed  work  must  be entirely  their  own.  Where 
collaboration between students is permitted, it must be clear to all students what the difference is between 
collaboration and collusion.
All work  submitted  to the IB for moderation  or assessment  must  be authenticated  by a teacher,  and  must 
not include  any known  instances  of suspected  or confirmed  malpractice.  Each  student  must  confirm  that 
the work  is their  authentic  work  and  constitutes  the final  version  of that  work.  Once  a student  has officially 
submitted the final version of the work, it cannot be retracted. The requirement to confirm the authenticity 
of work applies to the work of all students, not just the sample work that will be submitted to the IB for the 
purpose  of moderation.  For further  details,  refer  to the IB publications  Academic  integrity  policy , Diploma 
Programme:  From  principles  into  practice  and  the relevant  general  regulations  (in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures ).
Authenticity may be checked by discussion with the student on the content of the work, and by scrutiny of 
one or more of the following:
• the student’s initial proposal
• the first draft of the written work
• the references cited
Assessment
Internal assessment
58 Sports, exercise and health science guide
• the style of writing compared with work known to be that of the student
• the analysis of the work by a web-based plagiarism detection service such as www.turnitin.com.
The same piece of work cannot be submitted to meet the requirements of both the IA and the EE.
Time allocation
The IA is an integral  part  of the SEHS  course,  contributing  24%  to the final  assessment  in the SL and  the HL 
courses.  This  weighting  should  be reflected  in the time  that  is allocated  to teaching  the knowledge,  skills 
and understanding required to undertake the work, as well as the total time allocated to carry out the work.
It is recommended  that  a total  of approximately  10 hours  (SL and  HL) of teaching  time  should  be allocated 
to the work. This should include:
• time for the teacher to explain to students the requirements of the IA
• class time for students to work on the IA component and ask questions
• time for consultation between the teacher and each student
• time to review and monitor progress, and to check authenticity.
Safety requirements and recommendations
It is the responsibility  of everyone  involved  in science  education  to make  an ongoing  commitment  to safe 
and healthy practical work.
The working  practices  and  protocols  should  be effective  in safeguarding  students  and  protecting  the 
environment. Schools are responsible for following national or local guidelines, which differ from country to 
country. The SEHS teacher support material  provides some further guidance.
Using assessment criteria for internal assessment
For internal  assessment,  a number  of assessment  criteria  have  been  identified.  Each  assessment  criterion 
has level  descriptors  describing  specific  achievement  levels,  together  with  an appropriate  range  of marks. 
The level  descriptors  concentrate  on positive  achievement,  although  for the lower  levels  failure  to achieve 
may be included in the description.
Teachers  must  judge  the internally  assessed  work  at SL and  at HL against  the criteria  using  the level 
descriptors.
• The same assessment criteria are provided for SL and HL.
• The aim is to find, for each criterion, the descriptor that conveys most accurately the level attained by 
the student, using the best-fit model. A best-fit approach means that compensation should be made 
when a piece of work matches different aspects of a criterion at different levels. The mark awarded 
should be one that most fairly reflects the balance of achievement against the criterion. It is not 
necessary for every single aspect of a level descriptor to be met for that mark to be awarded.
• When assessing a student’s work, teachers should read the level descriptors for each criterion until 
they reach a descriptor that most appropriately describes the level of the work being assessed. If a 
piece of work seems to fall between two descriptors, both descriptors should be read again and the 
one that more appropriately describes the student’s work should be chosen.
• Where there are two marks available within a level, teachers should award the upper marks if the 
student’s work demonstrates the qualities described to a great extent; the work may be close to 
achieving marks in the level above. Teachers should award the lower marks if the student’s work 
demonstrates the qualities described to a lesser extent; the work may be close to achieving marks in 
the level below.
• Only whole numbers should be recorded; partial marks (fractions and decimals) are not acceptable.
• Teachers should not think in terms of a pass or fail boundary but should concentrate on identifying the 
appropriate descriptor for each assessment criterion.Internal assessment
59 Sports, exercise and health science guide
• The highest level descriptors do not imply faultless performance but should be achievable by a 
student. Teachers should not hesitate to use the extremes if they are appropriate descriptions of the 
work being assessed.
• A student who attains a high achievement level in relation to one criterion will not necessarily attain 
high achievement levels in relation to the other criteria. Similarly, a student who attains a low 
achievement level for one criterion will not necessarily attain low achievement levels for the other 
criteria. Teachers should not assume that the overall assessment of the students will produce any 
particular distribution of marks.
• It is recommended that the assessment criteria be made available to students.
Internal assessment details—SL and HL
The scientific investigation
Duration: 10 hours
Weighting: 24%
The IA, worth 24% of the final assessment, consists of one task—the scientific investigation.
The scientific  investigation  is an open-ended  task  in which  the student  gathers  and  analyses  data  in order 
to answer their own formulated research question.
The outcome  of the scientific  investigation  will be assessed  through  the form  of a written  report.  The 
maximum overall word count for the report is 3,200 words.
The following are not included in the word count:
• charts and diagrams
• data tables
• equations, formulae and calculations
• citations/references (whether parenthetical, numbered, footnotes or endnotes)
• bibliography
• Headers.
The following details should be stated at the start of the report:
• title of the investigation
• IB candidate code (alphanumeric, for example, xyz123)
• IB candidate code for all group members (if applicable)
• number of words.
There is no requirement to include a cover page or a contents page.
Facilitating the scientific investigation
The research  question  should  be of interest  to the student,  but it is not necessary  that  it encompasses 
concepts beyond those described by the understandings within the guide.
The scientific investigation undertaken must have sufficient extent and depth to allow for all the descriptors 
of the assessment criteria to be meaningfully addressed.
The investigation of the research question must involve the collection and analysis of quantitative data that 
should be supported by qualitative observations where appropriate.
The scientific  investigation  allows  a wide  range  of techniques  for data  gathering  and  analysis  to be 
employed. The approaches that could be used in isolation or in conjunction with each other are as follows.
• Hands-on practical laboratory work
• Fieldwork
• Use of a spreadsheet for analysis and modelling
• Extraction and analysis of data from a databaseInternal assessment
60 Sports, exercise and health science guide
• Use of a simulation
The SEHS teacher support material  contains further guidance on these possible approaches.
Teachers must:
• ensure that students are familiar with the assessment criteria
• ensure that students are able to investigate their individual research question
• counsel the students on whether their proposed methodology is feasible in consideration of available 
time and resources
• ensure that students have given appropriate consideration to safety, ethical and environmental factors 
before undertaking the action phase
• remind students of the requirements for academic integrity and the consequences of academic 
malpractice; the difference between collaboration and collusion must be made clear.
Developing the research question
Each  student  is expected  to formulate,  investigate  and  answer  a unique  research  question,  seeking  advice 
from their teacher.
A student must not present the same set of raw data as another student.
Methodology for individual work
Each  student  develops  their  own  methodology  to answer  their  individual  research  question.  The student 
investigates by:
• manipulating an independent variable
or
• selecting variables during fieldwork
or
• selecting different data from external databases.
The student might seek support from peers when collecting data.
Methodology for collaborative work
Collaborative  work  is optional  and  where  it is facilitated  the groups  formed  must  be no larger  than  three 
students.  Students  may  organize  their  own  groups.  The teacher  must  provide  guidance  to ensure  that  all 
students  are fully  engaged  in the collaborative  activity.  Students  must  clearly  understand  the requirement 
to conduct an individual investigation.
The methodology  developed  to answer  their  individual  research  question  may  be in part  the outcome  of 
collaborative  activity.  A student  within  the group  investigates  their  individual  research  question  by 
manipulating:
• a different independent variable to those selected by other group members
or
• the same independent variable with a different dependent variable to those selected by other group 
members
or
• different data to that selected by other group members from within a larger communally acquired 
data set.
In this context,  collaborative  work  is permitted  under  the understanding  that  the final  report  presented  for 
assessment is that of the individual student. A report by the group is not permitted. All authoring, including 
the description  of the methodology,  must  be done  individually.  This  diagram  illustrates  a possible  route 
through the IA process where students collaborate.Internal assessment
61 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Figure 4
A possible route through collaborative work
Class collaboration to set up a database
A school  may  take  part  in a large-scale  activity  collecting  data  to generate  a database  using  standardized 
protocols.  If a student  decides  to utilize  this database  in order  to answer  their  research  question,  then  the 
investigation  must  be treated  as a database  investigation.  In such  a case  the methodology  should  be 
focused  on the way  the data  are filtered  and  sampled  from  the whole  database  in the same  way  as if the 
data was wholly acquired from an external source.
Assessing the scientific investigation
The performance  in the IA at both  SL and  HL is marked  against  common  assessment  criteria,  with  a total 
mark out of 24. Student work is internally assessed by the teacher and externally moderated by the IB.
The four assessment criteria are as follows:
• research design
• data analysisInternal assessment
62 Sports, exercise and health science guide
• conclusion
• evaluation.
Each  assessment  criterion  has level  descriptors  describing  specific  achievement  levels,  together  with  an 
appropriate  range  of marks.  The level  descriptors  concentrate  on positive  achievement,  although  for the 
lower levels failure to achieve may be included in the description.
Teachers  must  judge  the internally  assessed  work  at SL and  at HL against  the same  criteria  using  the level 
descriptors  and  aided  by the clarifications.  The criteria  must  be applied  systematically  using  a best-fit 
approach—when  a piece  of work  matches  different  aspects  of a criterion  at different  levels  the mark 
awarded  should  be one  that  most  fairly  reflects  the balance  of achievement  against  the criterion.  It is not 
necessary  for every  single  aspect  of a level  descriptor  to be met  for that  mark  to be awarded.  The highest 
level descriptors do not imply faultless performance.
Where  there  are two  or more  marks  available  within  a level,  teachers  should  award  the upper  mark  if the 
student’s  work  largely  satisfies  the qualities  described;  the work  may  be close  to achieving  marks  in the 
level  above.  Teachers  should  award  the lower  marks  if the student’s  work  demonstrates  the qualities 
described to a lesser extent; the work may be close to achieving marks in the level below.
Only whole numbers must be recorded; partial marks (fractions and decimals) are not acceptable.
The criteria  should  be considered  independently.  A student  who  attains  a high  achievement  level  in 
relation  to one  criterion  will not necessarily  attain  high  achievement  levels  in relation  to the other  criteria. 
Similarly,  a student  who  attains  a low achievement  level  for one  criterion  will not necessarily  attain  low 
achievement  levels  for the other  criteria.  Teachers  should  not assume  that  the overall  assessment  of the 
students will produce any particular distribution of marks.
Where  command  terms  are used  in the level  descriptors,  they  are to be interpreted  as indicated  in the 
“Glossary of command terms ” section of this guide. These command terms indicate the depth of treatment 
required. Command terms used within the descriptors are provided in the following table.
Assessment 
objectiveCommand term Descriptor
AO1 State Give a specific name, value or other brief answer without explanation or 
calculation.
AO2 Identify Provide an answer from a number of possibilities.
AO2 Outline Give a brief account or summary.
AO2 Describe Give a detailed account.
AO3 Explain Give a detailed account including reasons or causes.
AO3 Justify Give valid reasons or evidence to support an answer or conclusion.
Referencing and academic integrity
Appropriate  referencing  to sourced  information  used  in the report  of the scientific  investigation  is 
expected. Omitted or improper referencing will be considered to be academic malpractice.
Students  must  ensure  their  assessment  work  adheres  to the IB’s academic  integrity  policy  and  that  all 
sources  are appropriately  referenced.  A student’s  failure  to appropriately  acknowledge  a source  will be 
investigated  by the IB as a potential  breach  of regulations  that  may  result  in a penalty  imposed  by the IB 
Final Award Committee. See the “ Academic integrity ” section of this guide for full details.
Internal assessment criteria—SL and HL
There are four IA criteria for the scientific investigation. The marks and weightings are as follows.Internal assessment
63 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Criterion Maximum number of marks 
availableWeighting (%)
Research design 6 25
Data analysis 6 25
Conclusion 6 25
Evaluation 6 25
Total 24 100
Research design
This  criterion  assesses  the extent  to which  the student  effectively  communicates  the methodology 
(purpose and practice) used to address the research question.
Marks Level descriptor
0 The report does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.
1–2 • The research question is stated without context.
• Methodological considerations associated with collecting data relevant to the 
research question are stated.
• The description of the methodology for collecting or selecting data lacks the detail 
to allow for the investigation to be reproduced.
3–4 • The research question is outlined within a broad context.
• Methodological considerations associated with collecting relevant and sufficient 
data to answer the research question are described.
• The description of the methodology for collecting or selecting data allows for the 
investigation to be reproduced with few ambiguities or omissions.
5–6 • The research question is described within a specific and appropriate context.
• Methodological considerations associated with collecting relevant and sufficient 
data to answer the research question are explained.
• The description of the methodology for collecting or selecting data allows for the 
investigation to be reproduced.
Clarifications for research design
A research question with context should contain reference to the dependent and independent variables 
or two correlated variables, include a concise description of the system in which the research question is 
embedded, and include background theory of direct relevance.
Methodological considerations include:
• the selection of the methods for measuring the dependent and independent variables
• the selection of the databases or model and the sampling of data
• the decisions regarding the scope, quantity and quality of measurements (e.g. the range, interval or 
frequency of the independent variable, repetition and precision of measurements)
• the identification of control variables and the choice of method of their control
• the recognition of any safety, ethical or environmental issues that needed to be taken into account.
The description of the methodology refers to presenting sufficiently detailed information (such as specific 
materials used and precise procedural steps) while avoiding unnecessary or repetitive information, so that Internal assessment
64 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Clarifications for research design
the reader may readily understand how the methodology was implemented and could in principle repeat 
the investigation.
Data analysis
This  criterion  assesses  the extent  to which  the student’s  report  provides  evidence  that  the student  has 
recorded, processed and presented the data in ways that are relevant to the research question.
Marks Level descriptor
0 The report does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–2 • The recording and processing of the data is communicated but is neither clear nor 
precise.
• The recording and processing of data shows limited evidence of the consideration 
of uncertainties.
• Some processing of data relevant to addressing the research question is carried out 
but with major omissions, inaccuracies or inconsistencies.
3–4 • The communication of the recording and processing of the data is either clear or 
precise.
• The recording and processing of data shows evidence of a consideration of 
uncertainties but with some significant omissions or inaccuracies.
• The processing of data relevant to addressing the research question is carried out 
but with some significant omissions, inaccuracies or inconsistencies.
5–6 • The communication of the recording and processing of the data is both clear and 
precise.
• The recording and processing of data shows evidence of an appropriate 
consideration of uncertainties.
• The processing of data relevant to addressing the research question is carried out 
appropriately and accurately.
Clarifications for data analysis
Data refers to quantitative data or a combination of both quantitative and qualitative data.
Communication
• Clear communication means that the method of processing can be understood easily.
• Precise communication refers to following conventions correctly, such as those relating to the 
annotation of graphs and tables or the use of units, decimal places and significant figures.
Consideration of uncertainties is subject specific and further guidance is given in the SEHS teacher support 
material .
Major omissions, inaccuracies or inconsistencies impede the possibility of drawing a valid conclusion that 
addresses the research question.
Significant omissions, inaccuracies or inconsistencies allow the possibility of drawing a conclusion that 
addresses the research question but with some limit to its validity or detail.
Conclusion
This  criterion  assesses  the extent  to which  the student  successfully  answers  their  research  question  with 
regard to their analysis and the accepted scientific context.Internal assessment
65 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Marks Level descriptor
0 The report does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–2 • A conclusion is stated that is relevant to the research question but is not supported 
by the analysis presented.
• The conclusion makes superficial comparison to the accepted scientific context.
• Practical implications of the findings are stated.
3–4 • A conclusion is described that is relevant to the research question but is not fully 
consistent with the analysis presented.
• A conclusion is described that makes some relevant comparison to the accepted 
scientific context.
• Practical implications of the findings are outlined.
5–6 • A conclusion is justified that is relevant to the research question and fully consistent 
with the analysis presented.
• A conclusion is justified through relevant comparison to the accepted scientific 
context.
• Practical implications of the findings are explained.
Clarifications for conclusion
A conclusion that is fully consistent requires the interpretation of processed data including associated 
uncertainties.
Scientific context refers to information that could come from published material (paper or online), 
published values, course notes, textbooks or other outside sources. The citation of published materials 
must be sufficiently detailed to allow these sources to be traceable.
Practical implications refer to real-world applications related to health or performance.
Evaluation
This  criterion  assesses  the extent  to which  the student’s  report  provides  evidence  of evaluation  of the 
investigation methodology and has suggested improvements.
Marks Level descriptor
0 The report does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–2 • The report states generic methodological weaknesses or limitations.
• Realistic improvements to the investigation are stated.
3–4 • The report describes specific methodological weaknesses or limitations.
• Realistic improvements to the investigation that are relevant to the identified 
weaknesses or limitations are described.
5–6 • The report explains the relative impact of specific methodological weaknesses or 
limitations.
• Realistic improvements to the investigation that are relevant to the identified 
weaknesses or limitations are explained.
Clarifications for evaluation
“Generic” is general to many methodologies and not specifically relevant to the methodology of the 
investigation being evaluated.Internal assessment
66 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Clarifications for evaluation
“Methodological” refers to the overall approach to the investigation of the research question as well as 
procedural steps.
“Weaknesses” could relate to issues regarding the control of variables, the precision of measurement or 
the variation in the data.
“Limitations” could refer to how the conclusion is limited in scope by the range of the data collected, the 
confines of the system or the applicability of assumptions made.Internal assessment
67 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Command terms for SEHS
Students  must  be familiar  with  the following  key terms  and  phrases  used  in examination  questions,  which 
are to be understood  as described  in this section.  Although  these  terms  will be used  frequently  in 
examination  questions,  other  terms  may  be used  to direct  students  to present  an argument  in a specific 
way. These command terms indicate the depth of treatment required.
Assessment objective 1
Command term Definition
Label Add labels to a diagram.
List Give a sequence of brief answers with no explanation.
State Give a specific name, value or other brief answer without explanation or 
calculation.
Assessment objective 2
Command term Definition
Annotate Add brief notes to a diagram or graph.
Apply Use an idea, equation, principle, theory or law in relation to a given problem or 
issue.
Calculate Obtain a numerical answer showing the relevant stages in the working.
Describe Give a detailed account.
Distinguish Make clear the differences between two or more concepts or items.
Estimate Obtain an approximate value.
Outline Give a brief account or summary.
Assessment objective 3
Command term Definition
Analyse Break down in order to bring out the essential elements or structure.
Compare Give an account of the similarities between two (or more) items or situations, 
referring to both (all) of them throughout.
Contrast Give an account of the differences between two (or more) items or situations, 
referring to both (all) of them throughout.
Deduce Reach a conclusion from the information given.
Determine Obtain the only possible answer.
Appendices
Glossary of command terms
68 Sports, exercise and health science guide
Command term Definition
Discuss Offer a considered and balanced review that includes a range of arguments, factors 
or hypotheses. Opinions or conclusions should be presented clearly and supported 
by appropriate evidence.
Evaluate Make an appraisal by weighing up the strengths and limitations.
Explain Give a detailed account including reasons or causes.
Interpret Use knowledge and understanding to recognize trends and draw conclusions from 
given information.
Predict Give an expected result.
Sketch Represent by means of a diagram or graph (labelled as appropriate). The sketch 
should give a general idea of the required shape or relationship, and should include 
relevant features.
Suggest Propose a solution, hypothesis or other possible answer.Glossary of command terms
69 Sports, exercise and health science guide
International  Baccalaureate.  (2014).  “Conceptual  understanding”.  In MYP:  From  principles  into  practice . 
International Baccalaureate Organization. https://resources.ibo.org/permalink/11162-32896
International  Baccalaureate.  (2019).  What  is an IB education?  International  Baccalaureate  Organization. 
https://resources.ibo.org/permalink/11162-58229
Appendices
Bibliography
70 Sports, exercise and health science guide
