N22/1/AXENG/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

November / Novembre / Noviembre de 2022


                    English A: literature
                    Anglais A : littérature
                     Inglés A: Literatura


         Higher level and standard level
        Niveau supérieur et niveau moyen
           Nivel Superior y Nivel Medio

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1



5 pages/páginas
                                            –2–              N22/1/AXENG/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2022

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2022

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2022

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                               –3–             N22/1/AXENG/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


General marking instructions

 These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking. They are not offered
 as an exhaustive and fixed set of features which all answers must include.

 Answers which do not follow the approach suggested in the guiding question, but have provided
 an alternative formal or technical focus should be rewarded appropriately in line with the
 assessment criteria.


Instructions générales pour la notation

 Ces notes ne sont que simples lignes directrices pour aider les examinateurs lors de la notation.
 Elles ne peuvent en aucun cas être considérées comme un ensemble fixe et exhaustif de
 caractéristiques que les réponses doivent présenter.

 Les réponses qui ne suivent pas l’approche suggérée dans la question d’orientation, mais qui
 ont adopté un autre angle technique ou formel doivent être récompensées de manière
 appropriée, conformément aux critères d’évaluation.


Instrucciones generales para la corrección

 El objetivo de estas notas para los examinadores es servir de directrices a fin de ayudar en la
 corrección. No deben considerarse un conjunto fijo y exhaustivo de características que deban
 estar presentes en todas las respuestas.

 Las respuestas que no sigan el enfoque recomendado en la pregunta de orientación, pero
 posean un enfoque alternativo, de carácter formal o técnico, también deberán ser valoradas
 de acuerdo con los criterios de evaluación.
                                               –4–              N22/1/AXENG/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.

                                           Literary form

                                           Prose fiction

                          Elements of the text significant for analysis
 These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking. They are not offered
 as an exhaustive and fixed set of features which all answers must include.

 • through the use of the identified different perspectives, the structure of the piece and how the
   accident is presented, enables the reader to observe the action and tension from various
   angles and characters
 • most of the focus is on the action of the children, e.g. the beach is “from another world, of no
   account”
 • contrast between long-dead fossils and the action they are provoking in the living
 • indirect characterisation through the use of verbs denoting violence, e.g. “hiss”; “shove”;
   “thrashes”; “thrusts”; “snarls”
 • verbs emphasizing action/effort as the children attempt to out-do each other, “scrambles”;
   “hauls”; “skidding rolling thumping”
 • auditory imagery suggesting increasing distance and foreshadowing danger, such as the
   beach and its “shrill cries, its barking, its calls are clear and loud” to denote distance
 • visual imagery giving a detailed picture of the landscape conveying its fragility and danger ,
   “And she hurls herself” “lurking by the hundred”, “enticing curls and ribbed whorls” to
   emphasize the allure of the fossils
 • sibling rivalry shown in their exchanges of speech, the snatches of dialogue help to develop
   tension “Move your leg”; “Don’t shove”; “Suspicion and rivalry burn her up”
 • the vivid description of Gordon’s anger and resistance and the disturbing and contradictory
   combination of “horror” and “satisfaction” with which he views the result of his anger and
   rivalry with his sister
 • contrasts and similarities between the mother and the children’s perspectives
 • contrast between the mother and the other adults who are compassionate, “the clucking
   mothers and nurses” contrasted with Edith “Don’t argue. Keep still Claudia”
 • despite the release of tension, the passage remains busy and the rivalry continues, “He
   pushed me. / I didn’t. Honestly mother, I didn’t. She slipped.”
 • sense of disharmony in the final paragraph which extends beyond the immediate action of the
   children to the world itself, “the perilous world, so unreliable, so malevolent”
 • no resolution. The accident does not resolve the rivalry and dispute between the children, the
   mother notes the “intransigence of her offspring”.
                                                –5–              N22/1/AXENG/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.

                                           Literary form

                                               Poetry

                          Elements of the text significant for analysis
 These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking. They are not offered
 as an exhaustive and fixed set of features which all answers must include.

 • the creation of atmosphere of isolation and loneliness in the portrayal of the setting through
   visual imagery seen with the beach; the houses and the portrayal of the boy alone on the
   shore
 • the use of imagery to explore the relationship between boy and the sea seen in the shifting
   power dynamic such as the child “feigning fear/ Like a father being chased by his own child”
   and the sea rushing after him, ‘‘it whitens and retreats’’ as the boy turns to face it
 • the shift in tone mid-way through the first verse, creating ambiguity and an air of mystery –
   “Like someone bearing a message no one/Wishes to receive – something written long ago/In
   his head”
 • the references to time passing both in the immediate and in the past and a sense of sadness
   and resignation, “end of season”; “something written long ago”
 • the use and significance of enjambment to suggest the movement of the tide and the boy
 • use and significance of similes, “like someone bearing a message” and “like a father being
   chased by his own child” and their impact on the tone and mood
 • contrasting vocabulary patterns and how they help to create a mood of vulnerability and
   danger “lonely”; “helplessly”; “hopelessly” “the sea rushes after him, monstrously grey”
 • the sense of the boy having superhuman qualities, “he will never stop running” “his skill
   increases mysteriously”. This contrasts with the end of the poem when the reader is informed
   the boy “is only human”.
 • the shift in narrative stance in the second stanza, from a more distant observer to the narrator
   being “here in the house”, perhaps linking to the use of the titular ‘Window’.
 • introduction of music linking to the idea of march of time and the pattern of the tide; “and while
   this goes on... someone very quietly plays”.
 • A sense of ambiguity and mystery is created in “Soon the game must end unaccompanied”
 • circularity – nothing appears to have changed; the boy continues to do what he has been
   doing from the start. However, the narrator’s observations have created more subtle and
   ambiguous readings of the child’s game, heightening the reader’s understanding of the link
   between time, tide, and possibly the narrator themselves.
