N21/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                        November 2021


                 Business management


                           Higher level


                               Paper 1




12 pages
                                            –2–                  N21/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2021

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2021

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2021

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                          –3–                N21/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The markbands and assessment criteria on pages 3–4 should be used
where indicated in the markscheme.

Section A         Level descriptor

Q1    Q2    Q3
(b)   (b)   (b)

Marks

0                 The work does not reach a standard described by the
                  descriptors below.

1–2                Little knowledge and understanding of relevant issues and
                      business management tools (where applicable),
                      techniques and theories.
                     Little use of business management terminology.
                     Little reference to the stimulus material.

3–4                A description or partial analysis of some relevant issues
                      with some use of business management tools (where
                      applicable), techniques and theories.
                     Some use of appropriate terminology.
                     Some reference to the stimulus material that goes beyond
                      the name of a person(s) and/or the name of the
                      organization.
                     At the lower end of the markband, responses are mainly
                      theoretical.

5–6                An analysis of the relevant issues with good use of
                      business management tools (where applicable),
                      techniques and theories.
                     Use of appropriate terminology throughout the response.
                     Effective use of the stimulus material.
                                      –4–               N21/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Section B   Level descriptor
Q4 (d)

Marks

0           The work does not reach a standard described by the
            descriptors below.

1–2            Little understanding of the demands of the question.
               Few business management tools (where applicable),
                techniques and theory are explained or applied and
                business management terminology is lacking.
               Little reference to the stimulus material.

3–4            Some understanding of the demands of the question.
               Some relevant business management tools (where
                applicable), techniques and theories are explained or
                applied, and some appropriate terminology is used.
               Some reference to the stimulus material but often not
                going beyond the name of a person(s) and/or the name of
                the organization.

5–6          Understanding of most of the demands of the question.
             Relevant business management tools (where applicable),
              techniques and theories are explained and applied, and
              appropriate terminology is used most of the time.
             Some reference to the stimulus material that goes beyond
              the name of a person(s) and/or the name of the
              organization.
             Some evidence of a balanced response.
             Some judgments are relevant but not substantiated.

7–8          Good understanding of the demands of the question.
             Relevant business management tools (where applicable),
              techniques and theories are explained and applied well,
              and appropriate terminology is used.
             Good reference to the stimulus material.
             Good evidence of a balanced response.
             The judgments are relevant but not always well
              substantiated.

9–10         Good understanding of the demands of the question,
              including implications, where relevant.
             Relevant business management tools (where applicable),
              techniques and theories are explained clearly and applied
              purposefully, and appropriate terminology is used
              throughout the response.
             Effective use of the stimulus material in a way that
              significantly strengthens the response.
             Evidence of balance is consistent throughout the
              response.
             The judgments are relevant and well substantiated.
                                                    –5–                 N21/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                          Section A

1.   (a)   With reference to MM, describe two features of a merger (lines 20–22).                  [4]

           Answers could include:
            Two or more businesses join together (Chilmin and MM in this case)
            The result is another single business, in this case retaining the name Megamin
             Mining
            The Directors made up of people from both businesses (in this case the two
             great grandchildren and three Chilean shareholders and two workers’
             representatives
            Generally mergers are friendly (in this case it was by agreement)
            This type of expansion occurs when two businesses become integrated by
             joining together and forming a bigger combined business. The owners of two
             businesses agree to join their firms together to make one business
            They can take advantage of synergies.

           Accept any other reasonable description.
           Award [1] for each feature up to a total of [2].
           Award [1] for putting the feature into context up to a total of [2].

     (b)   Explain the strategies used by MM to achieve sustainability.                            [6]


           Sustainability has three dimensions: environmental (ecological) sustainability,
           social sustainability and economic sustainability.

           Environmental sustainability

           Most of MM’s strategies are concerned with environmental sustainability and
           include:
            Carbon offsetting
            Supporting research to reduce use of harmful emissions
            Reviewing MM’s own practices to get more energy efficient production
              methods
            Improved targets
            New environmental policies
            Switching to lithium for electric cars

           Social sustainability

              “MM is reducing its operations in Alberta in response to Canadian concerns
               about the impact of the industry on First Nations (indigenous) peoples” (lines
               60-61)
              Fairness of working conditions and other employment practices in different
               countries (incl. safety and pay issues in Egypt): no clear strategy in place,
               however “MM ’s board is concerned”

           Economic sustainability

              To achieve economic sustainability, MM diversified a lot over the years (e.g. when they
               invested and expanded into property esp. the hotel division)
              Regarding the current problems with the hotel division (which does not seem economically
               sustainable) MM is “conducting primary market research to help identify methods to
               increase hotel bookings” (line 81).
                                       –6–                N21/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


   Regarding the Egyptian mine (which is operating at a loss, which is not economically
    sustainable) MM does not have any strategy in place yet, but “is exploring ways in which it
    could reduce its costs” (line 107).




Accept any other reasonable point about MM’s sustainability strategies.
Explanation/analysis should come from discussing these in relation to the
situation that MM is in.

Marks should be awarded according to the mark bands on page 3.
Award maximum 2 marks for only explaining one strategy.
Award maximum 3 marks for a theoretical answer or an answer that describes
two (or more) strategies without explaining them.
Award maximum 5 marks if the explanation of two strategies or more is mainly
descriptive but in context.
                                                  –7–                N21/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   (a)   Describe one advantage and one disadvantage for MM of decentralization
           (lines 44–45).                                                                       [4]

           Decentralization: Some decision making is delegated to lower level managers –
           in this case to subsidiary businesses

           Advantages
            Decision making delegated to the mines (operations, wages, contracts) and
             hotels (prices and menus)
            Not all decisions will be decentralized (in this case strategic decisions remain
             with the Board).
            Better focus on core activities
            Better understanding of local issues (hotels are in Europe which might face
             completely different problems from mines in Africa).

           Disadvantages
            Decision-making is not necessarily strategic as hotel managers and managers
              at mines are not part of higher- level decision-making process at board level
            More difficult to ensure consistent practices and policies across different
              locations. Hotel customers may prefer consistency.
            More difficult to achieve financial control if individual managers have more
              budgetary autonomy
            As contexts and needs are different, some conflicts may arise or may lead to
              inter-divisional rivalry if divisions compare each other, when making decisions
              on budgets, wages, employment, contracts, etc. (i.e. wages in Canada vs. in
              Africa)

           Accept any other reasonable advantage/disadvantage.
           Award [1] for each advantage and one mark for each disadvantage up to a total
           of [2].
           Award [1] for putting each advantage and [1] for putting each disadvantage into
           context up to a total of [2].

     (b)   Explain how MM could reduce stakeholder conflict in relation to its gold mine in
           Egypt. (lines 103–107)                                                               [6]

           Stakeholder issues can include:
            Managers: Technical problems, safety issues, risk of flooding. These will be
              difficult to manage and will have conflict with which employees who are
              threatening strikes. Costs will then have an impact on shareholders through
              lower prices.
            Employees: Threatening strikes over pay and other issues with the way mines
              are managed. Will want spending conflicts with owners/managers
            Shareholders: Will want dividends maintained but mine producing below
              breakeven and this affects profits. Will want costs reduced, profit increased.
              Will not want safety issues to get out of hand – bad publicity and impact on
              share price. High dividends may prevent investments, may put pressure on
              wages. Conflict with managers/employees.
            Other stakeholders may include government (taxes, licenses), the general
              public, pressure groups but these do not feature much in gold mines so are
              non-contextual.
            Resolution of conflict: Safety is important to all – should be resolved with
              managed costs
            Strikes are damaging to shareholders. Employees will lose pay. So
              communicate and work towards a solution
            Managers need to create a less combative environment and find satisfactory
              ways of reducing costs and solving problems without upsetting employees.
                                       –8–                  N21/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Some possible solutions could be:
 Identify technical problems in advance and improve processes;
 think of a maintenance plan to prevent production outages;
 invest more in industrial safety (but this will increase costs – possible conflict
  managers vs. shareholders?);
 improve employees´ motivation and job satisfaction, focusing on employees´
  needs or maybe adopting a reward programme and/or health insurance (this
  will increase costs: will shareholders be happy with that?);
 find a way to improve sales (look for new markets, segments, etc.), reduce
  costs or/and add value to their products in order to increase profits.

The use of stakeholders might be implied especially when referring to ‘conflict
with the business’. In this case the ‘business’ might mean managers,
shareholders or owners if the candidate makes this clear without using any of
those terms.

Accept any other reasonable explanation/application of stakeholder conflict.
Marks should be awarded according to the mark bands on page 4.
Award maximum 2 marks for only explaining one strategy.
Award maximum 3 marks for a theoretical answer or an answer that describes
two (or more) strategies without explaining them.
Award maximum 5 marks if the explanation is mainly descriptive but in context.
                                                   –9–                  N21/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   (a)   Describe two differences for MM between marketing its minerals (a product) and
           marketing its hotels (a service).                                                     [4]

           Marketing minerals
            B2B so advertising may not be necessary
            Role of promotion unclear
            Based on contracts
            Based on market prices
            Targeted at other industries
            Long-term contracts

           Marketing hotels:
            B2C so essential to promote
            Some promotion has not worked (ads in travel mags, price promotion)
            Customers are general public
            Market competitive but relatively stable. Fierce competition from Homehol.

           Accept any other reasonable difference.
           Award [1] for each difference up to a total of [2].
           Award [1] for putting the difference into context up to a total of [2].

     (b)   Explain strategies MM could use to improve cash flow in its palladium mine in
           South Africa. (Table 1)                                                               [6]

            Delay spending on major improvements – one month delay will improve Q2
             cash flow but will make Q3 worse
            Reduce credit terms on sales. These are on 2 months credit which is quite a
             long time. What is industry norm
            Get a short-term loan – however this impacts on the profits/liquidity/gearing
             and does not solve the problem
            Wages are not suitable for change, nor, probably are other costs
            Investigate ways to spread out maintenance costs or reduce them. Different
             credit terms?
            Incentivize early invoice payment;
            Renegotiate credit options if possible and delay vendor payments as long as
             possible; (e.g. credit terms are currently 60 days—could be reduced to 30
             days)
            Consider invoice factoring;

           Explanation should come from how relevant the strategies are.

           Marks should be awarded according to the mark bands on page 3.

           Award maximum 2 marks for only explaining one strategy
           Award maximum 3 marks for a theoretical answer or an answer that describes
           two (or more) strategies without explaining them.
           Award maximum 5 marks if the answer is mainly descriptive but in context
                                                  – 10 –              N21/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                         Section B
4.   (a)   Define the term just-in-time production (JIT).                                          [2]

           Candidates can answer in terms of JIT production where the focus is on
           processes that reduce the time within production systems (work-in-progress) and
           response times with suppliers/customers. The mention of lean production (of
           which JIT is a part) is useful.

           Candidates can also answer in respect of managing stocks (raw materials, work-
           in-progress, finished products) so that these are available exactly when needed
           and not before. Award a max of [1] if the answer is only related to JIT stock
           control.

           Candidates can use ‘inventories’ rather than ‘stocks’.

           Award [2] for a complete definition.
           Award [1] for some understanding of JIT e.g., it mentions ‘lean production’ or
           ‘stocks’ but not the idea of reducing to a minimum.
           Award a max of [1] if the answer is only related to JIT stock control.

     (b)   With reference to Table 2, explain one benefit and one limitation for MM of using
           sales forecasting.                                                                      [4]

           Benefits:
            businesses need to plan so forecasts are important
            oil industry has been predictable so suitable for the sales forecasting
             technique and helpful to MM
            Trend is clearly downward, and MM need to plan for this
            Energy demand is clearly seasonal so broad trends not enough
            Better workforce planning: planning staff required;
            Better cash flow management: considering "cyclical and seasonal variation"
             factors;
            Increased efficiency, assisting production department in knowing the number
             of goods to produce and when to produce them;
            Better tracking and finding problematic issues (deviations), etc.

           Limitations
            Assumes future is same as past – clearly not the case with unexpected
              decrease in demand and that long-term predictions are more difficult
              (economic change and global warming)
            Major problems can affect predictions e.g., strikes

           Award [1] for one benefit or one limitation, up to a total of [2].
           Award [1] for putting each benefit/limitation into context, i.e., reference MM/ Table
           2 up to a total of [2].
           i.e Award [3] for answers that put a benefit and/or limitation into context but does
           not make use of Table 2 in relation to sales forecasting for MM.
           Only award [4] for answers that make explicit use of Table 2 in relation to sales
           forecasting for MM.
                                             – 11 –              N21/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(c)   With reference to MM, explain the difference between crisis management and
      contingency planning.                                                                   [4]

      Contingency planning; Planning how to respond to unlikely events that are a
      threat to a business
       Forward looking
       MM are likely to have plans for broad issues such as strikes, fires, floods,
         earthquakes, failure of IT systems
       Will have gathered relevant information
       Decide which problems are disruptive and which are critical
       Plan likely to be tested and will involve training
       Contingency planning can be used to help improve crisis management

      Crisis management: The process by which a business deals with a major event
      that has happened and poses a threat to the business
       Dealing with an actual not a possible threat
       Information will be available as to the extent of the crisis. e.g., MM may not
         have planned for so many miners to be trapped underground in Egypt, nor the
         extent of the Chilean earthquake and the response of the Chilean government
       The plan for an oilfield fire may not have been so extreme as catastrophic
       Actual events can help future contingency planning

      Accept any other relevant difference.
      Context comes from issues identified in the case and the nature of the business.

      Award [4] for a clear distinction between the two with effective use of the context.
      Award [3] if both crisis management and contingency planning are understood in
      context, but there is no clear distinction made.
      Award [2] If there is clear understanding of contingency planning and crisis
      management but no context is shown.
      Award [1] for limited understanding.



(d)   Using information from the case and additional information above, discuss
      whether MM should sell its tar sands mining operation to JG.                           [10]

      Arguments for the sale:
       It provides finance for expansion into Lithium mining which looks very positive
       There are local issues with First Nation Canadians which does not fit in with
         MMs ethical values and could bring bad publicity. Selling could improve
         corporate image
       Is $50 million enough if they have already spent $45 million?
       Lower than average ARR
       MM has difficulty selling Sulphur, a by-product of tar sands production.
       how about NPV ($46m); is $50m enough?

      Arguments against the sale:
       Production at capacity and has no major issues, more so than other
         operations
       It provides a reliable source of income – important if other commodities have
         fluctuating prices
       They have invested $15 million, and the mine is possibly worth more than
         $45million so is $50 million enough?
       Employees at the tar sands operation are against selling the operation to JG
                                     – 12 –             N21/3/BUSMT/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Judgement/evaluation
    depends on whether they need the money
    is the return strong enough?
    Can they afford to upset the workforce?
    Who will ultimately make the decision? —what are their views?
    If the business is doing well, why sell it?
Final judgement should relate to points raised.

Candidates can use information from Section A and Section B.
Candidates who attempt to make use of Section B information may not write with
the same level of depth but should be rewarded positively.

Accept reasonable alternative answers.
Marks should be allocated according to the mark bands on page 4.
Award a maximum of [4] for a purely theoretical answer or with no effective use
of the case (e.g., only repeating case material without development).
Award a maximum of [5] for a one-sided answer.
Award a maximum of [6] options are considered but there is limited use of data or
if there is good analysis of data with limited consideration of issues.
Award a maximum of [8] if options are considered and there is good use of data
but there are no significant judgements.
