© International Baccalaureate Organization 2021

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2021

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2021

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Business management
Case study: Megamin Mining

For use in November 2021




Instructions to candidates
y Case study booklet required for higher level paper 1 and standard level paper 1 business
  management examinations.




                                                                                             8821 – 5001
     5 pages                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2021
                                                –2–                                            8821 – 5001


                                    Megamin Mining (MM)
     Megamin Mining (MM ) is a multinational conglomerate business based in Canada. MM ’s
     activities include mining, hotels and properties. Today, MM has mines in North America, South
     America, Africa and Australia, and property in North America and Europe. The commodities
     it mines include oil, copper, palladium, gold and zinc. Its properties include office buildings in
 5   Paris, Dubai and Bangkok and hotels in Berlin, Rome and Geneva.

     MM was set up as a partnership in the 1890s by two brothers, Jock and Craig MacAskill, to mine
     coal in Canada. At that time, coal was important in the rapid development of British Columbia
     and was used to power ships, including British Navy vessels. Following MM ’s success in the
     coal industry and growing demand for petrol* for cars in the early 1900s and 1910s, the brothers
10   saw an opportunity to mine oil in the Ontario region of Canada. In 1920, to raise finance for
     expansion, the brothers converted MM to a private limited company and they became directors.
     They encouraged local business people to become shareholders. The shareholders soon saw
     the benefits of diversifying, and the business spread risks by mining other minerals: in 1924, MM
     opened a copper mine in Canada, and in 1928, when the board of directors, which also included
15   two major shareholders, saw the opportunity to expand overseas, it opened a copper mine in
     Chile. To help finance the new mines, make international trading easier and facilitate future
     growth, MM became a public limited company.

     In the mid-1930s, the mining industry around the world underwent a period of consolidation
     brought on by economic depression and political uncertainty. The directors of MM could see that
20   their relatively small business would not survive in the industry, so in 1935, the board agreed to
     a merger with a Chilean mining company, Chilmin. Part of the merger agreement was that the
     name Megamin Mining would be retained.

     Between 1937 and 1954, MM made no new major investments. In 1955, the company’s
     diversification into property began when it seized the opportunity to buy its head office, which it
25   initially rented in a building shared with a hotel in downtown Vancouver, Canada. The American
     owners of the building had experienced financial difficulty following a property price collapse in
     the USA, and they offered to sell the building to MM at a very low price. MM bought the building,
     retaining its office on the top floors and running the hotel on the lower floors. MM has since
     expanded its property portfolio by buying properties in Europe, looking for opportunities when
30   property markets are weak. Apart from buying property, the business remained unchanged in
     the 1960s.

     In 1972, MM took over a palladium mine in South Africa. In the 1970s, catalytic converters,
     which contain palladium and reduce harmful emissions and pollution, began to be fitted
     to cars. The demand for palladium therefore increased significantly. To this day, catalytic
35   converters are still fitted to cars. In the 1980s, opportunities arose to open a gold mine in Egypt
     and a zinc mine in Australia. Then, in 1986, when new licenses for mining tar sands in Alberta,
     Canada, became available, MM did not miss the chance to grow and obtained a license from
     the Alberta government.

     MM today
40   MM ’s board of directors now includes Jock’s great granddaughter, Isla, as Chief Executive
     Officer, and Craig’s great grandson, Ethan, as Finance Director. The board also includes five
     other members: two worker representatives and three Chilean shareholders. The board of
     directors makes major strategic decisions, such as how to improve MM ’s sustainability. The
     board usually meets in Vancouver but sometimes in Santiago, Chile; however, the company uses
45   decentralization for day-to-day decisions where possible. For example, the local management
                                                 –3–                                              8821 – 5001


     teams of each mine can make decisions about their operations, wages and employment
     contracts, and the local management teams at each hotel have the freedom to set prices and
     choose restaurant menus. This delegation enables the board of directors to focus on key issues
     facing MM.

50   MM ’s business performance is mixed and is split into four divisions: the Oil Production Division,
     Hotels Division, Property Division, and Mining Division. Each division has external influences to
     which MM must respond.

     Oil Production Division
     Production of oil from wells is suffering from two factors. First, oil is a fossil fuel and the growth
55   in worldwide demand for petroleum and other oil products is declining as part of a major trend
     towards reducing carbon emissions in most countries. Oil demand is expected to eventually
     decline. Second, the oil fields have passed their peak production levels. These factors mean
     that production costs are increasing.

     Production from the Alberta tar sands is also being affected by falling demand for oil products.
60   However, MM is reducing its operations in Alberta in response to Canadian concerns about
     the impact of the industry on First Nations (indigenous) peoples and the environment through
     damage to ecosystems. There are also concerns about transporting harmful oil and gas
     products through towns.

     Furthermore, oil companies are seen as bad for the environment. MM is trying to improve its
65   image by:
     y developing energy-efficient production methods
     y supporting research into more efficient uses of energy, such as energy-efficient cars
     y offsetting carbon emissions by funding reforestation and other environmental projects
     y researching diversification into alternative fuels, such as hydrogen
70   y strengthening ethical values throughout the business, but particularly in oil production.

     Hotels Division
     MM ’s hotels mainly focus on the tourism market, selling rooms directly to tourists. All the
     hotels, except for the one in Geneva, have had three disappointing years. Between 2018
     and 2021, occupancy rates fell from an average of 80 % to 60 %. Competition from Homehol,
75   an online vacation rental company that hosts a service for users to list their properties for
     rental (rather than Homehol itself owning the properties), has also been affecting MM ’s hotel
     bookings. Return visitor numbers have declined, and comments on review websites have
     become increasingly negative. Customer complaints include high prices compared with those
     of competitors, uncomfortable beds, rude staff, buildings in need of renovation, and poor-quality
80   food. Advertising in travel magazines has not increased bookings, nor has a “two for the price of
     one” promotional offer. MM will conduct some primary market research to help identify methods
     to increase hotel bookings.

     Property Division
     Office rental incomes are high and property prices are increasing in European cities. Hotel
85   property prices are also increasing.

     Mining Division
     The Mining Division sells its entire production business to business (B2B), usually in long-term
     contracts. The prices of minerals can be volatile, however, and are determined by international
     commodities markets that reflect supply and demand at any given time.


                                                                                                 Turn over
                                                –4–                                            8821 – 5001


 90   The demand for palladium has been falling over the last 20 years. This decline was initially
      because consumers started purchasing diesel cars, which do not have catalytic converters that
      use palladium, rather than petrol cars. Today, governments around the world are discouraging
      the use of both diesel and petrol cars for environmental reasons, and sales of electric cars,
      which do not use palladium, are increasing. As a result, the demand for palladium is likely to
 95   continue to decrease. Furthermore, although the palladium produced in MM ’s mine in South
      Africa is highly profitable, cash flow can be a problem. Table 1 shows MM ’s cash flow for this
      mine in 2021.

             Table 1: Cash flow for MM ’s palladium mine in 2021 (in millions of $)

                                            Quarter 1     Quarter 2     Quarter 3     Quarter 4
                                                                                      (forecast)

      Opening balance                           20            26           −15          −10

      Sales (60 days credit)                    50            60            60            70

      Maintenance (one month’s credit)            4             6            8             4

      Wages (paid weekly)                       30            30            31            32

      Major improvements                          0           50             0             0

      Other costs (cash)                        10            15            16            14

      Closing balance                           26           −15           −10            10

      The demand for copper is high and expected to grow by as much as 50 % over the next 20 years.
      This increase is due to the rise in consumer use of electronics, wider uptake of electric vehicles,
100   increased use of renewable energy sources, and energy efficiency, all of which require
      significant amounts of copper.

      After a fall between 2012 and 2015, gold prices have recovered, so gold production has recently
      been very profitable for MM. However, the company’s gold mine in Egypt now has technical
      problems and some areas of the mine are unsafe, with a risk of flooding if heavy rains fall.
105   Some of the lorry drivers at the mine have threatened strike action because of safety and pay
      issues. The mine is currently producing below the break-even level, and MM is exploring ways
      in which it could reduce its costs.

      Specific issues facing MM
      MM ’s board of directors is also considering three specific issues: employment practices,
110   environmental issues, and expansion into a new section of the mining industry.

      Employment practices at MM
      Traditionally, MM ’s employment practices have varied from country to country and are even
      different within the company’s divisions. So, for example, employees in Canada are paid high
      wages, consistent with general wage levels in Canada whereas employees in Africa received
115   low wages consistent with local wage rates. Employees in the hotels in Berlin, Rome and
      Geneva have low wages relative to other workers in Europe. Employees’ rights are different too:
                                                    –5–                                            8821 – 5001


         whereas employees in Europe and Canada expect to be able to belong to a trade union and
         receive health insurance and favourable employment contracts, employees in some countries
         have zero-hour contracts, particularly in the mines and hotels, and no trade union protection.

  120    Employees in the Chilean mines are now demanding contracts similar to those in Canada.
         However, until recently, MM has had no difficulty recruiting employees for its Chilean operations
         and staff turnover is low. The Chilean employees argue that their work creates the greatest
         profits for MM, so they should be rewarded better for it. Meanwhile, managers in Africa are
         reporting that productivity is declining as a result of falling employee motivation. MM ’s board is
  125    concerned that any wage increases in Chile could reduce competitiveness and profits and lead
         to similar demands elsewhere.

         Environmental issues
         MM needs to respond to national and international policies on climate change. The company
         has also received negative publicity from environmental groups about its operations, and there
  130    have been protests against it at various locations.

         MM plans to review its environmental policies in response to the expected outcome of the
         United Nation’s COP26, a conference which will update various climate strategies and targets.
         MM is considering stopping activities in the most polluting areas of the business and is planning
         to set strict climate change targets at corporate, national and local levels for all other remaining
  135    areas of the business. To meet these new targets, MM will need to improve its methods
         of data collection on emissions and other environmental impacts. Currently, businesses in
         Europe adhere to targets on reducing emissions and are closely monitored. However, far
         less information is collected in other parts of the world. The board of directors is therefore
         considering an integrated IT network to share information for all of MM ’s activities.

  140    Expansion into lithium mining
         The fastest growing section of the mining industry is the extraction of lithium. Major producers of
         lithium include Australia, Chile and Argentina. Lithium and its compounds have several industrial
         applications, including lithium batteries, heat-resistant glass and ceramics, lubricants, and
         additives for iron, steel and aluminium production. The current rapid growth in the demand for
  145    lithium has been caused by the increased use of lithium-ion batteries, which are essential for
         electric vehicles, smartphones and other electronic equipment.

         MM ’s board of directors sees opportunities for major growth in this sector of the industry.
         However, the individual board members disagree about whether to seek a license for a new
         lithium mine (probably in Australia), take over an existing lithium producer (possibly in Chile), or
  150    enter a joint venture (possibly with a Canadian lithium producer).



* petrol: gasoline


Companies, products, or individuals named in this case study are fictitious and any similarities with
actual entities are purely coincidental.



References:

© International Baccalaureate Organization 2021
