N21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                       Markscheme


                        November 2021


                               Geography


           Higher level and standard level


                                Paper 1




26 pages
                                            –2–                 N21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2021

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2021

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2021

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                           –3–                    N21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 1 markbands
These markbands are to be used for paper 1 at both standard level and higher level.

 Marks   Level descriptor
         AO1: Knowledge and understanding of              AO3: Synthesis and evaluation AO4: Selection, use and
         specified content                                                              application of a variety of
                                                                                        appropriate skills and techniques
         AO2: Application and analysis of knowledge
         and understanding

   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
  1–2    The response is too brief, lists unconnected information, is not focused on the question and lacks structure.

         • The response is very brief or descriptive,      • No evidence of evaluation       • Information presented is not
           listing a series of unconnected                   or conclusion is expected         grouped logically (in
           comments or largely irrelevant                    at this level.                    paragraphs or sections).
           information. The knowledge and                                                    • Maps, graphs or diagrams
           understanding presented is very general                                             are not included, are
           with large gaps or errors in                                                        irrelevant or difficult to
           interpretation. Examples or case studies                                            decipher (only if appropriate
           are not included or only listed.                                                    to the question).
         • There is no evidence of analysis.
         • Terminology is missing, not defined,
           irrelevant or used incorrectly.

  3–4    The response is too general, lacks detail, is not focused on the question and is largely unstructured.

         • The response is very general. The        • If appropriate to the         • Most of the information is not
           knowledge and understanding presented      question, the conclusion is     grouped logically (in
           outlines examples, statistics, and facts   irrelevant.                     paragraphs or sections).
           that are both relevant and irrelevant.   • There is no evidence of       • Maps, graphs or diagrams
           Links to the question are listed.          critical evaluation of          included lack detail, are
         • The argument or analysis presented is      evidence (examples,             incorrectly or only partially
           not relevant to the question.              statistics and case studies).   interpreted without explicit
         • Basic terminology is defined and used                                      connections to the question
           but with errors in understanding or used                                   (only if appropriate to the
           inconsistently.                                                            question).
  5–6    The response partially addresses the question, but with a narrow argument, an unsubstantiated conclusion, and
         limited evaluation.
         • The response describes relevant                • If appropriate to the        • Logically related information
           supporting evidence (information,                question, the conclusions      is grouped together (in
           examples, case studies et cetera),               are general, not aligned       sections or paragraphs) but
           outlining appropriate link(s) to the             with the evidence              not consistently.
           question.                                        presented and/or based on • Maps, graphs or diagrams
         • The argument or analysis partially               an incorrect interpretation    included do not follow
           addresses the question or elaborates             of the evidence.               conventions, and include
           one point repeatedly.                          • Other perspectives on          relevant and irrelevant
         • Relevant terminology is defined and              evidence (examples,            interpretations in the text
           used with only minor errors in                   statistics and case studies)   (only if appropriate to the
           understanding or is used inconsistently.         and/or strengths and           question).
                                                            weaknesses of evidence
                                                            are listed.
                                                       –4–                    N21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


7–8    The response addresses the whole question, the analysis is evaluated and the conclusion is relevant but lacks
       balance.
       •   The response describes              • If appropriate to the question, the      • Logically related
           relevant supporting evidence            conclusion is relevant to the             information is grouped
           correctly (information, examples        question, aligned with the evidence       together (in sections)
           and case studies) that covers all       but unbalanced.                           consistently.
           the main points of the question,    • Other perspectives on evidence           • Maps, graphs or
           describing appropriate links to         (examples, statistics and case            diagrams included
           the question.                           studies) and/or strengths and             contribute to/support the
       • The argument or analysis is               weaknesses of evidence are                argument or analysis
           clear and relevant to the               described.                                (only if appropriate to
           question but one-sided or                                                         the question).
           unbalanced.
       • Complex terminology is defined
           and used correctly but not
           consistently.
9–10   The response is in-depth and question-specific (topic and command term); analysis and conclusion are justified
       through well-developed evaluation of evidence and perspectives.
       •   The response explains correct        •   If appropriate to the question, the   •     Response is logically
           and relevant examples, statistics        conclusion is relevant to the               structured with
           and details that are integrated in       question, balanced and aligned with         discussion (and if
           the response, explaining the             the evidence.                               appropriate to the
           appropriate link to the question.    •   Evaluation includes a systematic and        question, a conclusion)
       •   The argument or analysis is              detailed presentation of ideas, cause       focusing on the
           balanced, presenting evidence            and effect relations, other                 argument or points
           that is discussed, explaining            perspectives; strengths and                 made, making it easy to
           complexity, exceptions and               weaknesses of evidence are                  follow.
           comparisons.                             discussed; (if appropriate) includes  •     Maps, graphs or
       •   Complex and relevant                     justification of the argument and           diagrams are annotated
           terminology is used correctly            conclusion.                                 following conventions
           throughout the response.                                                             and their relevance is
                                                                                                explained and support
                                                                                                the argument or
                                                                                                analysis (only if
                                                                                                appropriate to the
                                                                                                question).
                                                     –5–              N21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Option A — Freshwater

1.   (a)   (i)      State the direction from point A to point B.                                           [1]

                    South-east

           (ii)     Estimate the percentage of the satellite image that is covered by dense vegetation. [1]

                    About 20% (accept 10–30%)

     (b)   Outline the relationship between river discharge and hydraulic radius.                    [2]

           Award [1] for the basic relationship and [1] for further development (either explanation or
           other outlined development, eg mention of Bradshaw model).

           For example: The relationship is positive [1] / they both increase with distance downstream
           [1] as the river’s size and energy increases [1].

           Do not award marks for definitions.

     (c)   Suggest two landform changes that could be caused by river processes in an environment
           such as this.                                                                      [3+3]

           In each case, award [1] for a valid landform change resulting from fluvial processes, and up
           to [2] for development / explanation / exemplification.

           For example: a meander develops into an ox-bow lake [1] when river erosion cuts through
           the neck of the meander [1] and deposition continues to isolate the lake [1].

           Other possibilities which are appropriate for the lowland fluvial environment shown in the
           photograph include:

           •      Meanders - accept increasing, more sinuosity, formation implying change
           •      Levees - formation implying change
           •      Floodplains - formation implying change

           •      Deltas
           •      Slip-off slope / river cliff
           •      River terraces.
                                                   –6–                 N21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   (a)   Examine the management challenges that internationally shared water resources
           can create.                                                                                       [10]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

           The focus of the essay is on the management challenges facing the use of internationally
           shared water resources (rivers, lakes, wetlands and aquifers). Conflicts over shared water
           resources may be serious and difficult to resolve, especially where resources are scarce and
           demand is high. There are competing demands for water, which should be allocated on an
           equitable basis, to satisfy all users. Increasing demands from agriculture, industry and urban.
           Water scarcity is becoming an important issue; physical and economic water scarcity is
           increasing. The varying power of different stakeholders should be considered in relation to
           water management.

           Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
           • Conflicts over aquifers, lakes and rivers which cross international boundaries.
           • Conflicts over water for human consumption, irrigation and power generation; pollution
             resulting from such activities.
           • Conflicts over access to scarce water resources, especially in arid regions.
           • The power of different stakeholders varies between local people, water management
             organisations, and local and national governments.
           • Disputes over water are an increasing source of international tension.
           • Resolution of the conflict is difficult, and relies on international treaties regarding water
             management in drainage basins.

           Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
           evaluation (AO3) of the statement in a way that examines the management challenges, and
           may show that perspectives (eg, political, economic, social and environmental) may differ
           between stakeholders. Another approach might be to examine which stakeholders gain
           greater benefits, perhaps in relation to the varying power over the management process.

           For 5–6 marks, expect weakly evidenced outlining of one or more management challenges
           created by internationally shared water resources.

           For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account which includes:
           • either an evidenced explanation of two or more management challenges created by
             internationally shared water resources
           • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
             and/or perspectives.

           For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                –7–                N21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   (b)   Examine why some communities and environments may benefit more than others
           from the building of large dams.                                                         [10]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

           The construction of large dams for multi-purpose water schemes can have significant
           benefits, but often come at a considerable cost. The cost and benefits are shared unevenly
           between different communities and environments, and some will benefit more than others.

           Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
           • The benefits and costs of building large dams vary between different stakeholders,
             including local communities, farmers, environmentalists, organizations such as water
             management and power companies, national governments.
           • The benefits and costs also vary between different environments/places.
           • Benefits include: reducing flood risk, improved water supplies, and economic development
             through irrigation, power generation, recreation and tourism.
           • There are also significant environmental, social and economic costs, which vary between
             different stakeholders and places.

           Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
           evaluation (AO3) of the statement in a way that examines the varying benefits of large dam
           construction for communities and environments, and may show that perspectives (eg
           political, economic, social and environmental) may differ between stakeholders. Another
           approach might be to examine which stakeholders gain greater benefits, perhaps in relation
           to their varying power over future management possibilities.

           For 5–6 marks, expect weakly evidenced outlining of one or more benefits of large dam
           construction for communities and/or environments (places)

           For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account which includes:
           • either an evidenced explanation of two or more reasons why some communities and
             environments (places) benefit more than others
           • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
             and/or perspectives, possibly examining future possibilities for management.

           For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                   –8–                 N21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Option B — Oceans and coastal margins

3.   (a)   (i)    Identify the country with the third largest aquaculture production.                         [1]

                  Indonesia

           (ii)   Estimate the aquaculture production in China in millions of tonnes.                         [1]

                  56 (accept 53–59)

     (b)   Outline one environmental problem associated with the growth of aquaculture.                 [2]

           Award [1] for the environmental problem and [1] for development/explanation.

           For example: Contamination of waters around the aquaculture farms [1] caused by leaked
           chemicals [1].

           Other problems include:
           • Escaped fish breeding with local wild fish
           • Depleted fish stocks as used to feed farmed fish
           • Spread of sea lice and diseases
           • Eutrophication from fertilizers added to encourage greater phytoplankton growth.


     (c)   Suggest how sustainable management of ocean fish stocks in low- and middle-income
           countries may have benefits for:

           (i)    local communities;                                                                          [3]

                  Award [1] for a valid suggestion and up to [2] for explanation or exemplification.

                  For example: Fishing provides employment [1] so there is long-term job security [1]
                  due to lack of alternative employment options in industrializing/emerging countries
                  where there is increased pressure on fish stocks [1].

                  Other suggestions include:
                  • Fishing provides protein source
                  • Tourism (people come to fish / scuba diving).

           (ii)   the global environment.                                                                     [3]

                  Award [1] for a valid suggestion and up to [2] for explanation or exemplification.

                  For example: Stops fish becoming extinct / allows biodiversity to thrive [1], which
                  maintains health of ocean ecosystems [1], thus protecting an important global
                  commons [1].

                  Other suggestions include:
                  • Healthy food chains
                  • Environmental services
                  • Future stewardship.
                                                 –9–                N21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   (a)   Examine the positive and negative impacts of La Niña events for different parts of
           the world.                                                                                [10]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

           La Niña is the positive and cold phase of El Niño, and is associated with below average sea
           surface temperatures in the central and eastern tropical Pacific Ocean. La Niña may have
           significant impacts on weather systems, with environmental and economic consequences. La
           Niña can have positive and negative effects on different places, including changes in storm
           frequencies and rainfall amounts, causing flooding and droughts, and modification of ocean
           currents, affecting fishing industries.

           Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
           • La Niña is the positive and cold phase of an El Niño event, associated with cooler than
             average sea surface temperatures in the central and eastern tropical Pacific Ocean.
           • La Niña may have significant impacts on weather systems, with major environmental and
             economic consequences. It may lead to intense storms and flooding in some areas, and
             severe drought in others. For example, in Asia the formation of tropical cyclones causes
             heavy rainfall, flooding and landslides over SE Asia.
           • Above average rainfall in NW India and Bangladesh is of benefit to agriculture, water
             supply and industry.
           • La Niña may also increase the potential for tropical cyclones in the Atlantic Ocean.
           • Drought also affects the coastal regions of California, Peru and Chile; while flooding
             affects the central Andes and Bolivia.
           • La Niña has a positive impact on the fishing industry of western South America –
             upwelling of cold, nutrient-rich waters increase fish stocks, especially crustaceans and sea
             bass.
           • The intensity and duration of La Niña cycles may increase with global climatic change.

           Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
           evaluation (AO3) of the statement in a way that examines the positive and negative impacts
           of La Niña in different areas. Another approach might be to examine which areas gain
           greater benefits, and whether these outweigh the negative impacts.

           For 5–6 marks, expect weakly evidenced outlining of one positive and/or negative impact of
           La Niña.

           For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account which includes:
           • either an evidenced explanation of at least one positive and one negative impact of La
             Niña in different parts of the world
           • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
             and/or perspectives, possibly examining whether benefits outweigh the negative impacts.

           For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                 – 10 –              N21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   (b)   Evaluate the relative importance of vegetation in the development of coastal
           sand dunes.                                                                                [10]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

           Vegetation plays a vital role in the formation and development of coastal sand dunes, but
           wind and other coastal processes are also of importance. Sand dunes typically develop
           where there are strong onshore winds, and constructive wave action with the formation of
           wide, sandy beaches. There should also be a plentiful supply of sand, either from erosion of
           nearby cliffs or transported by ocean currents. Vegetation is important in trapping and
           stabilizing sand deposition to form dunes. A recognizable vegetation succession is evident
           from newer to older, more inland dunes. If vegetation is destroyed by human activity, sand
           dune erosion may occur.

           Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
           • Vegetation plays a vital role in the formation and development of coastal sand dune
             systems.
           • Other factors are also important, including the role of wind, and the availability of a large
             expanse of sand which can be transported inland.
           • Strong prevailing onshore winds transport sediment inland, by saltation, suspension and
             creep.
           • Vegetation traps and colonises the sand at the back of the beach, where wind velocities
             are lower. The roots and stems of the vegetation anchor the shifting sand, creating
             protection from the wind and hence more sand accumulation. Over time, more dunes will
             form at the back of the beach and plant succession occurs on the older, inland dunes.
           • Dunes are vulnerable to erosion by human activities such as trampling which destroys the
             vegetation.
           • Vegetation is vital in stabilising the sand dunes: protection and re-planting of dune
             vegetation is important in dune stabilisation.

           Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
           evaluation (AO3) of the statement in a way that examines the relative importance of
           vegetation in sand dune formation in relation to other factors such as wind and coastal
           processes that provide a wide expanse of sand. Another approach might be to examine the
           spatial variation in the role of vegetation, the way vegetation succession occurs over time
           scales, and the interaction of human activity.

           For 5–6 marks, expect weakly evidenced outlining of the link between vegetation and
           coastal sand dune development.

           For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account which includes:
           • either an evidenced explanation of the importance of vegetation in coastal sand dune
             development
           • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) which examines the relative importance
             of vegetation in relation to other factors, such as wind.

           For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                   – 11 –             N21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Option C — Extreme environments

5.   (a)   (i)    Identify one feature of the way buildings are dispersed across Antarctica.            [1]

                  Near ice shelves / on the edge of the continent / coastal / concentrated on the Antarctic
                  Peninsula / concentrated between 135° E and 180° / to the east of Ross Ice Shelf /
                  none at the South Pole.

           (ii)   Estimate the latitude of building A.                                                  [1]

                  Accept 80° or 80° South (credit 78–82)

     (b)   Outline one reason why a long-term fall in temperature might cause glaciers
           to advance.                                                                                  [2]

           Award [1] for the reason and [1] for explanation/development.

           For example: Volume of ice increases due to more snowfall [1] accumulation exceeds
           ablation/melting [1].

           Other possibilities include:
           • Movement of glacier accelerated by greater mass of ice
           • Mass balance changes
           • Reaches pressure melting point.

     (c)   Explain two geographic factors that can make very high-latitude polar regions
           challenging for human activity.                                                     [3+3]

           In each case, award [1] for a valid factor and up to [2] for development / explanation.

           For example: Remoteness makes communications difficult [1] due to distance/time/hostile
           ocean/lack of infrastructure [1] and increases the cost of supplies/materials that have to be
           brought into the area [1].

           Other factors include:
           • Extreme cold – human discomfort
           • Frozen ground/ice cover/permafrost – inaccessibility.
                                                 – 12 –              N21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


6.   (a)   Examine why opportunities for agriculture vary from place to place in hot,
           arid environments.                                                                          [10]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

           Hot, arid areas are characterized by high temperatures and low, variable annual rainfall.
           There is some possibility for farming, especially where water conservation and irrigation
           methods are used. Opportunities for agriculture will vary spatially due to factors such as
           access to water supply, for example by water transfer schemes, the exploitation of aquifers,
           access to land, capital and economic development, and different irrigation technologies.
           Challenges include low soil fertility, access to surface and groundwater supplies, salinization
           and desertification; economic and social inequalities.

           Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
           • Hot, arid areas are characterised by low, variable rainfall, limited surface water supplies,
             low soil moisture content, lack of vegetation and infertile soils.
           • Opportunities will vary partly due to differences in economic development between
             different places.
           • Opportunities are created by traditional farming, including pastoral nomadism. Traditional
             irrigation systems allow intensive farming along rivers and oases.
           • In recent years, large-scale irrigation systems, advanced irrigation technologies, utilization
             of aquifers, and desalinization plants have expanded commercial farming in different
             places.
           • Large-scale water transfers have also allowed expansion of commercial farming in
             different places.
           • Commercialization of agriculture, specialization in certain crops and access to capital and
             external markets have also occurred.

           Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
           evaluation (AO3) of the statement in a way that examines the way in which opportunities
           vary between different types of place and at different scales. These might reflect different
           agricultural systems, access to water supply and irrigation, access to capital and external
           markets, and the large-scale commercialization of agriculture. Another approach might be to
           examine the varying power of different stakeholders in the possibility of agricultural
           development.

           For 5–6 marks, expect weakly evidenced outlining of some agricultural opportunities in hot,
           arid environments.

           For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account which includes:
           • either an evidenced explanation of why agricultural opportunities may vary in hot, arid
             environments
           • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
             and/or perspectives.

           For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                  – 13 –               N21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


6.   (b)   Evaluate the main opportunities and challenges for indigenous groups in extreme
           environments.                                                                                 [10]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

           Candidates may refer to hot, arid or cold extreme environments, or to both. The main
           challenges and opportunities for indigenous groups include adaptation to global climatic
           change, management of desertification, increasing competition for access to resources (eg
           oil, minerals, fish), and access to new technologies. There may be conflicts between different
           stakeholders, including indigenous people, national governments and transnational
           corporations (TNCs). It is not expected that candidates will consider all of these traits, but the
           focus should be on opportunities and challenges facing indigenous groups.

           Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
           • Adaptation to climate change – eg melting of ice sheets and permafrost; changes in
             rainfall patterns – eg droughts; and change to natural ecosystems, wildlife and migration
             patterns of animals.
           • Economic development may be facilitated, leading to improvements in transport and
             communications, reduction in isolation, and increased wealth and job opportunities.
           • Increased competition for access to resources – eg minerals, fossil fuels and fish).
           • Challenges include threats to traditional ways of life, and conflicts between different
             stakeholders – indigenous groups, national governments and TNCs.

           Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
           evaluation (AO3) of the statement in a way that examines the way in which opportunities
           and challenges vary between different places, and how these might vary over time. The
           relative power of different stakeholders might be considered in relation to the impact on
           indigenous groups. Another approach might be to examine contrasting places and the
           varying prospects for sustainable development (economy, society, environment) for
           indigenous groups.

           For 5–6 marks, expect weakly evidenced outlining of some opportunities and/or challenges
           for indigenous groups in extreme environments.

           For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account which includes:
           • either an evidenced explanation of the opportunities and challenges facing indigenous
             groups in extreme environments
           • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
             and/or perspectives.

           For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                   – 14 –            N21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Option D – Geophysical hazards

7.   (a)   (i)    Identify the land use with the largest area.                                            [1]

                  Tea

           (ii)   Estimate the distance, in metres, between A and B of the landslide on the map.          [1]

                  850 (accept 820 to 900)

     (b)   Outline one physical factor that increases the speed of onset in a mass
           movement event.                                                                          [2]

           Award [1] for cause and [1] for development.

           For example: Prolonged rainfall [1] will saturate the soil and accelerate soil movement on a
           slope [1].

           Other possibilities include:
           • relief/gradient
           • soil structure
           • geology.

     (c)   Suggest how two pre-event management strategies could reduce the negative impact of
           mass movement in an area such as this.                                            [3+3]

             In each case, award [1] for a valid strategy and up to [2] for development, explanation or
             exemplification. (If strategy and/or development is not specific to mass movement hazard
             then maximum [2].)

           For example: Increasing slope stability by terracing [1] therefore reducing the slope angle [1]
           and preventing damage to settlement / farmland [1].

           Other strategies include, but are not limited to:
           • land use zoning – infrastructure and buildings
           • banning logging on steep slopes / Plant trees
           • improving drainage/diverting surface water
           • restraining structures eg gabions/walls
           • netting/rock traps.
                                                – 15 –              N21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


8.   (a)   Examine the reasons why earthquakes vary in magnitude and frequency between
           different places.                                                                        [10]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

           Earthquake activity is caused both by geophysical processes operating at plate margins, and
           also by human activities. The distribution, frequency and magnitude of earthquakes are
           chiefly related to different types of plate margin. Shallow earthquakes, of low magnitude and
           high frequency, are often associated with divergent plates, while high magnitude, deep
           earthquakes of lower frequency are associated with destructive plate margins. Human
           activity may also trigger low magnitude earthquakes.

           Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
           • Different places are affected by varying types of earthquake activity. Some areas are
             more prone than others to earthquake activity.
           • Earthquake activity occurs at constructive, destructive and transverse plate margins. High
             magnitude, deep-focus earthquakes occur at destructive margins. Shallow, low magnitude
             events characterize constructive and transverse margins. The latter are also associated
             with volcanic activity at hot spots, away from plate margins.
           • Human activity, such as dam building and resource extraction, may also trigger low
             magnitude, shallow earthquakes.

           Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
           evaluation (AO3) of the statement in a way that examines the relationship between physical
           processes and earthquake frequency and magnitude. Another approach would be to
           examine earthquake characteristics at different places such as types of plate margin.

           For 5–6 marks, expect weakly evidenced outlining of reasons why earthquakes vary in
           magnitude and/or frequency.

           For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account which includes:
           • either an evidenced explanation of processes of earthquake formation and associated
             magnitude and frequency at different places
           • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
             and/or perspectives.

           For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                – 16 –             N21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


8.   (b)   Examine how different human factors can affect community vulnerability to one or more
           geophysical hazards.                                                                  [10]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

           The vulnerability of communities to geophysical hazards is influenced by various economic,
           social and demographic factors. These include levels of wealth and poverty, economic
           development and access to technology; population characteristics, education levels and
           degrees of awareness and perception. Vulnerability varies spatially, between different
           places, and at different scales from international to local.

           Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
           • Economic factors include levels of wealth and poverty, building types, communications
             and access to technology, insurance.
           • Demographic factors include population characteristics (age and gender) and population
             densities; migration.
           • Social factors include levels perception and awareness, prior experience, and education
             level.
           • These factors will also influence disaster pre- event management strategies designed to
             minimize vulnerability.
           • The vulnerability of communities varies between different places and local contexts, and
             at different scales from international to local.
           • Vulnerability may also vary between different types of geophysical hazard.

           Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
           evaluation (AO3) of the statement in a way that shows understanding of the relationship
           between various human factors and geophysical processes that affect vulnerability. Another
           approach would be to examine vulnerability to communities at different places and scales.

           For 5–6 marks, expect weakly evidenced outlining of human factors affecting vulnerability to
           a geophysical hazard.

           For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account which includes:
           • either an evidenced explanation of a range of human factors affecting vulnerability of
             communities to one or more geophysical hazards
           • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
             and/or perspectives.

           For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                   – 17 –               N21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Option E — Leisure, tourism and sport

9.   (a)   (i)    State the range of number of visitors, in millions, for the 15 major tourist hotspots.     [1]

                  20.0- 8.3 (or 11.7).

           (ii)   State the median number of visitors, in millions, for the 15 major tourist hotspots.       [1]

                  12

     (b)   Outline one way in which investment by transnational corporations (TNCs) can help places
           grow as tourist destinations.                                                        [2]

           Award [1] for a valid way and [1] for explanation or developed exemplification.

           For example: TNCs organize/advertise package/all-in holidays [1] to destinations that people
           would otherwise not be aware of [1].

           Other possibilities:
           • A TNC/MNC might hold a conference in a city [1] helping to raise its profile and attracting
             visitors [1]
           • Developing resort complexes (hotels, swimming pools etc) [1] attracting package holiday
             makers [1].

     (c)   Suggest two reasons why further visitor growth at major tourist hotspots such as
           these could be unsustainable.                                                                   [3+3]

           In each case award [1] for a valid reason and [2] for further development / explanation /
           exemplification (with a link to sustainability).

           For example: There may already be a shortage of accommodation in these hotspots [1] so
           prices are forced up further by increasing numbers [1] becoming unaffordable for local
           communities [1].

           Other possibilities for the contexts shown include:
           • Over-tourism
           • Threats to culture
           • Exceeds carrying capacity
           • Increase in pollution.
                                                   – 18 –              N21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


10.   (a)   Examine how people’s participation in leisure activities can be affected by their country’s
            level of human development.                                                                 [10]

            Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

            The focus of the question is on the link between levels of human development and
            participation in leisure activities. Level of human development includes not only economic
            factors such as affluence, but also attitudes to gender and disability, demographic
            characteristics, changes in work habits and leisure time.

            Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
            • There has been a significant growth in people’s participation in different types of leisure
              activities in recent years.
            • The growth in participation is linked to human and economic development, such as
              increases in personal affluence and disposable incomes.
            • Some leisure activities are associated with more affluent people, while other activities may
              be associated with poorer groups.
            • Social and demographic factors are also important. These include ageing populations and
              retired people with more leisure time; changes in the workplace, with more paid holidays;
              changing attitudes towards gender and disability.
            • Participation in leisure activities varies spatially, both within and between countries at
              different levels of human development.

            Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
            evaluation (AO3) of the statement in a way that examines the relationship between various
            human factors and participation in leisure activities from different perspectives or on varying
            time and spatial scales. Another approach would be to examine changes in participation for
            different places at differing levels of development.

            For 5–6 marks, expect weakly evidenced outlining of the relationship between human
            development and participation in leisure activities.

            For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account which includes:
            • either an evidenced explanation of the relationship between human development and
              participation in leisure activities
            • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
              and/or perspectives.

            For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                  – 19 –             N21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


10.   (b)   Examine how different tourism strategies might contribute to the development of
            one or more countries.                                                                    [10]

            Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

            The focus of the question is on how different tourism strategies, such as ecotourism, heritage
            tourism, and adventure tourism might contribute to development. The costs and benefits of
            different tourism strategies should be considered, including various economic and
            social/cultural effects. The growth of tourism has had significant impacts on the economy and
            communities in countries at varying levels of development.

            Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
            • There are various types of tourist strategy, including ecotourism, heritage tourism and
              movie-location tourism.
            • The growth of tourism has had significant economic, social and environmental costs and
              benefits.
            • The relationship between the growth of tourism and development is complicated, and
              varies at different scales from local to national.
            • The relative success of different tourism strategies for sustainable development should
              be examined.

            Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
            evaluation (AO3) of the statement in a way that examines the contribution of different
            strategies from different perspectives or on varying time or spatial scales. Another approach
            might be to examine countries at different levels of development, and why some places have
            benefitted more than others, and the varying power of different stakeholders.

            For 5–6 marks, expect weakly evidenced outlining of how a tourism strategy contributes to
            the development of one or more countries

            For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account which includes:
            • either an evidenced explanation of how different tourism strategies contribute to the
              development of one or more countries
            • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
              and/or perspectives.

             For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                  – 20 –              N21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Option F — Food and health

11.   (a)   (i)    State which world region has the least food waste created by food producers
                   and shops.                                                                                [1]

                   Sub-Saharan Africa

            (ii)   Estimate the amount of food waste, in billions of tonnes, created by consumers in
                   North America.                                                                            [1]

                   100 (acceptable range of 90–110)

      (b)   Outline how vertical farming can help increase long-term global food availability.         [2]

            Award [1] for a valid way and [1] for development/explanation.

            For example: More food can be grown in the same land area / yields increase [1] because
            crops are being grown year-round/in layers [1].

      (c)   Explain two strengths of food waste reduction as a strategy to improve food security
            in the world regions shown on the graph.                                         [3 + 3]

            In each case, award [1] for a valid reason and up to [2] for development / explanation /
            exemplification.

            For example: Reducing food waste could make more food available without having to
            produce more [1] therefore regions where population growth is occurring will have enough
            food [1]. This is very efficient/sustainable in terms of energy and land use [1].

            Other possibilities include:
            • Cost of food is lower as less is wasted
            • Less is stockpiled so costs saved.
                                                  – 21 –             N21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


12.   (a)   Examine the relative importance of prevention and treatment in limiting the spread of
            one or more diseases.                                                                     [10]

            Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

            The relative importance of policies of prevention and treatment will depend partly on the
            nature of the disease – chronic (non-communicable), or contagious/infectious – as well as on
            the economic, social, demographic and political characteristics of affected communities.
            Social marginalization issues, government priorities, means of infection and government
            priorities are also important considerations.

            Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
            The relative importance of prevention over treatment of disease will depend on a variety of
            factors, including:
            • The nature of the disease (chronic or infectious) – e.g. cardiovascular disease or cholera):
               prevention may be more important in one than the other.
            • Means of infection and transmission. The pattern and rate of diffusion of the disease.
            • Economic characteristics and wealth of the community.
            • Demographic characteristics – an ageing population may be more prone to particular
               chronic diseases.
            • Availability of medical professionals and facilities; cost of medicines and healthcare.
            • Government priorities; levels of education and awareness; access to social media.

            Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
            evaluation (AO3) of the statement in a way that examines the complex interactions between
            various factors affecting strategies of prevention and treatment from different perspectives
            and scales. The power of different stakeholders might also be examined. Another approach
            might be to consider the changing relative importance of prevention and treatment for
            countries and places at different levels of development.

            For 5–6 marks, expect weakly evidenced outlining of prevention and/or treatment for one or
            more diseases.

            For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account which includes:
            • either an evidenced explanation of strategies of prevention and treatment for one or more
              diseases
            • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) regarding the relative importance of
              prevention and treatment of one or more diseases.

            For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                  – 22 –              N21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


12.   (b)   Examine how governments and other stakeholders can affect the severity of famine.          [10]

            Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

            The focus of the question is on the severity, rather than the causes, of famine, and the role
            and actions of different stakeholders. In some cases, the severity of the famine may be
            actually worsened, rather than alleviated. Apart from governments, other stakeholders
            include: international aid agencies and other humanitarian groups, local communities, and
            the media. Time scale is also important, as famine might be alleviated in the short term. In
            the long term, international aid may increase resilience and reduce the severity of future
            famines.

            Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
            • The severity of famine is affected by a variety of human factors and the actions of different
              stakeholders.
            • Stakeholders include local and national governments, international aid agencies and
              humanitarian groups, local communities and the media.
            • The views and attitudes of different stakeholders (local, national and international) should
              be considered.
            • The actions of the media may play an important role in highlighting the severity of famine.
            • International aid may be both short and long term. In the short term, medical, food aid and
              water supplies will reduce death tolls from hunger and malnutrition. However, in the long
              term this may increase dependency on foreign aid.
            • Long-term aid may increase resilience and reduce the severity of future famine.
            • Local communities may also increase resilience to famine, through actions such as
              introduction of improved farming techniques, irrigation practices, and drought-resistant
              crops/animals.
            • Improvements in education, health care and infrastructure in local communities are also
              important.

            Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
            evaluation (AO3) of the statement in a way that examines the contribution and power of
            different stakeholders in reducing the severity of famine. Another approach might be to
            examine the severity of famine in different places and geographical contexts, and how
            severity might be alleviated over time scales.

            For 5–6 marks, expect weakly evidenced outlining of the influence of governments and/or
            other stakeholders in affecting the severity of famine.

            For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account which includes:
            • either an evidenced explanation of the influence of governments and other stakeholders in
              affecting the severity of famine
            • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
              and/or perspectives.

            For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                  – 23 –              N21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Option G — Urban environments

13.   (a)   (i)    State which neighbourhood has the lowest amount of green space remaining.           [1]

                   B

            (ii)   State which neighbourhood has 30 % of green space remaining on its streets.         [1]

                   C

      (b)   Outline one reason why urban temperatures are sometimes higher than those of
            surrounding rural areas.                                                             [2]

            Award [1] for a correct factor and [1] for development.

            For example: Higher density of buildings/concrete compared with rural areas absorb/store
            heat during the day [1] which is then released during the night [1].

            Other possibilities include:
            • Buildings emitting heat
            • Air pollution
            • Transport routes
            • Hard surface reverberation
            • Albedo effect
            • Valid reasons why rural areas are cooler.
                                             – 24 –             N21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(c)   Suggest how the loss of green spaces over time in large cities like this could be
      explained by:

      (i)    one economic factor;                                                                  [3]

             Award [1] for a valid suggestion and up to [2] for development / explanation /
             exemplification.

             For example: In large cities, there is very high demand for land [1] so green space is
             turned into more profitable land uses in the inner areas [1] for example for new housing
             projects [1].

             Other possibilities include:
             • retail use
             • industry
             • services.

      (ii)   one political factor.                                                              [3]

             Award [1] for a valid suggestion and up to [2] for development / explanation /
             exemplification.

             For example: lack of protection of green spaces by planning authorities/governments
             [1] leading to the uncontrolled urban sprawl of industry/housing/transport [1]
             particularly where there is great public pressure for new housing that governments
             must act on [1].

             Other possibilities include:
             •    planning ie designating areas for housing / industrial use
             •    corruption means protected areas are developed unofficially
             •    local tax revenues increased by new housing/car parks.
                                                   – 25 –              N21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


14.   (a)   Examine reasons for the location of different economic activities in one or more cities.     [10]

            Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

            The focus of the question is on the location/distribution/pattern of different economic activities
            (retail, commercial and industrial) in urban areas. The factors affecting the pattern might be
            physical, economic and political. The relative importance of these will vary between different
            urban areas in countries at contrasting levels of development.

            Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
            • There is a variety of physical, economic and political factors that influence the location of
              different economic activities.
            • Physical factors might include relief, drainage, proximity to the sea or rivers.
            • Economic factors include land values, access to transportation, proximity to a CBD.
            • Political factors include planning and controls over development.
            • Social factors might include relative wealth and poverty, and deprivation which influence
              informal economic activities.

            Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
            evaluation (AO3) of the statement in a way that examines varying reasons for the location of
            economic activities in urban areas. The power of different stakeholders might be considered
            in urban places and scales. Another approach might be to consider the different time scales
            of changing locations of economic activity in urban areas.

            For 5–6 marks, expect weakly evidenced outlining of reasons for location of economic
            activities in an urban area.

            For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account which includes:
            • either an evidenced explanation of the influence of different factors affecting the location
              of economic activity in one or more urban areas
            • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
              and/or perspectives.

            For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                   – 26 –              N21/3/GEOGR/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


14.   (b)   Evaluate the use of eco-city design as a way of managing large cities more sustainably. [10]

            Marks should be allocated according to the markbands

            The increasing concentration of people into large urban areas poses considerable challenges
            to urban planners, including management of the urban ecological footprint. Ecological issues
            include: atmospheric pollution and production of greenhouse gases, dependence on fossil
            fuels, pollution and over-use of water supplies; damage to natural ecosystems and wildlife.
            Sustainable management aims to reduce these ecological stresses and the urban ecological
            footprint. The use of eco-city designs is important, but these are often only at small scale, are
            expensive and can only play a small role in overcoming future urban challenges. Eco-cities
            may not always be appropriate, but the design principles may be successfully applied to
            existing cities.

            Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
            • Eco-cities are designed to reduce ecological footprint, including minimizing greenhouse
              gas emissions, reduce dependence on fossil fuels, the sustainable use of water, and
              disposal of waste.
            • Several eco-cities and eco-communities have been constructed, but these are often of
              small scale and expensive.
            • Planned eco-cities may be more appropriate in richer countries, with lower rates of
              urbanization, but less appropriate in large, rapidly growing cities in NICs.
            • Principles of eco-city design may be “retro-fitted” to sustainable management of existing
              cities.

            Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
            evaluation (AO3) of the statement in a way that examines the contribution of eco-city design
            processes to the sustainable management of cities. The power and perspectives of different
            stakeholders might be considered. Another approach might be to examine the success in
            terms of different spatial scales, the time scale of the changes, and whether the cities are
            new or long established.

            For 5–6 marks, expect weakly evidenced outlining of eco-city design and/or sustainable
            management.

            For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account which includes:
            • either an evidenced explanation of the contribution of eco-city design to sustainable
              management in large cities
            • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
              and/or perspectives.

            For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
