N21/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Markscheme

                        November 2021


                           Psychology


                           Higher level


                               Paper 1




11 pages
                                            –2–                  N21/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2021

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2021

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2021

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                   –3–                 N21/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                          Section A
Biological approach to understanding behaviour

1.   Outline neural pruning with reference to one relevant study.                                     [9]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands when awarding marks.

     The command term “outline” requires candidates to give a brief account of neural pruning
     with reference to one relevant study.

     Relevant studies may include, but are not limited to:
     • Draganski et al.’s (2004) study investigating the effects of learning juggling on the brain
       after training and after a period of latency
     • Bremner et al.’s (2003) study investigating hippocampal atrophy in PTSD
     • Maguire et al.’s (2000) study suggesting pruning in the anterior hippocampus of
       experienced taxi drivers
     • Squeglia et al.’s (2013) study suggesting a negative correlation between cortical thickness in the
       frontal lobe and age.

     An outline of the concept of neural pruning may include:
     • the role of long-term potentiation
     • the development of children’s brains
     • a decrease in dendritic branching leading to a decrease in synaptic connections
     • neuronal cell death.

     If a candidate refers to more than one study, credit should only be given to the first study.

     If a candidate outlines neural pruning without making reference to a study, up to a maximum
     of [5] should be awarded.

     If a candidate only describes an appropriate study without outlining neural pruning, up to a
     maximum of [4] should be awarded.

     The response must make a link between neural pruning and the chosen study; however, a
     link between the study and human behaviour is not required.
                                                   –4–                 N21/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Cognitive approach to understanding behaviour

2.   Describe schema theory, with reference to one relevant study.                                   [9]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands below when awarding marks.

     The command term “describe” requires candidates to give a detailed account of schema
     theory, with reference to one relevant study.

     Candidates may refer to relevant aspects of schema theory such as, but not limited to:
     • mental representation
     • framework of knowledge
     • assimilation and accommodation (Piaget)
     • the role of past experience
     • reconstructive memory
     • schema types
     • the role of schema in the encoding and retrievel of memory

     Relevant studies may include, but are not limited to:
     • Bartlett’s (1932) study of “War of the Ghosts”
     • Anderson & Pichert’s (1978) study on schema theory and memory retrieval
     • Brewer & Treyens’ (1981) study of potential effects of schema on memory.

     If a candidate refers to more than one study, credit should be given only to the first study.

     If a candidate describes schema theory without making reference to a study, up to a
     maximum of [5] should be awarded.

     If a candidate only describes an appropriate study without describing schema theory, up to a
     maximum of [4] should be awarded.
                                                   –5–                 N21/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Sociocultural approach to understanding behaviour

3.   Outline the influence of culture on behaviour and/or cognition with reference to one
     relevant study.                                                                                 [9]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands when awarding marks.

     The command term “outline” requires candidates to give a brief account or summary of the
     influence of culture on behaviour and/or cognition with reference to one relevant study.

     Appropriate topics may include, but are not limited to:
     • conformity (Berry, 1967)
     • attachment (Van Ijzendoorn and Kroonenberg, 1988)
     • aggression in honour cultures (Cohen, 1996)
     • abnormal behaviour (Lin and Kleinman, 1988)
     • addictive behaviour (Raylu and Oei, 2004)
     • memory encoding and recall strategies (Cole and Scribner, 1974)

     If a candidate refers to more than one study, credit should be given only to the first study.

     If a candidate outlines the influence of culture on behaviour and/or cognition without making
     reference to a study, up to a maximum of [5] should be awarded.

     If a candidate only describes an appropriate study without outlining the influence of culture
     on behaviour and/or cognition, up to a maximum of [4] should be awarded.
                                                  –6–               N21/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Section B assessment criteria

A — Focus on the question

To understand the requirements of the question students must identify the problem or issue being raised
by the question. Students may simply identify the problem by restating the question or breaking down the
question. Students who go beyond this by explaining the problem are showing that they understand the
issues or problems.

 Marks     Level descriptor

    0      Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.

    1      Identifies the problem/issue raised in the question.

    2      Explains the problem/issue raised in the question.

B — Knowledge and understanding

This criterion rewards students for demonstrating their knowledge and understanding of specific areas of
psychology. It is important to credit relevant knowledge and understanding that is targeted at
addressing the question and explained in sufficient detail.

 Marks    Level descriptor

    0     Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.

          The response demonstrates limited relevant knowledge and understanding.
   1–2
          Psychological terminology is used but with errors that hamper understanding.

          The response demonstrates relevant knowledge and understanding but lacks detail.
   3–4
          Psychological terminology is used but with errors that do not hamper understanding.

          The response demonstrates relevant, detailed knowledge and understanding.
   5–6
          Psychological terminology is used appropriately
                                                   –7–                 N21/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


C — Use of research to support answer

Psychology is evidence based so it is expected that students will use their knowledge of research to
support their argument. There is no prescription as to which or how many pieces of research are
appropriate for their response. As such it becomes important that the research selected is relevant and
useful in supporting the response. One piece of research that makes the points relevant to the answer
is better than several pieces that repeat the same point over and over.

 Marks    Level descriptor

    0     Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.

          Limited relevant psychological research is used in the response. Research selected serves
   1–2
          to repeat points already made.

          Relevant psychological research is used in support of the response, and is partly explained.
   3–4
          Research selected partially develops the argument.

          Relevant psychological research is used in support of the response and is thoroughly
   5–6
          explained. Research selected is effectively used to develop the argument.

D — Critical thinking

This criterion credits students who demonstrate an inquiring and reflective attitude to their understanding
of psychology. There are a number of areas where students may demonstrate critical thinking about the
knowledge and understanding used in their responses and the research used to support that knowledge
and understanding.

The areas of critical thinking are:
• research design and methodologies
• triangulation
• assumptions and biases
• contradictory evidence or alternative theories or explanations
• areas of uncertainty.

These areas are not hierarchical and not all areas will be relevant in a response. In addition, students
could demonstrate a very limited critique of methodologies, for example, and a well-developed
evaluation of areas of uncertainty in the same response. As a result, a holistic judgement of their
achievement in this criterion should be made when awarding marks.
                                                  –8–                  N21/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



 Marks    Level descriptor

    0     Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.

          There is limited critical thinking and the response is mainly descriptive. Evaluation or
  1–2
          discussion, if present, is superficial.

          The response contains critical thinking, but lacks development. Evaluation or discussion of
  3–4
          most relevant areas is attempted but is not developed.

          The response consistently demonstrates well developed critical thinking. Evaluation
  5–6
          and/or discussion of relevant areas is consistently well developed.

E — Clarity and organisation

This criterion credits students for presenting their response in a clear and organized manner. A good
response would require no re-reading to understand the points made or the train of thought underpinning
the argument.

 Marks    Level descriptor

    0     Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.

          The answer demonstrates some organization and clarity, but this is not sustained throughout
    1
          the response.

    2     The answer demonstrates organization and clarity throughout the response.
                                                  –9–                 N21/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                                Section B
4.   Evaluate one or more studies that use an animal model to investigate the relationship between
     genetics and behaviour.                                                                      [22]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “evaluate” requires candidates to make an appraisal by weighing up the
     strengths and limitations of one or more studies that use an animal model to investigate the
     relationship between genetics and behaviour.

     Although a discussion of both strengths and limitations is required, it does not have to be
     evenly balanced to gain high marks.

     Relevant studies include, but are not limited to:
     • Cases et al. (1995); Mosienko et al. (2012), Van Oortmerssen and Bakker ‘s (1981) studies of
       aggression in mice
     • Farooqi and Rahilly (2006); Friedman (1950) studies of obesity in rats
     • Shmelkov et al.’s (2010) study of OCD in mice

     Evaluation of the selected research studies may include, but is not limited to:
     • methodological and ethical considerations
     • potential differences between humans and animals
     • the strengths and limitations of a reductionist approach
     • supporting and/or contradictory findings
     • construct validity with regard to the behaviour studied and the question of
       anthropomorphism
     • the applications of the empirical findings

     If the candidate addresses only strengths or only limitations of the study or studies, the
     response should be awarded up to a maximum of [3] for criterion D: critical thinking. All
     remaining criteria should be awarded marks according to the best fit approach.
                                                – 10 –              N21/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


5.   Discuss one cognitive process.                                                                 [22]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” requires the candidate to offer a considered review of one cognitive
     process.

     Cognitive processes may include:
     • attention
     • language
     • memory
     • perception
     • thinking and decision-making

     Discussion of a cognitive process may include, but is not limited to:
     • the value of a model or theory
     • reliability of a cognitive process
     • effects of culture
     • effects of biological factors
     • effects of environmental factors and stress
     • methodological and ethical considerations related to the research into the cognitive
        process.


     If a candidate discusses more than one cognitive process, credit should be given only to the
     first cognitive process discussed.
                                                  – 11 –              N21/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



6.   Discuss one or more ethical considerations related to research studies investigating
     individuals and groups.                                                                         [22]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term "discuss" requires candidates to offer a considered review of one or
     more ethical considerations related to research studies investigating individuals and groups.

     Ethical considerations may be positive (what guidelines were followed) or negative (what
     guidelines were not followed).

     Ethical considerations may include, but are not limited to:
     • deception
     • protection from undue stress or harm
     • briefing and debriefing
     • right to withdraw
     • informed consent
     • anonymity

     Studies investigating individuals and groups may include, but are not limited to:
     • Festinger’s (1956) study on cult behaviour
     • Sherif’s (1954) “Robbers Cave” study investigating the realistic conflict theory
     • Zimbardo’s (1961) Stanford Prison Experiment
     • Milgram’s (1961) study of obedience
     • Bandura’s (1961) study of aggression

     Discussion may include, but is not limited to:
     • why deception is used
     • the difficulties of ensuring confidentiality in social psychology research
     • the role of informed consent when studying groups
     • decisions as to why certain ethical guidelines were/were not followed
     • changes over time in adherence to ethical standards/guidelines.
