© International Baccalaureate Organization 2021

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2021

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2021

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Social and cultural anthropology
Higher level
Paper 1

Wednesday 27 October 2021 (afternoon)


2 hours


Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y Section A: read the passage and answer questions 1 and 2. Choose either question 3 or 4.
  Answer question 5.
y Section B: answer the question.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [40 marks].




                                                                                            8821 – 5801
     5 pages                                            © International Baccalaureate Organization 2021
                                                   –2–                                            8821 – 5801


                                              Section A

Read the passage.

Passage adapted from Canals, R., 2018. Studying multi-modal religions: migration and mediation in the
cult of Maria Lionza (Venezuela, Barcelona, Internet). Visual Anthropology Review, 34(2), pp.124–135.

        The goal of this research, based on fieldwork in Venezuela and my native city of Barcelona, was
        to study the cult1 of Maria Lionza, an Afro-Latin American religion from Venezuela, which I also
        practice. I conducted online research, using a range of visual research methods (film, online
        interviews, photo-elicitation2), to explore how new followers and spirits use social networks.
    5   The research resulted in a film, an interactive website, an exhibition, and publications.

        Maria Lionza expresses a strong sense of Venezuelan nationalism. She is a spirit or goddess
        represented in different ways – as Indian, white, mestiza [mixed-race Spanish/indigenous], or
        black, as seductress or virgin. Popular representations include a white or mestiza woman with
        a crown, called The Queen, and an indigenous woman riding naked on an animal, called The
   10   Indian. The cult of Maria Lionza involves a set of healing, divination, and initiation rituals, in
        which spirit possession plays a role.

        The cult’s historical origins are unclear, but seem to stem from beliefs and ceremonies of
        pre‑colonial indigenous female nature deities. These beliefs blended with Catholicism and
        African rituals. Although principally Venezuelan, the cult has spread to other countries and now
   15   has a significant internet presence, with believers using smart phones and social networks.

        In Barcelona, followers and other agents, such as spirits, increasingly use different media to
        communicate with each other. Some of these media are “traditional” (altars, photographs,
        prayers, spirit possession) while others are contemporary (websites, social networks, and
        smartphones). I realized that the best way to capture, understand and convey these media
   20   practices, which were reshaping the way the cult unfolds, was using research methods that also
        involve image, text, sound, and objects. For example, I designed a collaborative website and
        held an exhibition with the participation of other followers in Barcelona.

        The cult relies on agency, where any decision or action involves the active participation of many
        independent agents – including spirits, who intervene in how they are portrayed. This agency
   25   plays a crucial role in the processes of visual creativity.

        The film I made was about Maria Lionza’s religious altars, which use objects from different
        sources, including Catholic saints, African deities, indigenous elements, and photos of deceased
        relatives. These objects represent a worldview; for example, images of Indians recall the
        resistance of “aboriginal peoples” killed by the Spaniards during the Conquest, whereas images
   30   of malandros (delinquents) point to the violence of police or of drug gangs in contemporary
        Venezuela. These images create material narratives that suggest historical discourses about
        oppression. Altar images are also used to transform reality through rituals.

        My project also included a participatory website enabling the exchange of material and
        knowledge about Maria Lionza, as well as the sharing of research findings. Believers
   35   increasingly take images during ceremonies, usually with smartphones. Artists and designers
        working on the reinvention of Maria Lionza’s image display their creations online. The
        website provided a sense of the multiplicity of agents who take part in the constant process of
        reinvention of this religious practice.
                                                      –3–                                           8821 – 5801


            The website is also a device for ethnographic research. For example, one follower insisted on
     40     the “correct” practice of the cult, claiming that the “true” practice had been lost and that the
            introduction of “foreign” elements, such as the use of certain chemicals in ritual, is a betrayal
            of “traditional” forms of worship. The website was seen as a political platform through which he
            could spread his message.

            Another follower posted an image of a velación (a collective purification ritual). These are
     45     difficult to witness, as they take place in private or remote places, and gaining access to them
            takes time and effort. This shows a change in the status of digital images in the cult: digital
            devices are increasingly used to record rituals and spirits often ask to be filmed when they
            descend. Many followers film and stream ceremonies online, making them available to followers
            abroad. Increased sharing of such images on social networks blurs the distinction between
     50     public and private. This rise in new imaging practices and online sharing contrasts with a loss
            of presence of the cult in Venezuelan public space, where its practice is threatened by other
            religious movements and by state control.



1
     cult: the term used by followers and academics; it is not pejorative
2
     photo-elicitation: a visual research method that uses visual images to
     invite comments


Answer question 1 and question 2.

1.        Define the term agency and describe how it can be understood and applied in the context
          of the passage.                                                                                  [4]

2.        Analyse the ethnographic data presented in the passage using the concept of materiality.[6]


Answer either question 3 or question 4.

3.        Compare and contrast the way in which the key concept of change or culture is evident in
          this passage with how it is evident in one other ethnographic example you have studied.
          Make reference to theory in your answer.                                                       [10]

OR

4.        Compare and contrast the approaches to research adopted by the anthropologist in this
          passage to the approaches to research used by one other anthropologist you have studied.
          Make reference to concepts, ethnographic material and theory in your answer.                   [10]


Answer question 5.

5.        To what extent is knowing others possible? Discuss with reference to at least two sources
          of ethnographic material and examples from the passage.                                        [10]




                                                                                                    Turn over
                                                     –4–                                           8821 – 5801


                                                 Section B

Answer question 6.

6.        With reference to either stimulus A or stimulus B and your own knowledge, discuss the
          defining features of anthropological ethics.                                                   [10]


Stimulus A

            Kieron is alcohol dependent, but when his contact details were provided by his landlord
            to participate in my research project, apart from his basic details, no further information
            was available. I was therefore unaware of his dependency. The discussion during the
            initial telephone call to arrange the interview failed to illuminate any information of cause
      5     for concern, which might have given me better foresight and reason for more suitable
            preparation, such as working in pairs for safety. After imparting essential information about
            my research project, we exchanged a few informal comments about taxi firms operating in
            Kieron’s local area and the nearest bus/train station to his home. This conversation put him at
            ease quickly and built some rapport, which was demonstrated during the second telephone
     10     call to remind him of our interview the following day. Kieron helpfully provided directions and
            offered to put his untrained dog outside during the interview to put me at ease. Again, I had
            no reason to suspect any problems. However, when I arrived at his home early next morning,
            Kieron had already been drinking heavily. While consuming alcohol he explained that he
            drank considerably every day, and his addiction was mentioned repeatedly during
     15     the interview.
                                                  –5–                                          8821 – 5801


Stimulus B

Photograph of a political protest in Buenos Aires, Argentina, taken by a research anthropologist who also
participates in the protests.





References:

Section A.	Canals, Roger, 2018. Studying multi-modal religions: migration and mediation in the cult of Maria Lionza
            from Visual Anthropology Review, Vol.34 Issue 2. https://anthrosource.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/
            var.12169 © John Wiley and Sons.

Stimulus A.	Nadia Bashir, Qualitative Research (Vol. 18, Issue 6) Doing research in peoples’ homes: fieldwork, ethics and
             safety – on the practical challenges of researching and representing life on the margins, p.6, © 2018 SAGE
             Publications, https://doi.org/10.1177/1468794117731808 Reprinted by Permission of SAGE Publications.

Stimulus B.	Courtesy of Prof Sian Lazar.

All other texts, graphics and illustrations © International Baccalaureate Organization 2021
