M19/2/ABDAN/SP2/DAN/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                    May / Mai / Mayo 2019


                  Danish / Danois / Danés B


                         Standard level
                         Niveau moyen
                          Nivel medio


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2




8 pages/páginas
                                      –2–              M19/2/ABDAN/SP2/DAN/TZ0/XX/M



No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic
or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without written permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of
any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties,
including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study
services, preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping
services or teacher resource digital platforms and app developers, is not
permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license. More
information on how to request a license can be obtained from http://
www.ibo.org/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-
third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni
par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation
écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation
commerciale de tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit.
L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs,
des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou d’aide aux études,
des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des
gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs
d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations
sur la procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à
l’adresse http://www.ibo.org/fr/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni
por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin que medie la
autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines
comerciales de todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El
uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales,
profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o ayuda para el
estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan
recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del
IB. En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una
licencia: http://www.ibo.org/es/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.
                                                –3–              M19/2/ABDAN/SP2/DAN/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion A: Language

• How effectively and accurately does the student use language?

  Marks    Level descriptor
    0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
           Command of the language is generally inadequate.
   1–2     A very limited range of vocabulary is used, with many basic errors.
           Simple sentence structures are rarely clear.
           Command of the language is limited and generally ineffective.
   3–4     A limited range of vocabulary is used, with many basic errors.
           Simple sentence structures are sometimes clear.
           Command of the language is generally adequate, despite many inaccuracies.
   5–6     A fairly limited range of vocabulary is used, with many errors.
           Simple sentence structures are usually clear.
           Command of the language is effective, despite some inaccuracies.
   7–8     A range of vocabulary is used accurately, with some errors.
           Simple sentence structures are clear.
           Command of the language is good and effective.
   9–10    A wide range of vocabulary is used accurately, with few significant errors.
           Some complex sentence structures are clear and effective.


Clarification

Ordoptælling
På SL-niveau forventes eleverne at skrive minimum 250 ord. Skriver de færre end 250 ord får de
iht. Kriterium A et minuspoint [1 point]. Den samlede tekst skal tages i betragtning ved
karakterafgivning.

Sprog
Eksaminatorer bør huske på, at ikke alle fejl er lige alvorlige. Nogle fejl påvirker budskabet
markant, andre gør ikke. Nogle fejl røber en fundamental mangel på viden om sproget, andre er
blot udtryk for glemsomhed.

Smuttere – tilfældige og sporadiske fejl på alle niveauer, fx når en elev generelt behersker
verbernes datidsformer, men glemmer dem en enkelt gang eller to.

Mangler – fejlene er ofte konsekvente og optræder hyppigere, fx er verbernes datidsform kun
sommetider korrekt, eleven udviser usikkerhed og måske forvirring (fx førnutid vs. præteritum)

Videnshuller – visse konstruktioner er sjældent eller aldrig korrekte eller optræder slet ikke, fx
præteritum, selv når den behøves.

En god besvarelse udviser kun få sproglige mangler, og smuttere og fejl påvirker kun sjældent
betydningen.
                                              –4–             M19/2/ABDAN/SP2/DAN/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B: Message

• How clearly can the student develop and organize relevant ideas?

  Marks   Level descriptor
    0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
          The message has not been communicated.
          The ideas are irrelevant and/or repetitive.
   1–2
          The development of ideas is unclear; supporting details are very limited and/or not
          appropriate.
          The message has barely been communicated.
          The ideas are sometimes irrelevant and/or repetitive.
   3–4
          The development of ideas is confusing; supporting details are limited and/or not
          appropriate.
          The message has been partially communicated.
          The ideas are relevant to some extent.
   5–6
          The development of ideas is evident at times; supporting details are sometimes
          appropriate.
          The message has been communicated fairly well.
   7–8    The ideas are mostly relevant.
          The development of ideas is coherent; supporting details are mostly appropriate.
          The message has been communicated well.
   9–10   The ideas are relevant.
          The development of ideas is coherent and effective; supporting details are appropriate.

 Clarification

 For the 9-10 mark band, all aspects listed for each task are expected to be present. The
 response should also be COHERENT and EFFECTIVE. Scripts should be marked
 proportionately lower to the degree to which they fail to meet these requirements.

 NOTE: When marking candidate responses, keep in mind that neither the accuracy of the
 information presented, nor the validity of the candidates’ personal opinions, are being assessed.
 Therefore, scripts that are factually inaccurate should not be marked down, provided they meet
 the requirements of the task, and the ideas are sufficiently developed.
                                                 –5–               M19/2/ABDAN/SP2/DAN/TZ0/XX/M


Spørgsmål 1:.

You are spending a month as an exchange student in an X-speaking country. Instead of the exciting
adventure you were hoping for, you realize that you are experiencing a culture shock for which you
were not at all prepared. Write an email to your friend describing your experience and the
feelings/emotions you have about this.

The task expects that candidates will:
• produce a response relevant to the context stated in the task: they are spending a month as an
exchange student in an X-speaking country but they are not having the exciting adventure they were
hoping for
• focus on the topic of a culture shock for which they were not at all prepared
• cover both aspects of the task: describing your experience AND the feelings/emotions they have
about this
• support ideas with appropriate examples, explanations and/or justifications
• give structure to the development and progression of ideas, e.g. through paragraphing or use of
cohesive devices, etc.




Spørgsmål 2:
Your X-language teacher has set this as the title of your next essay: “How changing values create
tension between generations”. Write the essay.

The task expects that candidates will:
• focus on the topic of how changing values create tension between generations
• cover the topic in some detail: whether presenting a range of different perspectives, or exploring one
overarching perspective in depth
• support ideas with appropriate examples, explanations and/or justifications.
• give structure to the development and progression of ideas, e.g. through paragraphing or use of
cohesive devices, etc.




Spørgsmål 3:
You recently read an article in which the writer argued that those who do not make good role models in
the world of sports should be banned from competing. Write a response in your blog, where you
discuss the extent to which sportspeople must be positive role models.
                                                  –6–                M19/2/ABDAN/SP2/DAN/TZ0/XX/M


The task expects that candidates will:
• produce a response which makes reference to the original article (or to specific ideas within it)
• focus on discussing the extent to which sportspeople must be positive role models
• cover the topic in some detail: whether presenting a range of different perspectives, or exploring one
perspective in depth
• support ideas with appropriate examples, explanations and/or justifications
• give structure to the development and progression of ideas, e.g. through paragraphing or use of
cohesive devices, etc.




Spørgsmål 4:
You are passionate about cinema and you have decided to start a foreign language film club in your
school. Write a leaflet promoting the club and its activities, making sure it appeals not just to students of
foreign languages, but to all students in the school.

The task expects that candidates will:
• produce a response which links the content/information to the target audience (not just students of
foreign language but all students in the school)
• focus on promoting the club and its activities
• cover the topic in some detail: whether focusing promoting the club, or its activities, or both equally
• support ideas with appropriate examples, explanations and/or justifications
• give structure to the development and progression of ideas, e.g. through paragraphing or use of
cohesive devices, etc.




Spørgsmål 5:
The topic of your next school debate is: “Scientists have a duty to benefit society”. Write the text of
your opening speech, either agreeing or disagreeing with this idea.

The task expects that candidates will:
• focus on EITHER agreeing OR disagreeing on the topic: Scientists have a duty to benefit society
• cover the topic in some detail: whether presenting a range of different arguments, or exploring one
overarching argument in depth.
• support arguments with appropriate examples, explanations and/or justifications.
• give structure to the development and progression of ideas, e.g. through paragraphing or use of
cohesive devices, etc.
                                                 –7–             M19/2/ABDAN/SP2/DAN/TZ0/XX/M



Criterion C: Format

• How correctly does the student produce the required text type?
• To what extent are the conventions of text types appropriate?

  Marks       Level descriptor
    0         The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
              The text type is not recognizable.
       1
              Conventions appropriate to the text type are not used.
              The text type is hardly recognizable or is not appropriate.
       2
              Conventions appropriate to the text type are very limited.
       3      The text type is sometimes recognizable and appropriate.
              Conventions appropriate to the text type are limited.
              The text type is generally recognizable and appropriate.
       4
              Conventions appropriate to the text type are evident.
              The text type is clearly recognizable and appropriate.
       5
              Conventions appropriate to the text type are effective and evident.

For maksimal pointafgivelse [5] må alle angivne konventioner være opfyldt.
For at opnå [3] må mere end halvdelen af konventionerne være opfyldt.

Kriterium C. Bemærk: Vi minder bedømmere om, at punkterne i Kriterium C er rettenoter, ikke
retteskemaer. Også besvarelser, hvor ét eller flere punkter kun er delvis opfyldt (fx: passende
sprogligt register er anvendt generelt, men ikke konsekvent; der er en indledende hilsen, men ikke
en afsluttende etc.), kan man derfor bedømme med en vis rummelighed. I sådanne tilfælde må
bedømmere se på opgaven som en helhed og bruge deres professionelle dømmekraft til at nå et
slutresultat, dog under hensyntagen til bedømmelseskriterierne.

De forventede konventioner for hver teksttype er som følger:


Spørgsmål 1: E-mail

   •       Konsekvent uformel sprogbrug
   •       Oplagt og engagerende sprogbrug (inkluderer måske ungdomssprog, slang e.l.)
   •       Emnelinje
   •       Henvender sig tydeligt til en bestemt person
   •       Passende hilsner, indledende og afsluttende.


NB Formel e-mailtypografi (afsender, modtager, dato) forventes ikke


Spørgsmål 2: Essay

   •       Semi-formel/formel sprogbrug
   •       Titel
   •       Passende og tydeligt afgrænset indledning og afslutning
                                               –8–               M19/2/ABDAN/SP2/DAN/TZ0/XX/M


Spørgsmål 3: Blogindlæg

   •   Semi-formel/formel sprogbrug
   •   Engagerende titel på indlægget
   •   1. person-fortælling
   •   Udviser læserbevidsthed, fx i kraft af læserhenvendelser, en oplagt og interessant
       sprogtone, en invitation til at kommentere o.l.
   •   Passende afslutning, der runder indlægget af


Spørgsmål 4: Folder

   •   Semi-formel/formel sprogbrug
   •   Inciterende titel
   •   Indeholder en kort indledning og en kort afslutning
   •   Velstruktureret opsætning (fx tydeligt afgrænset indledning, underoverskrifter,
       afsnitsinddeling, punkter o.l.)
   •   Indeholder praktiske oplysninger og/eller kontaktoplysninger (mødested, telefonnummer,
       e-mailadresse o.l.)


NB Grafik/typografi bliver ikke vurderet


Spørgsmål 5: Tale

   •   Semi-formel/formel sprogbrug
   •   Passende sprogtone
   •   Inkluderer tilhørerhenvendelser (fx i form af pronomener som ‘vi’ og ‘I’)
   •   Bejler til tilhørernes opmærksomhed og gør indtryk
   •   Udviser god forståelse for mundtlig retorik (fx retoriske spørgsmål, repetition o.l.)
