No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic
or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without written permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of
any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties,
including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study
services, preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping
services or teacher resource digital platforms and app developers, is not
permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license. More
information on how to request a license can be obtained from http://
www.ibo.org/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-
third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni
par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation
écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation
commerciale de tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit.
L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs,
des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou d’aide aux études,
des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des
gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs
d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations
sur la procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à
l’adresse http://www.ibo.org/fr/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni
por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin que medie la
autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines
comerciales de todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El
uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales,
profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o ayuda para el
estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan
recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del
IB. En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una
licencia: http://www.ibo.org/es/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/
guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-
license.
M19/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T




English ab initio – Standard level – Paper 1
Anglais ab initio – Niveau moyen – Épreuve 1
Inglés ab initio – Nivel medio – Prueba 1

Thursday 16 May 2019 (afternoon)
Jeudi 16 mai 2019 (après-midi)
Jueves 16 de mayo de 2019 (tarde)

1 h 30 m


Text booklet – Instructions to candidates
yyDo not open this booklet until instructed to do so.
yyThis booklet contains all of the texts required for paper 1.
yyAnswer the questions in the question and answer booklet provided.

Livret de textes – Instructions destinées aux candidats
yyN’ouvrez pas ce livret avant d’y être autorisé(e).
yyCe livret contient tous les textes nécessaires à l’épreuve 1.
yyRépondez à toutes les questions dans le livret de questions et réponses fourni.

Cuaderno de textos – Instrucciones para los alumnos
yyNo abra este cuaderno hasta que se lo autoricen.
yyEste cuaderno contiene todos los textos para la prueba 1.
yyConteste todas las preguntas en el cuaderno de preguntas y respuestas.




                                                                                              2219 – 2805
     5 pages/páginas                                      © International Baccalaureate Organization 2019
                                                    –2–               M19/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

Text A


            Can’t use public transport? Then use Call-a-Ride!
         Question:       [–X–]

         Call-a-Ride is a public transport service in Smithville, Canada, for people with disabilities who
         are unable to get onto or off buses or trains. Because of their disability, they cannot travel
         between home and work every day. Call-a-Ride changes that, as it gives them a public transport
 5       service that allows them to commute. Businesses can, therefore, employ them and they can
         become independent.

         Question:       [–1–]

         Call-a-Ride works only within the town of Smithville. It uses public transport routes and stops
         at public transport stops where it is safe to get on and off the vehicles. This transport service
10       works only if there are enough passengers on a route. There must be at least three passengers
         for the service to run.

         Question:       [–2–]

         Call-a-Ride is available seven days a week between
         07:00 and 19:00.

15       This transport service shares road lanes with all traffic
         and passengers can expect normal traffic delays. The
         transport vehicle may arrive 15 minutes before or after
         the scheduled time. If the vehicle arrives 30 minutes
         after the scheduled time, the passenger may make a
20       complaint by phone or email to the transport service.

         Roadworks or accidents on the roads may change the vehicles’ arrival times. The Call-a-Ride
         service will phone the passenger if something has happened that will make the vehicle late.

         Question:       [–3–]

         Call-a-Ride receives money from the town and government services. The passenger only pays
25       the same as the public transport fare on that route.

         Question:       [–4–]

         The following passengers are not permitted to use the Call-a-Ride service:
         • People who are able to get on and off public transport.
         • People with disabilities who want to travel not for work but for social or medical reasons.
30       • Students.
         • People who are travelling for personal reasons.
                                                      Text: International Baccalaureate Organization (2017)
                                                                          Photo: Corepics VOF/Shutterstock
                                                   –3–                M19/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

Text B




             “My generation cares about climate change”
                              An interview with a 14-year-old activist

         Xiuhtezcatl is a 14-year-old activist. He is the youth
         director of an organization, Earth Guardians, that his
         mother Tamara created to inspire young people to
 5       defend the environment. He gives talks about climate
         change to children younger and older than him at            Removed for copyright reasons
         schools around the United States. Lilah Raptopoulos
         meets with him to ﬁnd out more.

         Lilah:   How old were you when you started?

10       Xiuhtezcatl: I gave my ﬁrst public speech about climate change in front of 300 people
         when I was six years old. When I was nine, the Parks department in my town decided to
         start using two new unhealthy chemicals in public parks. About 50 of us protested to the
         city council. The city council listened and stopped using them.

         Lilah:   How do you make young people care about climate change?

15       Xiuhtezcatl: We must explain the urgency of the situation to young people. But I also want
         them to know that it’s not too late to prevent climate change and it is not an impossible task.
         A lot of kids know this is a crisis but they do not understand that we are the generation that
         will suﬀer the most from the consequences of climate change. It is important that young
         people understand this.

20       Lilah:   What do you say to people who say we need natural gas as a fuel source?

         Xiuhtezcatl: People say we need oil, coal and natural gas, but the future of energy comes
         from natural sources such as wind or water, resources that will last forever. Fossil fuels are
         limited! We’re going to run out of them soon.

         Lilah:   How can people get involved?

25       Xiuhtezcatl: You can read the information at earthguardians.org and get involved,
         but I’m not here to tell people what to do. Use the things that you are passionate
         about – music, sports, art, for example – to make a change. A passionate,
         educated young person is the key to a sustainable world tomorrow.




                                                              Copyright Guardian News & Media Ltd 2019



                                                                Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                   –4–               M19/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

Text C




             Make 2020 the year to say “yes!”
                   to studying abroad
   For those of us who are always dreaming about exploring somewhere new, a semester abroad
         is an obvious choice. You can experience new cultures, try new foods, meet new people and,
         perhaps most importantly, get to travel while following university courses. What is there not
         to love?

   The University of Victoria says it has “partnership agreements with over 300 post-secondary
         institutions worldwide”. Students have the opportunity to choose between destinations in
         Brazil, France, Korea or Thailand for their next academic adventure. The Hispanic Studies
         department offers two locations to study abroad: Cuenca, Ecuador or Alcala, Spain. I decided
         to go to Ecuador.

   I spent three months in southern Ecuador and completed a Certificate in Language Proficiency
         in Spanish. As there were only four of us in the programme, we had small, intimate classes
         designed specifically for our needs. Through the University of Cuenca’s matching programme,
         we were partnered with local students who quickly became good friends. We explored nearly
         every weekend – sometimes close to home and sometimes across the country. While Ecuador
         uses the American dollar, food, bus tickets and accommodation are still very affordable.

   The northern town of Otavalo has one of the most important markets in the Andes, and
         perhaps one of the most well-known in South America. The market takes place on Tuesdays
         and Saturdays. Hundreds of vendors sell silver jewellery and coloured blankets. I was able to
         visit Quito and Otavalo as a weekend trip from Cuenca without missing any classes. During
         Cuenca’s November holiday, we were given a week off from classes. A friend and I chose to
         spend our break in the Galapagos. We visited beaches, snorkelled, swam and ate wonderfully
         fresh seafood.

   Returning home, I found myself almost fluent in Spanish and with a memory card full of
         photos. While studying abroad and coping with a language barrier can be challenging, I would
         wholeheartedly recommend studying abroad to anyone interested, and I’m looking forward
         to returning to Ecuador in the future.




                                 Permission granted by Sarah Lazin, former Editor-in-Chief of the Martlet,
                                                           the student newspaper, University of Victoria.
                                                    –5–                 M19/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

Text D





     Search for lost hiker
     Part 1
     Police have launched a huge search and rescue operation for a hiker named Chan who has been
     missing since Sunday afternoon.

     The man, his wife and friends rented a holiday bungalow in Tai Po (Hong Kong) on Sunday.
     He was last seen at 1:00 pm when the group were enjoying a barbecue. He left by himself
     and drove to Plover Cove Country Park to hike and take photographs. Chan’s wife said he called
     her and sent pictures around 3:30 pm, saying he had arrived at the beginning of the trail in the
     park. She has heard nothing since then. His phone was disconnected.

     Police and firefighters arrived at 1:00 am yesterday. Government helicopters joined the search.

     Chan is 170 cm tall and 64 kilograms in weight. He was wearing a blue and white long-sleeved
     top, black pants and black hiking shoes, police said. His wife said Chan has memory problems.




     Part 2
     Flora Lo Ngo-Pui, a [ – X – ] who has walked the 18-kilometre trail, said it takes about 8 hours
     to go from the [ – 33 – ] of the trail to the end of the trail. “Hiking this long trail under this
     super-hot weather could be very dangerous.”

     The highest [ – 34 – ] recorded on Sunday was 35.2 °C, said the Hong Kong Observatory. On the
     same day, a 31-year-old man was hit by heat stroke and admitted to [ – 35 – ] while hiking along
     the same trail with two friends.

     Earlier this year, a 30-year-old woman hiker passed out from heat when walking alone from
     Tai Mei Tuk to Wu Kau Tang. She was found by police, [ – 36 – ] and dehydrated. She was given
     immediate treatment on [ – 37 – ] at a nearby medical center.




                      Adapted with permission. The Standard, The Standard Newspapers Publishing Ltd.




                                                                  Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
