M14/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                           May 2014



           BUSINESS AND MANAGEMENT



                      Standard Level



                               Paper 1




18 pages
                              –2–            M14/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.
                                         –3–              M14/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The markbands on pages 3–4 should be used where indicated in the markscheme.


             Section A

    Q1 (c)    Q2 (c)     Q3 (c)                    Level descriptors

              Marks
               0–7

                                  • No knowledge or understanding of relevant
                0                   issues, concepts and theories.
                                  • No use of appropriate terminology.

                                  • Little knowledge and understanding of relevant
                                    issues, concepts and theories.
               1–2                • Little use of appropriate terminology.
                                  • No reference is made to the information in the
                                    case study.

                                  • A description or partial analysis/examination with
                                    relevant knowledge and/or understanding of
                                    relevant issues, concepts and theories.
                                  • Some use of appropriate terminology.
               3–5                • Some reference is made to the information in the
                                    case study, not just to the name of the
                                    organization.
                                  • At the lower end of the markband responses are
                                    mainly theoretical.

                                  • A balanced analysis/examination with accurate,
                                    specific,     well-detailed    knowledge      and
                                    understanding of relevant issues, concepts and
                                    theories.
               6–7
                                  • An analysis/examination that uses appropriate
                                    terminology throughout the response.
                                  • Explicit references are made to the information in
                                    the case study.
                        –4–              M14/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Section B

 Q4 (d)
                                 Level descriptors
 Marks
  0–8

            • No knowledge or understanding of relevant issues,
   0          concepts and theories.
            • No use of appropriate terminology.

            • Little knowledge and understanding of relevant issues,
              concepts and theories.
  1–2       • Little use of appropriate terminology.
            • No evidence of judgments and/or conclusions.
            • No reference is made to the information in the case study.

            • A description with some knowledge and/or understanding
              of relevant issues, concepts and theories.
            • Some use of appropriate terminology.
  3–4       • No evidence of judgments and/or conclusions.
            • Some reference is made to the information in the case
              study, not just to the name of the organization.
            • The response is mainly theoretical.

            • A response with relevant knowledge and understanding of
              relevant issues, concepts and theories.
            • A response that uses relevant and appropriate terminology.
  5–6       • Evidence of judgments and/or conclusions that are little
              more than unsubstantiated statements that has balanced
              analysis and demonstrates understanding.
            • Explicit references to the information in the case study are
              made at places in the response.

            • A response with accurate, specific, well-detailed
              knowledge and understanding of relevant issues, concepts
              and theories.
            • A response that uses appropriate terminology competently
  7–8         throughout the response.
            • A response that includes judgments and/or conclusions
              that is well supported and underpinned by a balanced
              analysis.
            • Explicit references to the information in the case study are
              made throughout the response.
                                                  –5–              M14/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                              SECTION A

1.   (a)   Define the following terms:

           (i)    primary sector (line 2)                                                      [2 marks]

                  The primary sector of an economy includes agriculture as well as fishing,
                  forestry and mining. It extracts natural resources/raw materials.


                  Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

                  Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and
                  understanding.

                  Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
                  understanding, similar to the answer above.

                  For only a relevant example or application to the stimulus award [1 mark].

           (ii)   dividends (line 23).                                                         [2 marks]

                  Dividends are the payments that a business pays to its shareholders on a
                  proportional basis (percentage) of the company’s profit (a fixed payment
                  amount for each share of the business).


                  Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

                  Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge
                  and understanding.

                  Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
                  understanding similar to the answer above.

                  For only a relevant example or application to the stimulus award [1 mark].
                                            –6–             M14/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   Explain one advantage and one disadvantage for Martin Kimathi of receiving
      “a salary based on performance-related pay” (line 45).                     [4 marks]

      Possible advantages include:
      • Martin will be financially motivated to ensure the success of The Imperial,
         because the higher the number of guests, the more Martin himself will earn,
         which is also good for GP as it ensures higher dividends.
      • In the longer term, Martin will pay attention to areas such as marketing and
         strategic development: if some of the options are very successful, that is, if
         Martin performs well as manager he could become very rich, which could be a
         major achievement for the son of a groundskeeper.

      Possible disadvantages include:
      • For some external reasons, for example political or economic, beyond
         Martin’s control, Mombasa could lose its popularity as a tourist destination;
         fewer tourists would stay at The Imperial and Martin’s salary would decrease,
         by no fault of his own, even if he does an excellent job as a manager.
      • The notion of “performance” could be very ambiguous for Martin if it is not
         well defined in his contract: it could be about the number of guests coming to
         the hotel, or the amount they spend (duration, extras…) or it could involve
         other aspects, such as their ratings or comments posted on a website
         (TripAdvisor for example) that Martin cannot control; he would earn less
         money to support his family just because someone gave unfair negative
         feedback about the hotel.

      Accept any other relevant advantage / disadvantage in the context of The
      Imperial.

      Mark as 2 + 2.

      Award [1 mark] for each valid advantage/disadvantage, and [1 mark] for each
      development of a valid point, showing why this is an advantage/disadvantage in
      the context of the Imperial.

      Award a maximum of [2 marks] if there is no application to the case study.
                                             –7–               M14/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(c)   Analyse the advantages and disadvantages for The Imperial of the strategic
      alliance with KenSafar (Option 3).                                         [7 marks]

      The strategic alliance with KenSafar presents both advantages and disadvantages
      for The Imperial. On the one hand, this scheme would ensure a regular and
      predictable flow of guests at The Imperial; the hotel would know when to expect
      them and could make special arrangements, for example organizing transport to
      the hotel. Martin could also benefit from Kamau’s networks and contacts, and
      take advantage of the increasing number of tourists interested in safaris. On the
      other hand, the strategic alliance with KenSafar would be costly for The Imperial,
      in two ways: firstly, the cost of the initial improvements to the building; secondly,
      the 20 % commission, which could substantially make a dent into The Imperial’s
      cash-flow (Martin would need to take this into account when calculating his break-
      even; it could even affect his own performance-related pay).

      Accept any other relevant point, such as spreading risk, poor communication,
      brand image, reputation.

      Accept any other relevant advantage / disadvantage in the context of The
      Imperial.

      Candidates are not expected to refer to all of the above points for top marks,
      but their analysis must be balanced in order to reach the highest level of
      the markband.

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                   –8–             M14/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   (a)   Define the following terms:

           (i)    appraisal (line 102)                                                            [2 marks]

                  Appraisal refers to a meeting between a worker and a manager (in the case
                  study: Susan and Martin) where they review key aspects of the worker’s
                  performance, including objectives and development.                  Different
                  organizations have different systems of appraisal; such as peer appraisal and
                  360 degrees appraisal.


                  Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

                  Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge
                  and understanding.

                  Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
                  understanding similar to the answer above.

                  For only a relevant example or application to the stimulus award [1 mark].


           (ii)   dismissal (line 113).                                                           [2 marks]

                  Dismissal occurs when an employer terminates the contract of an employee;
                  it is often just called “firing”. To be dismissed, the employee must have
                  been incompetent or must have breached the terms of his or her contract.

                  Accept the term lay-off.


                  Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

                  Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge
                  and understanding.

                  Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
                  understanding similar to the answer above.

                  For only a relevant example or application to the stimulus award [1 mark].
                                             –9–               M14/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   Martin Kimathi prepares two types of final accounts for Global Properties
      (GP): profit and loss accounts and balance sheets. Explain the importance of
      those two types of final accounts for GP (lines 69–70).                      [4 marks]

      The profit and loss account of a company shows the sales revenue for a given
      period of time (usually a year), as well as the costs – and also the levels of profit
      (gross profit, net profit). In the case of GP and The Imperial, it is important for
      GP to see how profitable the hotel is and what the dividends and retained profit
      are (the dividends that can be paid to GP shareholders, the retained profit that can
      be used by the hotel for maintenance and other types of investment).

      The balance sheet shows what an organization owns (fixed assets such as the
      building, current assets such as stock and cash) and what it owes others (liabilities
      such as money still to be paid to suppliers). In the case of GP and The Imperial, it
      is important for GP shareholders to see how safe the investment is and how well
      the manager (Martin) is performing, for example towards debtors and creditors.
      The balance sheet also indicates the business’s level of working capital and its
      liquidity, which provide insight into the business’s ability to survive in the short
      term.


      Mark as 2 + 2.

      Award [1 mark] for each correct answer, and [1 mark] for each development
      about the importance for GP (ie to get the second mark, the candidate must refer
      to GP in the context of the case study: a purely theoretical answer is not sufficient
      for full marks).
                                              – 10 –            M14/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(c)   Analyse the impact that one opportunity and one threat may have on
      The Imperial.                                                      [7 marks]

      This question implicitly refers to a SWOT analysis (opportunities and threats being
      external, as opposed to internal strengths and weaknesses). Candidates are not
      required to carry out a SWOT analysis, but they must identify a valid and relevant
      opportunity and a valid and relevant threat.

      The opportunity / threat must be external.

      Valid and relevant opportunities include:
      • Tourists to Kenya are increasingly interested in combining leisurely beach
         holidays with safaris or cultural tourism; lying by the Indian Ocean,
         The Imperial has traditionally targeted holidaymakers, but Martin has carried out
         market research and realised that market development (to use a term from the
         Ansoff matrix) is a possible opportunity for The Imperial; this corresponds to
         Martin’s Option 3 (strategic alliance with KenSafar).
      • Although The Imperial has always been a hotel for leisure tourists, paying per
         night, Martin has recently considered a different target market altogether (this is
         the opportunity): “business travellers staying at least one week” (see Option 2).
         Although the core product would stay the same (accommodation), several aspects
         would be different (the rooms would be turned into “self-contained apartments
         with small kitchens”). This may seem quite a radical change, but there may well
         be a business opportunity there. The marketing audit has revealed that there is
         increasing demand for this kind of accommodation and there are very few hotels
         in Mombasa offering such apartments.
      • The case study makes some brief and separate references to WiFi access, to
         business travellers and to special events services – although this is not explicitly
         suggested, The Imperial could also specialise in other areas, for example
         developing conference facilities to target high-level meetings with politicians and
         senior civil servants of organizations such as the AU (African Union); this again
         represents an external opportunity that The Imperial could seize.

      Valid and relevant threats:
      • Competition from the “new luxurious hotels” nearby: “with their spas, themed
        restaurants and fast WiFi internet access, they offered better facilities and better
        services than The Imperial”; Martin is very aware of the issue, he has also
        travelled to Dubai and Muscat to get ideas about how The Imperial could reinvent
        itself to try to compete.
      • Although Kenya is seen as a stable country, terrorist attacks are always possible
        (some candidates might have researched the fact that there was a terrorist attack in
        Mombasa in 2002, outside the Paradise Hotel, killing 13 people); this threat could
        deter some travellers from going to Kenya, which would affect The Imperial.
      • Global economic conditions. When major economies such as those of the United
        States, Europe, or the Pacific Rim are in economic recession or are merely in
        periods of slower economic growth, the tourism industry often suffers or
        experiences decreases in revenue.


         If only one threat, or one opportunity is external award a maximum of [4 marks].

         Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                – 11 –           M14/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   (a)   Describe how a hotel such as The Imperial combines human resources,
           physical resources and financial resources for its business activity. [4 marks]

           The “human resources” correspond to the staff employed (not just the workers but
           the managers too, middle managers such as Susan and even Martin as manager of
           the entire hotel), the “physical resources” correspond to the hotel itself (the
           building with the rooms), the “financial resources” correspond to current assets,
           liabilities and even retained profit (simply put: the money in the bank that the
           manager can use). As in any business, the three types of resources are combined,
           ie not taken in isolation: they are interrelated, as for example the financial
           resources may make it possible to improve the human resources (by hiring more
           staff) and the physical resources (by renovating the rooms), which in turn may
           lead to more financial resources.


           Award [1 mark] for a basic answer showing some limited knowledge of what
           “human resources”, “physical resources” or “financial resources” are.

           Award [2 marks] for an adequate answer showing knowledge of “human
           resources”, “physical resources” and “financial resources” by applying them to a
           hotel (for example the fact that “physical resources” correspond to the premises
           and that “human resources” are the staff employed in the hotel).

           Award [3 marks] for a satisfactory answer which partially describes how the
           resources (human, physical and financial) are combined in a hotel (for example
           how the main revenue comes from the physical resources); such an answer shows
           the integration of any two types of resources.

           Award [4 marks] for a good answer which correctly describes how the resources
           (human, physical and financial) are combined in a hotel (for example how the
           financial resources may make it possible to improve the human resources, by
           hiring more staff); such an answer shows the integration of the three types of
           resources.
                                            – 12 –           M14/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   Explain two benefits for Martin Kimathi of conducting a marketing audit
      (line 59).                                                              [4 marks]

      A marketing audit evaluates the existing marketing activities in a business. It has
      the following benefits:
      • Based on his experience and intuition, Martin has some generic (preconceived)
         ideas about the types of tourists who come to Kenya; his marketing audit
         however will give him more reliable, factual information. (Note: candidates
         could refer to TOK concepts here).
      • As Martin knows The Imperial and its guests (customers) so well, he might
         miss/ignore some important marketing aspects, for example about some of
         their needs or some of the extra services they could benefit from; the marketing
         audit will enable The Imperial to find out the changes in customers' needs that
         Martin has not perceived and to analyse data in a more systematic way, not
         based on anecdotes, but on representative samples.
      • The marketing audit could help Martin appreciate which aspects of the
         marketing mix he should change, or not, at The Imperial (for example about
         “physical evidence” the marketing audit could reveal the fact that many guests
         do seek and value the old-fashioned colonial charm of the hotel and stay there
         precisely for that reason).

      Candidates are not asked to define “marketing audit”; they may do so at the
      beginning of their answer. A candidate whose answer solely consists in a
      definition of “marketing audit” would still be awarded [1 mark] overall, in order
      to credit the fact that they have some knowledge of the concept being examined
      here (“marketing audit”).

      There are two references to marketing audit in the case study, one about tourism
      to Kenya in general (see lines 59–61) and one about strategic option 3 (see line
      161). Candidates may refer to one in particular or to both or just to Martin’s
      marketing audits in general.

      Accept market research as part of a marketing audit. However, if the answer only
      refers to market research, award a maximum of [2 marks].

      Mark as 2 + 2

      Award [1 mark] for each valid answer, and [1 mark] for each development,
      showing why this is beneficial for Martin.
                                           – 13 –            M14/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(c)   Using examples of migrant workers (such as Jomo Kimathi, Martin Kimathi
      and Craig Chapman), analyse the significance of changes in domestic and
      international labour mobility.                                          [7 marks]

      The case study provides three examples of migrant workers: Jomo Kimathi (who
      first worked in Kenya, then in England, once The Imperial was sold in 1959),
      Martin Kimathi (who was born and educated in England, but went to Kenya in
      2000 to work as hotel receptionist there) and Craig Chapman (who went to Kenya
      in the early 20th century to open and operate an orphanage there). Those three
      examples of international labour mobility show that people migrate for a range of
      work motivation (to find a new job, to find a first job, for financial or
      humanitarian reasons). It is beneficial for the country of arrival (eg with Martin
      and Craig: qualified workforce in Kenya) and sometimes also for the country of
      departure too (eg in the short term, migrants often send money back home, as did
      Jomo, maybe; in the long term, many migrant workers decide to go back home, as
      Jomo returned to Kenya to retire). International labour mobility usually has an
      economic dimension (for example from less developed countries to more
      developed countries) though other factors are important too (for example joining
      family or avoiding political situations, as with refugees).

      Accept any other relevant point.

      N.B. Change can refer to changes in individual circumstances as well as to labour
      markets.

      Candidates are not expected to cover all the above-mentioned points. However,
      for candidates’ responses in the 6–7 markband, they must include at least two of
      the examples above, in some fashion and consider both the impact on the
      destination country and the “departure country” and recognize that people migrate
      for both financial and non-financial reasons.

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                   – 14 –            M14/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                                SECTION B

4.   (a)   (i)    Outline one possible area of conflict between two internal stakeholders of
                  The Imperial.                                                              [2 marks]

                  One possible area of conflict is about Guthoni’s dismissal by Susan. It is a
                  conflict between two internal stakeholders:
                  • the workers (Guthoni’s colleagues) who are outraged (line 113) as they
                     believe that Susan unfairly dismissed her
                  • the hotel management: Susan and especially Martin, who see how a strike
                     could damage the hotel operations, compromising its financial situation and
                     even its whole future.

                  Accept any other relevant answer.


                  Award [1 mark] for the explicit identification of two correct internal
                  stakeholders.

                  Award [1 mark] for the outline of a possible area of conflict between those two
                  internal stakeholders.

                  N.B: If at least one of the stakeholders is external (for example Kamau
                  Onyango) the answer cannot receive any mark.

           (ii)   Identify two fixed costs for The Imperial (line 146).                              [2 marks]

                  Fixed costs include:
                  • the salary (wages) of the hotel staff (as they would be employed, no matter
                     how many rooms are let
                  • some utility bills such as electricity, internet access (as Martin may pay the
                     server a fixed amount, no matter whether 10 guests or 100 guests use the
                     bandwidth)
                  • some local taxes that the hotel may pay, based on the land/property itself (no
                     matter how many guests are at the hotel)
                  • some promotional costs (for example if Martin pays for advertisements in
                     business directories or websites targeting business travellers who need to
                     stay in Mombasa for at least a week).


                  The answers must be applied to the hotel – so generic answers such as rent,
                  marketing, maintenance, taxes cannot be credited, unless they are
                  contextualized.

                  N.B: Some costs are always semi-variable or can be interpreted differently (for
                  example the hotel could have hourly-paid contractual cleaners who are only
                  employed if there is work for them).

                  Candidates are not asked to define “fixed costs”; they may do so as the
                  beginning of their answer. A candidate whose answer solely consists of a
                  definition of “fixed costs” would still be awarded [1 mark] to credit the fact
                  that they have some knowledge of the concept being examined here (“fixed
                  costs”).
                                             – 15 –            M14/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   Explain the value of the Ansoff matrix as a decision-making tool for
      Martin Kimathi to choose between Options 1, 2 and 3.                 [4 marks]




      Option 1 is “existing market” “The new hotel would attract the same customer
      types” (see line 135) but with a slightly different product (renovated hotel) –
      however this is still a hotel, so “product development” is not an ideal description.
      Option 2 is “quite a different product” (though still a hotel) with “quite a different
      type of customers” (still visitors to Mombasa though), so again “diversification”
      would not be appropriate.
      Option 3 is “slightly different market” (though still tourists to Kenya) with a
      “slightly different product” (some improvements to the hotel) – but talking about
      “diversification” may be too exaggerated.

      The three options at the end of the case study illustrate very well the limits of the
      Ansoff matrix.

      N.B: Candidates are not asked to draw the Ansoff matrix itself (ie the table);
      candidates are very likely to do so, but a candidate could receive full marks even
      without it. Put another way, a candidate will not be penalized if their answer is
      only textual.

      The [4 marks] available are allocated as follows:

      Award [1 mark] for an answer that shows partial knowledge and understanding
      of what the Ansoff matrix is; this could be in the form of a diagram.
                                     – 16 –           M14/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Award [1 mark] for an answer that shows clear knowledge and understanding of
the strategies within the Ansoff matrix (market development, product
development etc); this could be in the form of a diagram.

Award [1 mark] for the application to The Imperial (bearing in mind that
interpretations may vary, for example Option 3 could be presented as market
development).

Award [1 mark] for an explanation of the value of the matrix for Martin (although
the case study shows that the matrix is of very limited value, a candidate could
argue that it is a valuable tool in some ways).
                                             – 17 –             M14/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(c)   Explain how being empowered by Martin Kimathi can positively affect
      the job satisfaction, motivation and productivity of the employees at
      The Imperial (line 90).                                               [4 marks]

      Empowerment refers to the fact that Martin readily gives his employees some
      autonomy and some responsibility about their working arrangements (for example
      if a guest has a problem in the restaurant about a disappointing dish, the hotel
      manager could directly offer them a free dessert to apologize). Being empowered
      can affect staff in several ways:
      • It may increase their level of job satisfaction, as they rightfully feel that they
         are trusted and, as such, appreciate their job more, as opposed to being micro-
         managed in a bureaucratic way.
      • It may motivate them more, as they become aware of other forms of non-
         financial motivation that they could enjoy as well, for example through job
         enrichment and job enlargement, as they realize that their employer supports
         them and gives them some control over some areas of their work.
      • It could make them more productive, as they are able to make decisions faster,
         without having to refer to their line manager every time.
      • It could however be unsuitable for some workers who start abusing this new
         power that they have, and adopt unprofessional attitudes, for example if some
         office staff are allowed to use online social networking websites, they might
         use it too much and lose focus on their work, thereby becoming unproductive,
         although their level of job satisfaction would be very high (so this would still
         be positive, but with a negative dimension too).


      Accept any other relevant point.


      Candidates are not asked to define “empowerment”; they may do so as the
      beginning of their answer. A candidate whose answer solely consists of a
      definition of “empowerment” would still be awarded [1 mark] to credit the fact
      that they have some knowledge of the concept being examined here
      (“empowerment”).

      Candidates are not expected to refer separately to (i) job satisfaction, (ii)
      motivation and (iii) productivity, though they are likely to do so, as the question is
      worded that way.

      Award [1 mark] for each basic point; award an extra [1 mark] for the
      development of that point. Award up to a maximum of [4 marks].
                                            – 18 –            M14/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(d)   Evaluate the effectiveness of Susan Chapman’s and Martin Kimathi’s
      leadership styles, and their implications for The Imperial.        [8 marks]

      Susan and Martin have very different leadership styles – almost antithetic and
      stereotypical. Susan is presented as (very) autocratic, whereas Martin appears as
      mainly laissez-faire (possibly with some elements of democratic, in his treatment of
      the Guthoni incident). Both are partly effective and partly ineffective (for example
      Susan is not appreciated by her employees, but her work performance is very high;
      Martin seems affable with his staff, but in his appraisal meetings with Susan, he is
      not able to convince her that she should change her own leadership style). There
      are several consequences for The Imperial, some positive ones (for example about
      the high quality of housekeeping standards, as praised by the French journalist),
      some negative ones (for example about Martin’s inability to manage Susan who
      alienates her staff so much that they threaten to go on strike in one of the busiest
      months of the year for the hotel).

      Accept any other relevant point.


      For top marks, candidates must evaluate the effectiveness of both leadership
      styles, in context, with reference to the possible implications for the hotel.

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 4.
