M14/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                           May 2014



                   GLOBAL POLITICS



           Higher Level and Standard Level



                               Paper 2




11 pages
                                –2–           M14/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not be
reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.
                                          –3–               M14/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The paper is marked using the generic markbands below, and the paper specific markscheme that
follows. The markscheme for this paper is the same for HL and SL.

Markbands for paper two

     Marks                                       Level descriptor

       0          The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
                  The response reveals limited understanding of the demands of the question.
                  The response is poorly structured, or where there is a recognizable essay
                   structure there is minimal focus on the task.
      1–5
                  There is little relevant knowledge, and examples are either lacking or not
                   relevant.
                  The response is mostly descriptive.
                  The response indicates some understanding of the demands of the question.
                  There is some evidence of an attempt to structure the response.
                  Some relevant knowledge is present, and some examples are mentioned but
                   they are not developed or their relevance to arguments is not clear.
      6–10
                  The response demonstrates limited understanding of fundamental political
                   concepts and approaches.
                  There is limited justification of main points.
                  Counterclaims are not considered.
                  The demands of the question are understood and mostly addressed but the
                   implications are not considered.
                  There is a clear attempt to structure the response.
                  The response is mostly based on relevant and accurate knowledge of global
     11–15         politics, and relevant examples are given and support arguments.
                  The response demonstrates some understanding of fundamental political
                   concepts and approaches.
                  Many of the main points are justified and arguments are largely coherent.
                  Some counterclaims are considered.
                  The demands of the questions are understood and addressed, and most
                   implications are considered.
                  The response is well-structured.
                  The response demonstrates relevant and accurate knowledge and understanding
                   of global politics, and relevant examples are used in a way that strengthens
     16–20
                   arguments.
                  The response demonstrates a good grasp of fundamental political concepts and
                   approaches.
                  All or nearly all of the main points are justified and arguments are coherent.
                  Counterclaims are explored.
                  A very well structured and balanced response that addresses the demands and
                   implications of the question.
                  Comprehensive knowledge and in-depth understanding of global politics is
                   applied in the response consistently and effectively, with examples integrated.
     21–25        The response demonstrates a very good grasp of fundamental political concepts
                   and approaches.
                  All of the main points are justified. Arguments are clear, coherent and
                   compelling.
                  Counterclaims are explored and evaluated.
                                                 –4–               M14/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



      The content listed indicates possible areas candidates might cover in their answers. They are not
      compulsory points. They are only a framework to help examiners in their assessment. Candidates
      may take a different approach, which if appropriate, should be rewarded. Examiners should not
      expect all of the points listed and should allow other valid points.

      An understanding of, and an ability to work with, the key concepts of the course are particularly
      important in this paper. Some questions use the key concepts of a particular unit; others may
      draw on key concepts from several units; yet others may not use key concepts at all. Whether or
      not the key concepts are explicitly mentioned in a question, students are expected to draw on their
      conceptual understanding of global politics and are invited to draw on any political concepts that
      are relevant to the arguments they put forward.


Power, Sovereignty and International Relations

1.   Examine the claim that the significance of military power is diminishing in contemporary
     global politics.

     Better answers will demonstrate an excellent grasp of the concept of military power, and are likely
     to contrast this with other types of power such as economic power. They could include discussion
     of the various components of power, for example, military, economic (tangible) and leadership
     (intangible), or of how power has been viewed differently by different schools of thought.

     Arguments in favour of the claim that the significance of military power has diminished could
     include:
      the increasing weight of variables such as economic interdependence, transnational actors and
        international organizations;
      increased globalization leading to less emphasis on individual states and their individual military
        power; economic power being equally, if not more, important than military power, as economic
        power is required to bolster military power;
      the idea that some issues do not lend themselves to military solutions, for example, states may
        avoid using military action if it could negatively impact future trade agreements etc.

     Arguments against the claim that the significance of military power has diminished may include:
      military force remains critical, as shown by the fact that the production of arms continues to
       increase;
      the sale of military weapons has become a major factor in the arming of various contestants for
       control of resources;
      military power is also still important as a deterrent, etc.

     Answers should include reference to specific examples. These could include examples such as the
     anti-military culture in places such as Japan; anti-war movements, such as the protests against the
     war in Iraq; or the importance of military power in the conflict in Syria.

     The responses are likely to end with a conclusion stating to what extent the candidate agrees or
     disagrees that the significance of military power is diminishing in contemporary global politics.
                                                  –5–              M14/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   Discuss the impact of NGOs, MNCs, and international organizations on state sovereignty.

     Better answers will demonstrate an excellent understanding of the concept of sovereignty, including
     reference to sovereignty as characterizing a state’s independence, its control over territory and its
     ability to govern itself. Candidates may talk about the role and functions of the state, and then
     proceed to explore how and what kind of an impact each of the aforementioned – NGOs, MNCs and
     international organizations like the United Nations – has had on state sovereignty.

     Arguments that these actors have no real impact may include:
      states may control the agenda of many of these organizations;
      the strengthening of national security and national interest due to the threat of terrorism and to
       economic interests;
      states sometimes have a choice over whether to align with recommendations/policies etc from
       these organizations, rather than these being compulsory, etc.

     Arguments that these actors have a big impact may include:
      trade agreements;
      corporate demands on state laws, for example, environmental or labour laws;
      capital flight;
      threats to relocate;
      the ability of these actors to have significant impact, even bringing down governments or
       bringing about severe economic consequences for states, etc.

     The responses should make reference to specific examples, such as (have no real impact): the EU,
     the World Bank, and the IMF control the interests of states; states can ban NGO protests such as in
     Singapore; the US refused to sign the Kyoto agreement; (have a big impact): can bring down
     governments, for example, Guatemala.

     The responses may end with a conclusion/judgment on the impact of NGOs, MNCs and
     international organizations on state sovereignty.
                                                  –6–              M14/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Human rights

3.   Compare and contrast an institutional approach to the ratification and enforcement of
     human rights (for example, through the Hague Courts) with non-institutional approaches
     (for example, through human rights NGOs, such as Amnesty International).

     It is not necessary for the response to be equally balanced between similarities and differences to
     achieve the highest marks.

     Better answers will demonstrate an excellent understanding of the concept of human rights;
     for example they may include references to human rights as often being regarded as universal,
     inalienable, equal, and indivisible rights which people are entitled to purely by being human.

     Answers should explore the similarities and differences between an institutional and
     non-institutional approach to the ratification and enforcement of human rights.

     Similarities may include:
      both try to actively enforce human rights ideals;
      both have controversial aspects;
      both have become increasingly media centred;
      both interact with government bodies and seats of power at various geographic levels.

     Differences may include:
      non-institutional organizations such as Human Rights Watch or Amnesty International are often
        seen to have sufficient influence to have an effect on human rights policies, whereas institutions
        tend to have more prestige, resources or power;
      institutional approaches tend to be more state centred, whereas non-institutional approaches tend
        to be more informal or more local;
      institutional approaches have to work within systemic frameworks;
      there are possible differences in how they are financed.

     Candidates may name institutional forums and organizations that consider human rights beyond
     those mentioned in the question itself. Examples may include the Zapatista rebellion,
     the International Court of Justice, groups such as Occupy, etc. They may also discuss specific
     examples of failures of the particular approaches, for example the fact that none of the major
     powers have been brought to the Hague Courts.

     The response may sum up with a conclusion on the similarities and differences between institutional
     and non-institutional approaches to human rights ratification and enforcement.
                                                 –7–              M14/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   To what extent do the complex realities and relationships of power in global politics make the
     concept of human rights an unachievable ideal?

     Better answers will demonstrate an excellent understanding of the concept of human rights and the
     concept of power. They may then discuss whether the realities of power make the goals utopian
     rather than realistic.

     Arguments that they are unachievable may include:
      inherent differences in resources and opportunities
      they are too idealistic;
      they are unrealistic or impractical;
      reference to the complex links between political and economic power;
      the difficulties posed by entrenched belief systems; etc.

     Arguments that human rights are achievable may include:
      there has been progress in gaining recognition of human rights, even in difficult circumstances;
      power can be seen to be moving away from the state to grassroots, which links to the importance
       of the individual rather than the state in human rights.

     Answers should make reference to specific examples, such as, for instance, to the fact that 147
     countries ratified the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
     Treatment or Punishment; or they could refer to the success of polio vaccination programmes, or to
     MNC demands, for example, for free trade zones, etc.

     Answers may include a conclusion reflecting on how power and human rights are interlinked,
     and on the extent to which the complex realities and relationships of power in global politics make
     the concept of human rights an unachievable ideal. They may, for example, conclude that
     human rights are aspirational goals, so it does not matter whether they are achievable or not.
                                                  –8–              M14/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Development

5.   Evaluate the claim that development through aid relies heavily on a stable government and a
     lack of corruption.

     Better answers will demonstrate an excellent understanding of the concept of development and the
     concept of aid. They may also distinguish between different types of development, such as human
     and sustainable development, and different types of aid. Answers may also contain an explanation
     of the meaning of the terms “stable government” and “lack of corruption”, and may contrast
     development through aid to development through other methods. The focus of the question is on
     the factors that enable development, rather than on the removal of obstacles to development
     (emphasized at the time of the MDGs).

     Arguments supporting the claim may include:
      that development depends on the removal of barriers such as corruption;
      that corruption can lead to a misallocation of resources, and to resources not being used for their
       intended purpose;
      that development relies on stable governance and infrastructure; etc.

     Arguments against the claim may include:
      that often the countries that need aid are exactly those that have unstable governments and issues
       with corruption;
      that the success of development relies far more on factors other than the two mentioned, such as
       financial stability;
      that bureaucracy can actually stifle economic activity whereas corruption and bribes can
       stimulate/facilitate economic activity; etc.

     Answers should make reference to specific examples such as Transparency International,
     worldaudit.org, the Corruption Perception Index, UNDP, the UN Convention against Corruption,
     etc. They may also make reference to specific examples of countries where instability and
     corruption have postponed development, such as in Sudan, and to countries where a relative
     stability and lack of corruption have promoted it, such as in Chile. Responses may end with a
     conclusion/judgment on whether development through aid depends on stable government and lack
     of corruption.
                                               –9–              M14/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


6.   The fundamental weakness of development goals (such as the Millennium Development
     Goals) is their lack of focus on how targets are actually to be achieved. To what extent do you
     agree with this claim?

     Better answers will demonstrate an excellent understanding of the concept of development and may
     also contain explanations of concepts underlying particular goals such as environmental
     sustainability, poverty or hunger. Answers may focus on the example provided of the Millennium
     Development Goals and the setting of development targets for realization in 2015, or they may
     focus on other examples of development goals.

     Arguments that this is a fundamental weakness of development goals may include:
      the lack of focus on methods;
      the lack of defined responsibilities for rich countries; etc.

     Answers may also identify other weaknesses of development goals, such as to the need to further
     develop some targets, for example, equality and gender issues, or to the need to respond to the
     changes in the political climate since 9/11; etc.

     Arguments that this is not a fundamental weakness of development goals may include:
      it was justifiable to set the MDGs without guidance on how to achieve them because they were
       intended to raise consciousness about development issues;
      development goals help with the classification of issues into defined categories;
      they provide a focus for political consensus at international level, etc.

     Answers should make reference to specific examples, which could for instance be drawn from the
     UN Secretary General’s annual progress report, or from the experience of individual countries.

     Responses may end with a conclusion/judgment on the extent to which it is helpful to set such
     targets without specifying the means of achieving them.
                                                  – 10 –            M14/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Peace and Conflict

7.   “Transforming armed conflict towards peace relies on an interrelationship of peacemaking,
     peace keeping and peace building.” Discuss.

     Better answers will demonstrate an excellent understanding of the concepts of peace and conflict,
     and will explain the terms peacemaking, peace keeping and peace building, and how these three
     interrelate. Although it is expected that candidates should explain what is meant by armed conflict,
     it should be noted that providing lengthy definitions of terms should not form the main part of the
     essay. The focus should be on discussing the interrelationship between the three concepts named in
     the question:

      peacemaking may be described as armed intervention with the possible use of force (violence) to
       separate parties in conflict. Answers may discuss whether it is always and only defined as this,
       for example, discussing whether efforts at diplomacy may not also count as peace-making.
      peace keeping may be described as maintaining the status quo with armed force and with the use
       of unarmed observers between parties in conflict with their agreement.
      peace building may be described as the building of positive peace and the infrastructure of
       civil society, for example, education, access to health care, local services and
       governance structures, and the removing of psychological scars of violence. Candidates may
       refer to the concept of peace as often being defined as a state both of non-conflict and of
       harmonious relations.

     Candidates should discuss the relative importance of each process to the others and how each
     contributes to a successful peace process. The more sophisticated answers may identify that
     international interest and support for the process will usually have declined or disappeared before
     peace building has been embarked on.

     Arguments for reliance on an interrelationship may include:
      if the infrastructure and stable governance is not in place then the peace will not last;
      if there is no reconciliation and reconstruction then conflict may reignite, and there may be
       lasting psychological resentment etc.

     Arguments against reliance on an interrelationship may include:
      the view that as soon as armed conflict has stopped, peace has been achieved, so you don’t need
       the other elements.

     Candidates could also argue that lasting peace relies on other factors, such as the protection of
     human rights, and fair access to resources, in addition to these three elements. Answers may make
     reference to specific examples, such as to Afghanistan and Iraq, where the emphasis is on
     reconstruction, or to where the lack of all three activities for securing peace has meant that conflict
     has returned, or to where they have successfully been implemented together to establish peace.

     Answers should include a conclusion on whether peace does rely on an interrelationship of these
     three. Candidates may bring in a practical reflection such as that although all three might be needed
     this is not always possible to implement – for example, if resources are limited, then it might be
     preferable to use these in more urgent peacemaking situations rather than tying them up in
     peacekeeping and peace building efforts.
                                                – 11 –            M14/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


8.   “If a person died from tuberculosis in the eighteenth century it would be hard to conceive of
     this as violence since it might have been quite unavoidable, but if he dies from it today, despite
     all the medical resources in the world, then violence is present” (Galtung). To what extent do
     you agree with the view that those in power have an obligation to identify and prevent
     structural violence?

     Better answers will demonstrate an excellent understanding of what is meant by structural violence.
     Candidates may discuss the importance of understanding different concepts of peace and violence:
     peace as the absence of war and direct violence, or peace as the absence of all violence, including
     structural violence as in this reference. Candidates may include specific discussion of Galtung and
     the context of the 1960s and 1970s and how this is relevant today (the quotation, from 1969,
     comes from the context of the Cold War and the clash between different ideologies): however it
     should be noted that this should not be the focus of the response.

     Arguments that those in power have an obligation may include:
      economic and social policies should include equal access for everyone;
      those in power have a primary obligation to meet the basic needs of all people;
      health care provisions like vaccinations are a basic need;
      governments have more formal obligations and responsibilities than NGOs, MNCs, etc.

     Arguments that they do not have an obligation may include:
      there is no such thing as structural violence;
      epidemics are natural and unfortunate events rather than the responsibility of governments;
      it is the responsibility of individuals to take care of themselves, and the managers of power have
       no obligation to do so.

     Answers may make reference to specific examples, such as to places where deaths due to
     tuberculosis are still happening, such as in rural Haiti; or to where water is still the cause of a
     high percentage of communicable diseases, such as in India, or to where desertification and
     other negative environmental impacts, with resulting implications for health, occur due to the
     building of dams, for example, as in the Three Gorges Dam over the Yangtze river.

     Candidates should include a conclusion on the extent to which they agree that those in power have
     an obligation to prevent structural violence.
