M14/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                               May 2014



      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN A
            GLOBAL SOCIETY



                         Higher Level



                               Paper 3




13 pages
                                –2–            M14/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not be
reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.
                                                  –3–                M14/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Examiners should be aware that in some cases, candidates may take a different approach, which if
appropriate should be rewarded. If in doubt, check with your Team Leader.

If candidates answer more than the prescribed number of questions:

 In the case of an “identify” question read all answers and mark positively up to the maximum marks.
  Disregard incorrect answers.

 In the case of a “describe” question, which asks for a certain number of facts eg “describe two kinds”,
  mark the first two correct answers. This could include two descriptions, one description and
  one identification, or two identifications.

 In the case of an “explain” question, which asks for a specified number of explanations eg “explain
  two reasons”, mark the first two correct answers. This could include two full explanations,
  one explanation, one partial explanation etc.
                                                  –4–                M14/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.   Cobb Publishing is considering collecting data about the reading of e-books in
     order to analyse readers’ habits.

     (a)   Identify two data items that can be recorded about the reading habits of
           users.                                                                   [2 marks]

           Answers may include:
            how much has been read
            how long is spent reading
            the sections of the book being read
            items searched for
            items highlighted
            bookmarks
            hyperlinked contents page
            notes and annotations
            how much is read each session
            number of times opened/read
            type of device (iPad, mobile phone/desktop)
            format of the e-book (pub, mobi)
            local date of reader (ie does the reader read more in certain months)
            local time of reader (night-time or daytime reader)
            genre of books
            number of e-book purchases

           Items that are too specific, such as book titles are not acceptable. Also, collecting
           the personal data (names etc) from the device is not acceptable.
                                            –5–               M14/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   E-books have many additional features that are intended to give a better
      reading experience than a printed book.

      Identify two features that may be included to make this possible.                    [2 marks]

      Students may treat the e-books and e-readers as synonymous and treat features of
      the device as features of e-books. This is acceptable.

      Answers may include:
       e-books can be searched using the e-reader software
       e-books can contain multimedia features – audio, video, animations
       e-books can contain links to external data sources (eg websites, online
        dictionaries) / e-books can contain hyperlinks (of various forms) to various
        parts of the book
       e-books can be duplicated easily
       feature of reader allows the ability to read in the dark
       change font sizes (especially for partially sighted)
       text flow – reflowability depending on device
       communications tools to connect with other readers (chats, bulletin boards,
        blogs etc)
       specific content within the e-book that allows links to external sites/
        communities
       many books stored in small space
       e-book is more portable for multiple books (can carry 1000 books)
       books can be read aloud (spoken voice/speech synthesis) – especially useful for
        disadvantaged. However, there should be clear BOD that this is possible
        because the e-book is digital
       hyperlinked chapters
       annotations and highlighting (see below).

      Do not accept:
      Contains images – printed books do also. Must have an interactive or multimedia
      component.

      Do not include bookmarks and note-taking by themselves as these can be done in
      printed books. But allow if they are clearly digital and different from those of a
      printed book such as cutting and pasting, and searching/aggregating highlighted
      text.

      The features need to be about the technological characteristics of the e-book that
      differentiate the e-book from a paper book.

      Answers about e-book readers only are not accepted, but answers that connect the
      reading of e-books to the e-reader software are accepted, eg the software allows
      the e-book to be searched.

      DRM features are not about e-books exclusively as they are about copyright and
      intellectual property protection, which are common to online books.
                                                –6–               M14/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   Cobb Publishing hopes to sell more e-books by offering a synchronization service to
     its customers.

     Explain how the synchronization of the reading of an e-book across various
     platforms could be achieved.                                               [6 marks]

     Answers may include:
     Synchronization: the reader can open the e-book on any device/platform and the book
     will open at the last page that was being read; the book will also still contain the
     bookmarks, notes and highlights the reader had inserted on the previous devices.

     The response does not need to be very detailed but needs to explain clearly the main
     points of the three areas. Responses in the top mark band are likely to include
     additional information to that in the “reading data is synchronized” part.

     Reading data is synchronized
      reader’s data (last page read, bookmarks, notes and highlights) that had been saved
       on the original device that the e-book was downloaded to, would need to be uploaded
       to the publisher’s servers (accept “cloud” as well)
      this data might just be uploaded to the computer which controls the synchronization,
       such as is the case with iTunes (ie this data stored on a computer, not on a server).
      it would then be downloaded to the other device the reader wants to use – this should
       happen automatically if the device is connected to the internet (or to the computer –
       see above)
      when the reader has finished the reading session the same data would need to be
       uploaded to the servers (or the computer) ready to be downloaded to other devices
       when they are connected to the internet (or that computer).

     Setting up the e-reader software and the user account
      Cobb Publishing e-book reading software would need to be installed on each device.
        The software would need to be able to link to the synchronization service on the
        publisher’s servers through the internet
      e-reader would need to set up an account on the publisher’s server, most likely using
        an email address and password
      candidate needs to imply or state that the synchronization would not work with other
        e-book reading software from other companies, unless an agreement is made
        between Cobb Publishing and the other companies.

     Download the e-books to the various devices
      e-book would need to be copied to the various devices such as smart phones, tablets
       and computers (desktop and laptop)
      publisher would have a record of the books purchased by the reader
       - automatic / manual download of e-book to the reader’s device from publisher’s
          server
       - reader could manually copy the file to various devices.
                                         –7–              M14/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


[1–2 marks]
A limited response that indicates very little understanding of the topic, or the
explanation is not clear or is largely incomplete.

[3–4 marks]
A reasonable description of how synchronization could be achieved. The answer may
be incomplete and lack appropriate technical detail at the lower end of the band.

[5–6 marks]
A clear, detailed and complete explanation of how synchronization could be achieved
with clear evidence of technical understanding.
                                                 –8–               M14/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   Cobb Publishing wants to use DRM with its e-books. There is a choice between:
     active methods that prevent any content from being read or copied to
       unauthorized devices
     passive methods that allow reading of e-books on a variety of devices with no
       technical blockages to sharing the books openly; in the case of a copyright
       infringement the origin of the e-book can be traced to enable prosecution.

     Evaluate these methods from the perspectives of Cobb Publishing, and the readers
     of the e-books.                                                                  [8 marks]

     It should be recognized that, given time constraints, answers are likely to include a
     much narrower range of issues and concepts than identified below. There is no
     “correct” answer.

     Answers may include:
     Digital rights management (DRM)
      control technologies that can be used by Cobb Publishing to limit the use of digital
       content and devices after sale
      restricts the use of digital content that is not authorized by the content provider
      prohibits duplication of media to prevent copyright infringement and unauthorized
       storing or sharing of books to prevent other readers from using non-licensed
       products.

     Active Prevention
     Technology: encryption of e-books, recording of e-books sold and customer devices on
     Cobb Publishing servers, embedding in the device or the e-book file
     technology/information that checks the authorized use of the e-book on a specified
     device (authentication of the e-book and device) either online or through stored data on
     the device, need to be connected online to access extra material (eg multimedia which
     would be streamed, not downloaded), use of embedded or online passwords and other
     identification.

     Cobb Publishing
     Negatives:
      cost of developing and improving the technology
      infrastructure to support – website and backend processing and storage – to keep
       track of authorized devices and the e-books purchased
      possible restriction to one or two types of e-book readers
      negative feedback from customers who cannot lend e-book to a friend/family, cannot
       move it to another device, feel they are not trusted
      restrictions on lending libraries in communities, schools, universities, etc who cannot
       lend to everyone on a variety of devices – affects sales
      restrictions on sales outlets who need to be linked into authorization infrastructure
      some way of by-passing the technology will be certainly discovered, made accessible
       on the internet and used to archive, share and copy e-books
      only publishing e-books in a limited number of formats thus restricting possible
       sales.
                                          –9–              M14/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Positives:
 keeps authors of multimedia material happy that their material is protected
 no loss of royalties as none escape – each sale has its royalties collected
 can implement different types of royalty and subscription schemes
 can update and improve the e-book and send to customers (with extra fee possible) –
  attracts more sales
 can collect data about the reading of the e-books.

Readers
Negatives:
 cannot read on another device
 restrict the number of devices eBook can be on
 cannot make backup
 can be required to pay extra fees in subscription schemes
 do not effectively own the e-book
 Cobb Publishing has control over use and location of e-book – can withdraw/delete
  the e-book without reader’s consent
 upgrading, reinstalling or changing the device/software can disable the use of the
  e-book
 may need to be online to read the book due to authentication procedures and to
  access downloadable features
 data collected about reader’s usage habits – with/without permission, anonymously/
  reader specific.

Positives:
 support from Cobb Publishing if there are problems with reading the e-book –
  eg corrupted file
 no need to worry about infringing copyright as cannot make extra copies
 can get up-to-date and improved e-book features; Cobb Publishing can send them as
  they have control over location and use of the e-book
 only need to pay for what is used as Cobb Publishing controls access – possible
  subscription scheme.

Passive methods:
 the positives and negatives would be based on, and usually opposite to, the Active
  Prevention ones listed for both Cobb Publishing and the readers of the e-books
 responses should include items that are specific to passive methods:
  - a description of a method for tracking e-book copyright infringements – eg some
     form of digital watermark recording the copyright owner, the distributor, the
     distribution chain, and identifying the purchaser of the e-book which can be
     obtained from a copy of an e-book thought to have been illegally copied, using
     appropriate software
  - methods for deleting or changing watermarks would be invented
  - how to distinguish between major and minor infringements and their impacts
  - the problems of detecting and prosecuting copyright infringements, especially
     those outside the legal jurisdiction where Cobb Publishing operates.
                                        – 10 –              M14/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


SL and HL paper 1 part (c) and HL paper 3 question 3 mark band
     Marks                                      Level descriptor
                          A response with no knowledge or understanding of the relevant
    No marks               ITGS issues and concepts.
                          A response that includes no appropriate ITGS terminology.
                          A response with minimal knowledge and understanding of the
                           relevant ITGS issues and concepts.
                          A response that       includes    minimal   use   of   appropriate
      Basic                ITGS terminology.
   1–2 marks              A response that has no evidence of judgments and/or conclusions.
                          No reference is made to the scenario in the stimulus material in
                           the response.
                          The response may be no more than a list.
                          A descriptive response with limited knowledge and/or
                           understanding of the relevant ITGS issues and/or concepts.
                          A response that       includes    limited   use   of   appropriate
                           ITGS terminology.
    Adequate
                          A response that has evidence of conclusions and/or judgments
   3–4 marks
                           that are no more than unsubstantiated statements. The analysis
                           underpinning them may also be partial or unbalanced.
                          Implicit references are made to the scenario in the stimulus
                           material in the response.
                          A response with knowledge and understanding of the relevant
                           ITGS issues and/or concepts.
                          A response that uses ITGS terminology appropriately in places.
   Competent
                          A response that includes conclusions and/or judgments that have
   5–6 marks
                           limited support and are underpinned by a balanced analysis.
                          Explicit references to the scenario in the stimulus material are
                           made at places in the response.
                          A response with a detailed knowledge and understanding of the
                           relevant ITGS issues and/or concepts.
                          A response that uses ITGS terminology appropriately throughout.
    Proficient
                          A response that includes conclusions and/or judgments that are
   7–8 marks
                           well supported and underpinned by a balanced analysis.
                          Explicit references are made appropriately to the scenario in the
                           stimulus material throughout the response.
                                                – 11 –            M14/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   Cobb Publishing is considering developing its own in-house system for publishing
     e-books that include interactive content and additional multimedia materials.

     Discuss whether Cobb Publishing should go ahead with this development.                    [12 marks]

     The response must be focused on the possible development of Cobb Publishing’s own
     in-house system. The response needs to cover either production or distribution/
     publishing of the e-books. Some responses might focus on the need to include
     interactive and multimedia content and not address the larger issue of the balance of
     positives and negatives for Cobb Publishing and the future direction they need to take.

     The response should include a description of the components of an in-house system
     from the student’s own research with reference to real businesses where possible. A
     general description of an in-house system without using appropriately detailed IT
     terminology would limit access to the higher mark bands. The technical terms need to
     include the publishing/distribution technology and the technology needed to develop the
     e-books, including the interactive and multimedia materials.

     It should be recognized that, given time constraints, answers are likely to include a
     much narrower range of issues and concepts than identified below. There is no
     “correct” answer.

     Examiners must be prepared to award full marks to answers which synthesize and
     evaluate even if they do not examine all the stimulus materials.

     The response must be a balanced assessment of the positives and negatives for Cobb
     Publishing.

     The response to question 4 must include evidence of independent research linked to the
     Cobb Publishing and e-books case study.

     Candidates with a response that solely focuses on the multimedia and
     interactivity aspect can only reach a maximum of 6 marks. To have access to the top
     mark bands, students must focus on the in-house development for Cobb Publishing.

     Answers may include:

     Positives:
      greater flexibility for developing different types of e-books to suit a variety of
       audiences, content and authors
      can set up a self-publishing division to be used by individual businesses,
       organizations and authors
      can be used by other publishers who do not have the size to develop their own
       systems
      position the company for growth in the future
      no need to rely on other companies for their expertise and equipment – large amounts
       of outsourcing not needed


                                                                                           continued …
                                                 – 12 –            M14/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Question 4 continued

      develop their own business model – not restricted to the desires and needs of other
       companies who may be competitors with Cobb Publishing but may be needed for
       outsourcing and partnerships due to lack of expertise in Cobb Publishing
      no need to rely on other companies for their expertise and equipment – large amounts
       of outsourcing not needed
      saving money/increase in profit because Cobb Publishing wouldn’t need the services
       of any other companies to produce/distribute e-books

     Negatives:
      IT costs related to production and distribution (ie software costs, hardware costs)
      increase in staff costs – need for ICT experts with various skills
      multimedia production experts may still need to be outsourced if expertise not
       available in the company
      existing staff will need to be trained in the new system / method
      time to develop and set up the production and distribution systems
      need to research new technologies and keep up to date with competitors
      need to set up a distribution network, involving working with other businesses –
       especially with regard to DRM
      may still need to form partnerships with other companies for some parts of the
       production and distribution processes
      may not be able to respond to changes in the publishing industry due to being locked
       into their production and distribution investment
      takes focus away from the core business of Cobb Publishing.

     Conclusions:
     The response needs to include suggestions as to the future direction that Cobb
     Publishing should take as it cannot stand still in the rapidly changing industry; or else
     they would be taken over by another company or go out of business.
      yes – overall justifies the positives against the negatives with some way of negating
        the impact of the negatives
      no – overall justifies the negatives against the positives with suggestions as to how
        some of the positives could still be gained
      compromise – eg may increase investment in production technology and staff but
        form a partnership for distribution with other companies.
                                         – 13 –              M14/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


HL paper 3 question 4 mark band
      Marks                                        Level descriptor
                         A response with no knowledge or understanding of the relevant
     No marks             ITGS issues and concepts.
                         A response that includes no appropriate ITGS terminology.
                         A response with minimal knowledge and understanding of the
                          relevant ITGS issues and concepts.
                         A response that         includes   minimal    use   of   appropriate
                          ITGS terminology.
       Basic
                         A response that has no evidence of judgments, conclusions or future
     1–3 marks            strategies.
                         No reference is made to the information in the case study or
                          independent research in the response.
                         The response may be no more than a list.
                         A descriptive response with limited knowledge and/or
                          understanding of the relevant ITGS issues and/or concepts.
                         A response that         includes    limited   use   of   appropriate
                          ITGS terminology.
      Adequate
                         A response that has evidence of conclusions, judgments or future
     4–6 marks
                          strategies that are no more than unsubstantiated statements.
                          The analysis underpinning them may also be partial or unbalanced.
                         Implicit references are made to the information in the case study or
                          independent research in the response.
                         A response with knowledge and understanding of the relevant ITGS
                          issues and/or concepts.
                         A response that uses ITGS terminology appropriately in places.
     Competent
                         A response that includes future strategies, conclusions and/or
     7–9 marks            judgments that have limited support and are underpinned by a
                          balanced analysis.
                         Explicit references to the information in the case study or
                          independent research are made at places in the response.
                         A response with a detailed knowledge and understanding of the
                          relevant ITGS issues and/or concepts.
                         A response that uses ITGS terminology appropriately throughout.
     Proficient
                         A response that includes conclusions, judgments or future strategies
    10–12 marks
                          that are well supported and underpinned by a balanced analysis.
                         Explicit references are made appropriately to the information in the
                          case study and independent research throughout the response.
