M14/3/PHILO/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




       22145601

PHILOSOPHY
HIGHER LEVEL
PAPER 1

Wednesday 7 May 2014 (afternoon)

2 hours 30 minutes


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

   Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
   Section A: answer one question.
   Section B: answer two questions, each chosen from a different Optional Theme.
   The maximum mark for this examination paper is [90 marks].




2214-5601                                                                                           5 pages
                                                            © International Baccalaureate Organization 2014
                                                               –2–                       M14/3/PHILO/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

In your answers you are expected to:

     •   argue in an organized way using clear, precise language, which is appropriate to philosophy
     •   demonstrate knowledge and understanding of appropriate philosophical issues
     •   analyse, develop and critically evaluate relevant ideas and arguments
     •   present appropriate examples providing support for your overall argument
     •   identify and analyse counter-arguments
     •   provide relevant supporting material, illustrations and/or examples
     •   offer a clear and philosophically relevant personal response to the examination question.

                                                         SECTION A

Answer one question from this section. Each question in this section is worth [30 marks].

Core Theme: What is a human being?

1.       Read the following passage and develop your response as indicated below.

         Today we know more about Jupiter than about the person who lives next door to us. We can predict
         where an electron will go, we can turn a gene on or off, and we can even send a robot to Mars, but we
         are lost if asked to explain the phenomena we might know the most about, the actions of our fellow
         humans.

                [Source: A-L Barabási, (2010), Bursts: The Hidden Pattern Behind Everything We Do, New York: Dutton, page 8]



         Write a response (of approximately 800 words) in which you:

         • identify a central philosophical concept or philosophical issue in this passage that addresses the
           question, “what is a human being?”
         • investigate two different philosophical approaches to the philosophical concept or philosophical
           issue you identified
         • explain and evaluate the philosophical concept or philosophical issue you identified.




2214-5601
                                                                 –3–                       M14/3/PHILO/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

2.       Look at the following picture and develop your response as indicated below.




     [Source: cartoon by R. Glasbergen, (2002), www.glasbergen.com, accessed August 2013. © Randy Glasbergen. Used with permission.]



         Write a response (of approximately 800 words) in which you:

         • identify a central philosophical concept or philosophical issue in this picture that addresses the
           question, “what is a human being?”
         • investigate two different philosophical approaches to the philosophical concept or philosophical
           issue you identified
         • explain and evaluate the philosophical concept or philosophical issue you identified.




2214-5601                                                                                                                Turn over
                                                    –4–                   M14/3/PHILO/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                                SECTION B

Answer two questions from this section, each chosen from a different Optional Theme. Each question in
this section is worth [30 marks].

Optional Theme 1: Grounds of epistemology

3.    Explain and discuss what we should do in order to attain knowledge.


4.    Explain and discuss whether our knowledge is objective, or restricted to our own subjective perspective
      on things.



Optional Theme 2: Theories and problems of ethics

5.    Evaluate the claim that our moral judgments are projections or expressions of our desires, attitudes
      and preferences.


6.    Evaluate the claim that knowing the consequences of an action can tell you what is best, but it cannot
      tell you what is right.



Optional Theme 3: Philosophy of religion

7.    Evaluate the claim that in order for individuals to rationally accept the existence of God, or, the gods,
      they have no more need to provide adequate evidence for their belief than they have to in order to
      rationally accept the existence of the past.


8.    Evaluate the claim that what ultimately makes an action right or wrong is its being commanded or
      prohibited by God, or, the gods.



Optional Theme 4: Philosophy of art

9.    Evaluate the claim that there is no factual basis on which judgments about the value of art can either
      be made or spoken of.


10.   Evaluate the claim that good art is art which portrays the world authentically.




2214-5601
                                                   –5–                   M14/3/PHILO/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Optional Theme 5: Political philosophy

11.   Evaluate the claim that in a modern democracy there should be toleration of all non-violent action.


12.   Evaluate the claim that increased political activism at a local level will result in a change in the
      legitimacy of the power of the state.



Optional Theme 6: Non-Western traditions and perspectives

13.   With reference to at least one of the non-Western traditions that you have studied, explain and discuss
      the difficulties in achieving equality and justice in a multicultural society (when some groups within
      it understand their cultures to involve distinctive ways of life governed by the past, while others
      consider theirs fluid, open to change and not bound by the past).


14.   With reference to at least one of the non-Western traditions that you have studied, evaluate the claim
      that an internationally acceptable conception of human rights requires that social institutions be
      designed so that all human beings at least have reasonably secure, even if not legally recognized,
      access to their entitlements under those rights.



Optional Theme 7: Contemporary social issues

15.   Evaluate the role that gender differences play in forming an understanding of human identity.


16.   “Notions of human stewardship of nature are unhelpful given the inevitable association such notions
      have with a hierarchy. It would be better for humans to understand themselves more as part of nature
      than standing above it.” Discuss and evaluate.



Optional Theme 8: People, nations and cultures

17.   Evaluate the claim that cultural identity is better than national identity as a basis for an
      individual’s identity.


18.   Evaluate the claim that globalization necessitates the creation of more world institutions.




2214-5601
