M14/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                               May 2014



                        PHILOSOPHY



                         Higher Level



                               Paper 3




7 pages
                              –2–             M14/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.
                                                    –3–               M14/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Note to examiners
This markscheme outlines what members of the paper setting team had in mind when they devised
the questions. The topics listed in the bullet points indicate possible areas candidates might cover in their
answers. They are not compulsory points and not necessarily the best possible points. They are only a
framework to help examiners in their assessment. Examiners should be responsive to any other valid
points or any other valid approaches.

Paper 3 guidance
Examiners are reminded that in the examination paper it states that candidates are expected to
demonstrate the following skills. Since these skills are encouraged within the assessment criteria,
examiners should take them into account in their marking:
• develop a response in an organized way using clear, precise language, which is appropriate
   to philosophy
• identify pertinent issues regarding the philosophical activity raised in the text
• take an independent position about the nature of philosophical activity in relation to the ideas
   developed in the text
• draw upon, and show a holistic appreciation of, the skills, material and ideas developed throughout
   the course.

Candidates are also told that their responses are expected to include:
• a concise description of philosophical activity as presented in the text
• an exploration of the pertinent issues regarding philosophical activity raised in the text, relating this to
  their experience of doing philosophy throughout the whole course
• appropriate references to the text that illustrate their understanding of philosophical activity
• their personal evaluation of the issues regarding philosophical activity raised in the text.

Using the assessment criteria
Answers on Paper 3 are assessed according to the assessment criteria set out on pages 4–6.
                                               –4–              M14/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 3 assessment criteria

A    Expression

     • Has the student formulated the response in an organized way?
     • How clear and precise is the language used by the student?
     • To what extent is the language appropriate to philosophy?

      Achievement Descriptor
         Level
           0      The student has not reached level 1.
           1      The student expresses some basic ideas but it is not always clear what the
                  response is trying to convey. The use of language is not appropriate to
                  philosophy.
           2      The student presents some ideas in an organized way. There is some clarity of
                  expression but the response cannot always be followed. The use of language is
                  not always appropriate to philosophy.
           3      The student presents ideas in an organized way and the response can be easily
                  followed. The use of language is appropriate to philosophy.
           4      The student presents ideas in an organized and coherent way and the response is
                  clearly articulated. The use of language is effective and appropriate to
                  philosophy.
           5      The student presents ideas in an organized, coherent and incisive way, insights
                  are clearly articulated and the response is focused and sustained. The use of
                  language is precise and appropriate to philosophy.
                                                –5–               M14/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


B   Exploration

    • How well does the student identify pertinent issues regarding philosophical activity raised in the
      text?
    • How effectively does the student explore the text and present appropriate examples and/or
      illustrations?
    • How well does the student draw on the experience of doing philosophy throughout the whole
      course in exploring issues raised in the text?

     Achievement Descriptor
        Level
          0      The student has not reached level 1.
          1      The student demonstrates little or no evidence of identifying pertinent issues
                 regarding philosophical activity raised in the text.
          2      The student demonstrates some evidence of identifying pertinent issues regarding
                 philosophical activity raised in the text.
          3      The student demonstrates satisfactory evidence of identifying pertinent issues
                 regarding philosophical activity raised in the text. Examples or illustrations are
                 used in support of exploring the issues.
          4      The student demonstrates good evidence of identifying pertinent issues regarding
                 philosophical activity raised in the text. Appropriate examples or illustrations are
                 used in support of exploring the issues. The student draws on some experience of
                 doing philosophy throughout the course in exploring the issues raised in the text.
          5      The student demonstrates precise evidence of identifying pertinent issues raised
                 regarding philosophical activity in the text. Examples or illustrations are well
                 chosen and are compelling in support of exploring the issues. The student draws
                 insightfully on the experience of doing philosophy throughout the whole course
                 in exploring the issues raised in the text.
                                                –6–               M14/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


C   Relevance of the response and understanding of philosophical activity

    • How detailed and appropriate are the student’s references to the text?
    • How relevant is the response to the text?
    • How well does the response demonstrate an understanding of philosophical activity?

     Achievement Descriptor
        Level
          0      The student has not reached level 1.
         1–2     The student makes no references to the text. There is only a basic understanding
                 of the way the text raises issues about philosophy as an activity.
         3–4     The student makes few relevant references to the text. There is a limited
                 understanding of the way the text raises issues about philosophy as an activity
                 and the beginnings of an awareness of how philosophical activity is carried out.
         5–6     The student makes some relevant references to the text. There is a satisfactory
                 understanding of the way the text raises issues about philosophy as an activity
                 and a limited awareness of how philosophical activity is carried out.
         7–8     The student makes effective references to the text. There is a good understanding
                 of the way the text raises issues about philosophy as an activity and an awareness
                 of how philosophical activity is carried out.
        9–10     The student makes compelling and convincing references to the text. There is an
                 in-depth understanding of the way the text raises issues about philosophy as an
                 activity and a clear awareness of how philosophical activity is carried out.


D   Evaluation and personal response

    • How well does the student evaluate the philosophical activity raised in the text?
    • To what extent does the student express a relevant personal response?

     Achievement Descriptor
        Level
          0      The student has not reached level 1.
         1–2     The student expresses little or no personal response. There is little or no
                 evaluation of the philosophical activity raised in the text.
         3–4     The student expresses little personal response to the issues regarding
                 philosophical activity raised in the text. There is a basic evaluation of the
                 philosophical activity raised in the text.
         5–6     The student expresses some personal response to the issues regarding
                 philosophical activity raised in the text. There is a satisfactory evaluation of the
                 philosophical activity raised in the text.
         7–8     The student expresses a thoughtful personal response to the issues regarding
                 philosophical activity raised in the text. There is a good evaluation of the
                 philosophical activity raised in the text.
        9–10     The student expresses a thoughtful and insightful personal response to the issues
                 regarding philosophical activity raised in the text. There is a convincing
                 evaluation of the philosophical activity raised in the text.
                                                   –7–                M14/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Unseen text – exploring philosophical activity

The purpose of the exercise is to allow candidates to reflect upon the nature, function, methodology and
meaning of philosophical activity, relating this to the candidates’ experience of doing philosophy
throughout the whole course. Candidates may reflect this in very different ways in their responses,
giving examples which draw from their experience of the course or from their experience in general.
The following points – referring to the text extract – might be included in a response, but they are
neither exhaustive nor prescriptive.

Philosophy is seen as doing more than finding knowledge. It is claimed that philosophy can change us by
being applied to real issues of today.

Four basic traits of doing philosophy are identified: having the courage to challenge one’s beliefs;
hypothesizing; searching for truth; and trying to be objective. It is claimed that philosophy is different to
psychology because it investigates why certain positions, attitudes and opinions are held.
Philosophy does not/should not commit the “genetic fallacy” that is, establish criticism based upon
upbringing or social conditions. This fallacy often appears in discussions about religion and morality.
It should be clear that philosophy is not centrally concerned with facts and information, but the reasons
why arguments are constructed and whether they are sound arguments in themselves.

Consequently philosophy is not just critical, it enables the outlining of a new and better view through
constructive criticism. Philosophy is fundamentally an intellectual pursuit that is about seeking truth and
a love of wisdom.

Candidates might consider the following given their experience of doing the course in response to this
text extract:
• Is philosophy the only or best way to change one’s life and to increase happiness?
• The complexity of creating a balance between negative and positive criticism
• Is philosophy restricted to humans, and if so, why?                 Can computers and non-human
   beings philosophize?
• Are reason and a rational approach to issues universal?
• Examples of philosophical theories that can be analysed and applied that effectively impact on
   everyday life; examples might come from areas of ethics and politics which illustrate real life
   philosophical dilemmas
• Is it possible to argue without expressing personal feelings? Could good philosophy be
   personally intense?
• Is there a link between pursuit of truth and wisdom?
• To what extent is doing philosophy a solitary activity? Can it be beneficial to do philosophy as a
   group activity?
