Economics guide
First assessment 2022Economics guide
First assessment 2022
Published February 2020
Published on behalf of the International Baccalaureate Organization, a not-for-profit 
educational foundation of 15 Route des Morillons, 1218 Le Grand-Saconnex, Geneva, 
Switzerland by the
International Baccalaureate Organization (UK) Ltd 
Peterson House, Malthouse Avenue, Cardiff Gate 
Cardiff, Wales CF23 8GL 
United Kingdom  
Website: ibo.org
© International Baccalaureate Organization 2020
The International Baccalaureate Organization (known as the IB) offers four high-quality 
and challenging educational programmes for a worldwide community of schools, aiming 
to create a better, more peaceful world. This publication is one of a range of materials 
produced to support these programmes.
The IB may use a variety of sources in its work and checks information to verify accuracy 
and authenticity, particularly when using community-based knowledge sources such as 
Wikipedia. The IB respects the principles of intellectual property and makes strenuous 
efforts to identify and obtain permission before publication from rights holders of all 
copyright material used. The IB is grateful for permissions received for material used 
in this publication and will be pleased to correct any errors or omissions at the earliest 
opportunity.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the IB’s prior written 
permission, or as expressly permitted by the Rules for use of IB Intellectual Property .
IB merchandise and publications can be purchased through the IB Store  (email:  
sales@ibo.org ). Any commercial use of IB publications (whether fee-covered or 
commercial) by third parties acting in the IB’s ecosystem without a formal relationship 
with the IB (including but not limited to tutoring organizations, professional development 
providers, educational publishers and operators of curriculum mapping or teacher 
resource digital platforms etc) is prohibited and requires a subsequent written license 
from the IB. License requests should be sent to copyright@ibo.org . More information can 
be obtained on the IB public website .
Diploma Programme
Economics guide
International Baccalaureate , Baccalauréat International , Bachillerato Internacional   
and IB logos are registered trademarks of the International Baccalaureate Organization.IB mission statement
The International Baccalaureate aims to develop inquiring, knowledgeable and caring young people who 
help to create a better and more peaceful world through intercultural understanding and respect.
To this end the organization works with schools, governments and international organizations to develop 
challenging programmes of international education and rigorous assessment.
These programmes encourage students across the world to become active, compassionate and lifelong 
learners who understand that other people, with their differences, can also be right.IB learner profile I
profile IB learner parner profile IB leaile IB learner profiIB learner profile Ier profile IB learne
© International Bac calaur eate Or ganiza tion 2017
International Bac calaur eate® | Bac calaur éat International® | Bachiller ato Internacional®
The IB learner pro/f_ile represents 10 attributes valued by IB World Schools. We believe these attributes, and others 
like them, can help individuals and groups become responsible members of local, national and global communities.We nurture our curiosity, developing skills for inquiry and 
research. We know how to learn independently and with others. 
We learn with enthusiasm and sustain our love of learning 
throughout life.
We develop and use conceptual understanding, exploring 
knowledge across a range of disciplines. We engage with issues 
and ideas that have local and global signi/f_icance. 
We use critical and creative thinking skills to analyse and take 
responsible action on complex problems. We exercise initiative in 
making reasoned, ethical decisions.
We express ourselves con/f_idently and creatively in more than one 
language and in many ways.  We collaborate eﬀectively, listening 
carefully to the perspectives of other individuals and groups.
We act with integrity and honesty, with a strong sense of 
fairness and justice, and with respect for the dignity and rights 
of people everywhere. We take responsibility for our actions 
and their consequences.We critically appreciate our own cultures and personal histories, 
as well as the values and traditions of others. We seek and evaluate 
a range of points of view, and we are willing to grow from the 
experience.
We show empathy, compassion and respect. We have a 
commitment to service, and we act to make a positive diﬀerence 
in the lives of others and in the world around us.
We understand the importance of balancing diﬀerent aspects of 
our lives /emdash.capintellectual, physical, and emotional/emdash.cap to achieve 
well-being for ourselves and others. We recognize our interde-
pendence with other people and with the world in which we live.
We thoughtfully consider the world and our own ideas and expe-
rience. We work to understand our strengths and weaknesses in order to support our learning and personal development.We approach uncertainty with forethought and determination; we work independently and cooperatively to explore new ideas and innovative strategies. We are resourceful and resilient in the face of challenges and change.IB learner profile
The aim of all IB programmes is to develop internationally minded people who, recognizing their common 
humanity and shared guardianship of the planet, help to create a better and more peaceful world.
As IB learners we strive to be:THE IB LEARNER PROFILEIntroduction 1
Purpose of this document 1
The Diploma Programme 2
Nature of the subject 6
Approaches to teaching and learning in economics 11
Aims 16
Assessment objectives 17
Assessment objectives in practice 18
Syllabus 20
Syllabus outline 20
Unit 1: Introduction to economics 22
Unit 2: Microeconomics 25
Unit 3: Macroeconomics 35
Unit 4: The global economy 45
Assessment 55
Assessment in the Diploma Programme 55
Assessment outline—SL 57
Assessment outline—HL 58
External assessment 59
Internal assessment 67
Appendices 74
Glossary of command terms 74
Glossary of subject-specific  terms 76
Bibliography 77
Contents
Economics guide
This  publication  is intended  to guide  the planning,  teaching  and  assessment  of the subject  in schools. 
Subject teachers are the primary audience, although it is expected that teachers will use the guide to inform 
students and parents about the subject.
This  guide  can be found  on the subject  page  of the programme  resource  centre  at resources.ibo.org , a 
password-protected  IB website  designed  to support  IB teachers.  It can also  be purchased  from  the IB store 
at store.ibo.org .
Additional resources
Additional  publications  such  as specimen  papers  and  markschemes,  teacher  support  materials,  subject 
reports  and  grade  descriptors  can also  be found  on the programme  resource  centre.  Past  examination 
papers as well as markschemes can be purchased from the IB store.
Teachers are encouraged to check the programme resource centre for additional resources created or used 
by other  teachers.  Teachers  can provide  details  of useful  resources,  for example:  websites,  books,  videos, 
journals or teaching ideas.
Acknowledgment
The IB wishes  to thank  the educators  and  associated  schools  for generously  contributing  time  and 
resources to the production of this guide.
First assessment 2022
Introduction
Purpose of this document
1 Economics guide
The Diploma  Programme  is a rigorous  pre-university  course  of study  designed  for students  in the 16 to 19 
age range.  It is a broad-based  two-year  course  that  aims  to encourage  students  to be knowledgeable  and 
inquiring,  but also  caring  and  compassionate.  There  is a strong  emphasis  on encouraging  students  to 
develop  intercultural  understanding,  open-mindedness,  and  the attitudes  necessary  for them  to respect 
and evaluate a range of points of view.
The Diploma Programme model
The course  is presented  as six academic  areas  enclosing  a central  core  (see  figure  1). It encourages  the 
concurrent  study  of a broad  range  of academic  areas.  Students  study  two  modern  languages  (or a modern 
language  and  a classical  language),  a humanities  or social  science  subject,  an experimental  science, 
mathematics and one of the creative arts. It is this comprehensive range of subjects that makes the Diploma 
Programme  a demanding  course  of study  designed  to prepare  students  effectively  for university  entrance. 
In each  of the academic  areas  students  have  flexibility  in making  their  choices,  which  means  they  can 
choose subjects that particularly interest them and that they may wish to study further at university.
Figure 1
The Diploma Programme model
Introduction
The Diploma Programme
2 Economics guide
Choosing the right combination
Students are required to choose one subject from each of the six academic areas, although they can, 
instead  of an arts  subject,  choose  two  subjects  from  another  area.  Normally,  three  subjects  (and  not 
more  than  four)  are taken  at higher  level  (HL),  and  the others  are taken  at standard  level  (SL).  The IB 
recommends 240 teaching hours for HL subjects and 150 hours for SL. Subjects at HL are studied in greater 
depth and breadth than at SL.
At both levels, many skills are developed, especially those of critical thinking and analysis. At the end of the 
course,  students’  abilities  are measured  by means  of external  assessment.  Many  subjects  contain  some 
element of coursework assessed by teachers.
The core of the Diploma Programme model
All Diploma  Programme  students  participate  in the three  course  elements  that  make  up the core  of the 
model.
Theory  of knowledge  (TOK)  is a course  that  is fundamentally  about  critical  thinking  and  inquiry  into  the 
process of knowing rather than about learning a specific body of knowledge. The TOK course examines the 
nature  of knowledge  and  how  we know  what  we claim  to know.  It does  this by encouraging  students  to 
analyse  knowledge  claims  and  explore  questions  about  the construction  of knowledge.  The task  of TOK  is 
to emphasize  connections  between  areas  of shared  knowledge  and  link them  to personal  knowledge  in 
such  a way  that  an individual  becomes  more  aware  of his or her own  perspectives  and  how  they  might 
differ from others.
Creativity,  activity,  service  (CAS)  is at the heart  of the Diploma  Programme.  The emphasis  in CAS  is on 
helping students to develop their own identities, in accordance with the ethical principles embodied in the 
IB mission  statement  and  the IB learner  profile.  It involves  students  in a range  of activities  alongside  their 
academic  studies  throughout  the Diploma  Programme.  The three  strands  of CAS  are creativity  (arts,  and 
other  experiences  that  involve  creative  thinking),  activity  (physical  exertion  contributing  to a healthy 
lifestyle)  and  service  (an unpaid  and  voluntary  exchange  that  has a learning  benefit  for the student). 
Possibly,  more  than  any other  component  in the Diploma  Programme,  CAS  contributes  to the IB’s mission 
to create a better and more peaceful world through intercultural understanding and respect.
The extended  essay,  including  the world  studies  extended  essay,  offers  the opportunity  for IB students  to 
investigate  a topic  of special  interest,  in the form  of a 4,000-word  piece  of independent  research.  The area 
of research undertaken is chosen from one of the students’ six Diploma Programme subjects, or in the case 
of the interdisciplinary  world  studies  essay,  two  subjects,  and  acquaints  them  with  the independent 
research  and  writing  skills  expected  at university.  This  leads  to a major  piece  of formally  presented, 
structured  writing,  in which  ideas  and  findings  are communicated  in a reasoned  and  coherent  manner, 
appropriate  to the subject  or subjects  chosen.  It is intended  to promote  high-level  research  and  writing 
skills,  intellectual  discovery  and  creativity.  An authentic  learning  experience,  it provides  students  with  an 
opportunity to engage in personal research on a topic of choice, under the guidance of a supervisor.
Approaches to teaching and approaches to 
learning
Approaches  to teaching  and  learning  across  the Diploma  Programme  refers  to deliberate  strategies,  skills 
and  attitudes  which  permeate  the teaching  and  learning  environment.  These  approaches  and  tools, 
intrinsically  linked  with  the learner  profile  attributes,  enhance  student  learning  and  assist  student 
preparation  for the Diploma  Programme  assessment  and  beyond.  The aims  of approaches  to teaching  and 
learning in the Diploma Programme are to:
• empower teachers as teachers of learners as well as teachers of content
• empower teachers to create clearer strategies for facilitating learning experiences in which students 
are more meaningfully engaged in structured inquiry and greater critical and creative thinkingThe Diploma Programme
3 Economics guide
• promote both the aims of individual subjects (making them more than course aspirations) and linking 
previously isolated knowledge (concurrency of learning)
• encourage students to develop an explicit variety of skills that will equip them to continue to be 
actively engaged in learning after they leave school, and to help them not only obtain university 
admission through better grades but also prepare for success during tertiary education and beyond
• enhance further the coherence and relevance of the students’ Diploma Programme experience
• allow schools to identify the distinctive nature of an IB Diploma Programme education, with its blend 
of idealism and practicality.
The five approaches  to learning  (developing  thinking  skills,  social  skills,  communication  skills,  self-
management  skills  and  research  skills)  along  with  the six approaches  to teaching  (teaching  that  is inquiry-
based,  conceptually  focused,  contextualized,  collaborative,  differentiated  and  informed  by assessment) 
encompass the key values and principles that underpin IB pedagogy.
The IB mission statement and the IB learner profile
The Diploma  Programme  aims  to develop  in students  the knowledge,  skills  and  attitudes  they  will need  to 
fulfil  the aims  of the IB, as expressed  in the organization’s  mission  statement  and  the learner  profile. 
Teaching  and  learning  in the Diploma  Programme  represent  the reality  in daily  practice  of the 
organization’s educational philosophy.
Academic honesty
Academic  honesty  in the Diploma  Programme  is a set of values  and  behaviours  informed  by the attributes 
of the learner  profile.  In teaching,  learning  and  assessment,  academic  honesty  serves  to promote  personal 
integrity,  engender  respect  for the integrity  of others  and  their  work,  and  ensure  that  all students  have  an 
equal opportunity to demonstrate the knowledge and skills they acquire during their studies.
All coursework—including  work  submitted  for assessment—is  to be authentic,  based  on the student’s 
individual  and  original  ideas  with  the ideas  and  work  of others  fully  acknowledged.  Assessment  tasks  that 
require  teachers  to provide  guidance  to students  or that  require  students  to work  collaboratively  must  be 
completed in full compliance with the detailed guidelines provided by the IB for the relevant subjects.
For further  information  on academic  honesty  in the IB and  the Diploma  Programme,  please  consult  the IB 
publications  Academic  honesty  in the IB educational  context,  Effective  citing  and  referencing,  Diploma 
Programme:  From  principles  into  practice  and  General  regulations:  Diploma  Programme . Specific  information 
regarding academic honesty as it pertains to external and internal assessment components of this Diploma 
Programme subject can be found in this guide.
Acknowledging the ideas or work of another 
person
Coordinators  and  teachers  are reminded  that  candidates  must  acknowledge  all sources  used  in work 
submitted for assessment. The following is intended as a clarification of this requirement.
Diploma  Programme  candidates  submit  work  for assessment  in a variety  of media  that  may  include  audio-
visual material, text, graphs, images and/or data published in print or electronic sources. If a candidate uses 
the work  or ideas  of another  person,  the candidate  must  acknowledge  the source  using  a standard  style  of 
referencing  in a consistent  manner.  A candidate’s  failure  to acknowledge  a source  will be investigated  by 
the IB as a potential  breach  of regulations  that  may  result  in a penalty  imposed  by the IB final  award 
committee.
The IB does not prescribe which style(s) of referencing or in-text citation should be used by candidates; this 
is left to the discretion  of appropriate  faculty/staff  in the candidate’s  school.  The wide  range  of subjects, 
three  response  languages  and  the diversity  of referencing  styles  make  it impractical  and  restrictive  to insist 
on particular  styles.  In practice,  certain  styles  may  prove  most  commonly  used,  but schools  are free  to The Diploma Programme
4 Economics guide
choose  a style  that  is appropriate  for the subject  concerned  and  the language  in which  candidates’  work  is 
written.  Regardless  of the reference  style  adopted  by the school  for a given  subject,  it is expected  that  the 
minimum  information  given  includes:  name  of author,  date  of publication,  title  of source,  and  page 
numbers and URL as applicable.
Candidates  are expected  to use a standard  style  and  use it consistently  so that  credit  is given  to all sources 
used,  including  sources  that  have  been  paraphrased  or summarized.  When  writing  text  candidates  must 
clearly  distinguish  between  their  words  and  those  of others  by the use of quotation  marks  (or other 
method, such as indentation) followed by an appropriate citation that denotes an entry in the bibliography. 
If an electronic  source  is cited,  the date  of access  must  be indicated.  Candidates  are not expected  to show 
faultless  expertise  in referencing  but are expected  to demonstrate  that  all sources  have  been 
acknowledged.  Candidates  must  be advised  that  audio-visual  material,  text,  graphs,  images  and/or  data 
published  in print  or in electronic  sources  that  is not their  own  must  also  attribute  the source.  Again,  an 
appropriate style of referencing/citation must be used.
Learning diversity and learning support 
requirements
Schools  must  ensure  that  equal  access  arrangements  and  reasonable  adjustments  are provided  to 
candidates  with  learning  support  requirements  that  are in line with  the IB documents  Access  and  inclusion 
policy and Learning diversity and inclusion in IB programmes.
The documents  Meeting  student  learning  diversity  in the classroom  and  The  IB guide  to inclusive  education:  a 
resource  for whole  school  development  are available  to support  schools  in the ongoing  process  of increasing 
access and engagement by removing barriers to learning.The Diploma Programme
5 Economics guide
Figure 2
Overview of the curriculum model
Economics  is an exciting,  dynamic  subject  that  allows  students  to develop  an understanding  of the 
complexities and interdependence  of economic activities in a rapidly changing world.
At the heart  of economic  theory  is the problem  of scarcity . While  the world’s  population  has unlimited 
needs  and  wants,  there  are limited  resources  to satisfy  these  needs  and  wants.  As a result  of this scarcity, 
choices  have to be made. The economics course, at both SL and HL, uses economic theories to examine the 
ways in which these choices are made:
• at the level of producers and consumers in individual markets (microeconomics)
• at the level of the government and the national economy (macroeconomics)
• at an international level where countries are becoming increasingly interdependent through 
international trade and the movement of labour and capital (the global economy).
The choices  made  by economic  agents  (consumers,  producers  and  governments)  generate  positive  and 
negative  outcomes  and  these  outcomes  affect  the relative  well-being  of individuals  and  societies.  As a 
social  science,  economics  examines  these  choices  through  the use of models  and  theories.  The Diploma 
Programme  (DP)  economics  course  allows  students  to explore  these  models  and  theories,  and  apply  them, 
Introduction
Nature of the subject
6 Economics guide
using  empirical  data,  through  the examination  of the following  six real-world  issues  which  are posed  as 
economic questions:
• How do consumers and producers make choices in trying to meet their economic objectives?
• When are markets unable to satisfy important economic objectives—and does government 
intervention help?
• Why does economic activity vary over time and why does this matter?
• How do governments manage their economy and how effective are their policies?
• Who are the winners and losers of the integration of the world’s economies?
• Why is economic development uneven?
Economic  theory  suggests  that  the material  well-being  of societies  is related  to the quantity  of goods  and 
services  that  are available  to that  society.  As a result,  economic  growth  and  increased  efficiency  have 
become  prominent  goals.  However,  there  are two  important  global  economic  issues  related  to these  goals 
and  the choices  made  by economic  agents.  These  are the ways  in which  economic  activity  impacts  the 
environment,  and  the challenges  facing  the world  in terms  of fair access  to resources,  goods  and  services. 
When  exploring  these  significant  global  issues,  sustainability  and  equity  become  key concepts  for DP 
economics students to understand.
In all areas of economic activity, the economic agents can be divided up into the private sector (consumers 
and  producers)  and  the public  sector  (governments).  To different  extents  and  with  different  outcomes,  the 
public  sector  in any economy  assumes  some  responsibility  for monitoring  and  regulating  the behaviour  of 
the private  sector.  This  government  intervention  is a significant  concept  that  appears  throughout  the 
course  and  students  are expected  to critically  evaluate  the balance  between  the market  forces  of the 
private sector and intervention by governments.
Given  the rapidly  changing  world,  economic  activity  and  its outcomes  are constantly  in flux.  Therefore, 
students  are encouraged,  throughout  the course,  to research  current  real-world  issues.  Through  their  own 
inquiry,  it is expected  that  students  will be able  to appreciate  both  the values  and  limitations  of economic 
models in explaining real-world economic behaviour and outcomes.
By focusing  on the six real-world  issues  through  the nine  key concepts  (scarcity,  choice,  efficiency,  equity, 
economic well-being, sustainability, change, interdependence and intervention), students of the economics 
course  will develop  the knowledge,  skills,  values  and  attitudes  that  will encourage  them  to act responsibly 
as global citizens.
Distinction between SL and HL
The HL course in economics differs from the SL course in economics in terms of the:
• recommended hours devoted to teaching (240 hours for HL compared to 150 hours for SL)
• extra depth and breadth required (extension material for HL only)
• nature of the examination questions. Both SL and HL students develop quantitative skills, but HL 
students will need to further develop these as appropriate, in analysing and evaluating economic 
relationships in order to provide informed policy advice. These skills are specifically assessed in HL 
paper 3.
Economics and the core
Economics and theory of knowledge
As with  other  disciplines  within  individuals  and  societies,  there  is a variety  of ways  to gain  knowledge  in 
economics.  For example,  data  and  evidence  collection,  experimentation,  observation,  inductive  and 
deductive  reasoning,  can all be used  to help  explain  patterns  of behaviour  and  lead  to knowledge  claims. 
Students  in individual  and  societies  subjects  are required  to evaluate  the resulting  knowledge  claims  by 
exploring  questions  concerning  their  validity,  reliability,  credibility  and  certainty,  as well  as individual  and 
cultural  perspectives  on them.  For example,  at the core  of economic  theories  are important  assumptions Nature of the subject
7 Economics guide
such  as the ceteris  paribus  (all other  things  being  equal)  assumption.  Students  must  be aware  of these 
assumptions  and  be able  to critically  assess  how  these  might  limit  reliability  in the application  of economic 
theory.
Through inquiry, students in the economics course will be challenged to:
• obtain evidence related to economic theories in different contexts
• explain how the evidence that they have collected is supported by economic theory
• understand the limitations of economic theory in explaining real-world behaviour.
The relationship between each subject and TOK is of crucial importance and fundamental to the DP. Having 
followed  a course  of study  in individuals  and  societies,  students  should  be able  to reflect  critically  on the 
various ways of knowing and the methods used in human sciences, and in doing so, become the “inquiring, 
knowledgeable and caring young people” of the IB mission statement.
During  the economics  course,  a number  of questions  will arise  that  highlight  the relationships  between 
TOK and economics. Some of the knowledge questions that might be considered include the following:
• Are there fundamental differences between economics and other disciplines or areas of knowledge? If 
so, are these differences more than just methodological differences?
• How have technological advances affected the nature and practices of economics?
• Do emotion and intuition have a role in economics?
• What factors affect the reliability and validity of economic models?
• What is the difference between deductive and inductive reasoning? Is economics based on deductive 
or inductive reasoning or both?
• Does the inability of economics to perform controlled experiments mean that economics cannot be 
scientific in its approach to understanding the world?
• What are the implications of accepting that knowledge in economics changes over time?
Economics and the extended essay
An extended essay (EE) in economics provides students with an opportunity to undertake in-depth research 
in an area  related  to the subject.  Throughout  the process,  students  will develop  their  research  skills  by 
selecting  and  using  relevant  sources.  Students  should  select  and  apply  relevant  economic  theories  to 
develop  an argument  in response  to a clearly  defined  research  question  based  on an economics  topic.  The 
essay topic may relate to an area of the DP economics course, but this is not a requirement and other areas 
of the wider subject may be explored.
Students  should  take  a recent  economic  issue,  policy  or event,  and  then  gather  data  and  apply  economic 
theories,  models  and  tools  to evaluate  it. The economic  issue,  policy  or event  must  have  taken  place  up to 
five years prior to the beginning of the research process.
Appropriate  resources  for an EE in economics  could  include  both  primary  and  secondary  data,  obtained 
from  economics  textbooks,  general  economics  books,  newspapers  and  magazines,  government 
publications, databanks, interviews, or surveys.
An EE in economics  is not an extension  of the internal  assessment  task  for the subject.  Students  must 
ensure that they understand the clear distinction between the internal assessment and the EE. 
Indication  of the possible  range  of topics,  research  questions  and  approaches  that  can be considered  can 
be found in the Extended essay guide  in the section “Economics: Subject-specific guidance”.
Economics and creativity, activity, service
The economics course highlights many economic issues that have local, national and global manifestations. 
Students develop awareness of these issues, and by investigating their own examples of such issues as part 
of the course,  they  deepen  their  understanding.  Through  CAS,  students  can further  extend  their  awareness 
and  take  valuable  steps  in working  towards  alleviating  economic  problems  through  their  own  actions  and 
through motivating others to take action.
Economics students might choose to engage with CAS in the following ways.Nature of the subject
8 Economics guide
• Plan, participate and implement an activity to help raise awareness in the community about any 
number of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) including: poverty, reduced inequalities, decent 
work and economic growth, innovation and infrastructure, responsible consumption and production.
• Establish a group within the school to promote one of the official “global days”, for example:
▪ International Women’s Day to highlight and promote the importance of gender equity in 
employment (8 March)
▪ World No Tobacco Day to highlight and raise awareness of the social costs of smoking (31 May)
▪ Earth Day to highlight and promote the role of responsible consumption in achieving 
sustainability (22 April).
• Establish a Fairtrade club to raise awareness of the importance of responsible consumption.
Economics and the IB learner profile
The economics  course  is closely  aligned  with  the IB mission  which  “aims  to develop  inquiring, 
knowledgeable  and  caring  young  people  who  help  to create  a better  and  more  peaceful  world  through 
intercultural understanding and respect.” (IB mission statement). This mission is further delineated through 
the attributes  of the IB learner  profile,  and  the economics  curriculum  offers  students  opportunities  to 
demonstrate and develop these attributes through the implicit and explicit content of the course.
IB learners are: Economics students will:
Inquirers undertake independent and collaborative investigations into real-world economic 
issues, such as: disparities in economic development; concentration of economic 
power; inequity in the distribution of income; winners and losers in the global 
economy.
Knowledgeable utilize economic concepts, theories and models with confidence to gain a more 
sophisticated understanding of current economic issues, data and events.
Thinkers synthesize and evaluate economic information and data to draw conclusions and 
develop balanced, well-supported arguments.
Communicators compose clear and concise analytical commentaries utilizing the language and tools of 
economics.
Principled act with integrity, critically evaluating economic data and evidence understanding that 
the possession of knowledge carries with it an ethical responsibility.
Open-minded understand that different economic schools of thought identify different causes and 
therefore offer different solutions to economic problems which establishes economics 
as a highly contentious and dynamic discipline.
Caring appreciate that economics is a social science that has a human impact, influencing the 
well-being of individuals and societies.
Risk-takers utilize economic knowledge and understanding to develop and present creative policy 
recommendations for real-world economic issues.
Balanced consider multiple perspectives when developing a position on an economic issue and 
support any judgments made with effective and balanced reasoning.
Reflective compare the role of positive versus normative economics in the development of 
economic theory, considering the ability of economists to achieve objectivity within 
the context of the value-laden social sciences.Nature of the subject
9 Economics guide
Economics and international-mindedness
The economics  course  promotes  international-mindedness  through  a curriculum  that  allows  for the 
exploration  of economics  within  a decidedly  global  context.  Throughout  the course,  teachers  have  the 
freedom  to choose  a range  of both  local  and  global  examples,  case  studies  and  inquiries  that  are most 
relevant  to their  student  populations  in order  to animate  the main  content.  This  flexibility  ensures  that  the 
course remains relevant and responsive to the rapidly changing global environment.
While  economics  has its foundations  in theory,  the course  places  emphasis  on the application  of economic 
theory  to real-world  issues.  By examining  economic  issues  and  policy  interventions  at local,  national  and 
global  levels,  students  are empowered  to use their  knowledge  and  understanding  of economics  to seek 
solutions  to issues  that  matter  to them.  Economics  provides  students  with  the analytical  tools  necessary  to 
develop  a deep  understanding  of major  global  challenges  dealing  with  issues  of equity,  sustainability,  the 
concentration of economic power and increasing interdependence.
The internationally  minded  economics  student  engages  actively  with  the content  and  has a highly 
developed  agency  when  exploring  the economic  issues  facing  individuals  and  societies.  In this context, 
agency  refers  to the ability  of individuals  to act independently  and  make  their  own  economic  choices.  This 
includes having control over their actions and consequences.Nature of the subject
10 Economics guide
The economics  course  is underpinned  by a number  of pedagogical  principles.  In particular,  the teaching  of 
economics  is conceptually  focused  and  grounded  in real-world  issues.  The relationship  between  concepts, 
content and contexts can be illustrated in the following graphic.
Figure 3
The relationship between inquiries, concepts, content and contexts in economics
As figure  3 indicates,  the three  components  of inquiries  are of equal  relevance  and  teachers  may  choose 
any one  as a starting  point  for their  teaching.  Concepts  are anchored  in the content  of economics—its 
theories,  models,  ideas  and  tools—and  are given  context  through  the study  of real-world  issues  and 
examples.  Together  these  components  help  students  to acquire  a holistic  and  integrated  understanding  of 
economics as a discipline.
The economics  course  is focused  on inquiry-based  teaching  and  learning,  in which  students  are given  the 
opportunity  to explore  economic  theories  or global  issues  using  real-world  examples.  The teaching  of the 
economics  content  should,  therefore,  be supported  by focusing  on real-world  issues  and  applying  real-
world  examples.  In some  of the assessments,  using  real-world  examples  will be the basis  of the response 
and  an argument  must  be formed  around  them.  This  argument  should  then  demonstrate  the student’s 
understanding  of economics  through  the lens  of a real example  rather  than  the response  being  purely 
theoretical. In doing this the students will be able to go beyond merely “stating” an example in a theoretical 
response.  Students  need  to unpack  their  examples  to clearly  demonstrate/analyse/justify/evaluate  why 
they are relevant examples for particular economic issues.
While  inquiry  permeates  the whole  course,  the assessment  objective  3 (AO3)  topics  that  require  more 
depth are considered areas that lend themselves particularly well to this approach. However, it is important 
Introduction
Approaches to teaching and learning in economics
11 Economics guide
that  teachers  know  that  inquiry  as a teaching  and  learning  strategy  is not only  applicable  for AO3  topics. 
Teachers  need  to see the value  of this approach  in terms  of allowing  students  to develop  and  demonstrate 
higher-order  thinking  skills.  It is important  to highlight  that  inquiry  needs  to be taking  place  to ensure 
students  are actively  involved  in researching  economic  issues.  These  inquiries  may  take  the form  of 
suggested  statements  that  are provided  in the microeconomics,  macroeconomics  and  the global  economy 
units  in the guide  and  further  explored  through  examples  in the Economics  teacher  support  material  (TSM). 
This  inquiry  approach  will aid students  in developing  critical  thinking  and  problem-solving  skills,  an 
appreciation of different viewpoints, collaboration and reflective discussion.
Economic  skills  are important  to the study  of DP economics  and  reflect  the subject’s  distinctive  approach. 
Teaching and learning these skills enriches the students’ understanding of economics and enables them to 
apply  these  to various  economic  theories,  models,  ideas  and  tools.  It is essential  that  the skills  should  be 
covered  throughout  the course  and  that  they  are introduced  and  integrated  where  appropriate  in relation 
to the concepts,  content  and  context  at both  SL and  HL. Students  are expected  to demonstrate 
competence  in the use of economic  skills  in the external  assessment  and  internal  assessment.  These  skills 
are covered  generally  in the “Approaches  to teaching  and  learning”  section  in the TSM  while  the more 
subject-specific skills are addressed in assessment objectives.
The nine  key concepts  that  underpin  the economics  course  (scarcity,  choice,  efficiency,  equity,  economic 
well-being,  sustainability,  change,  interdependence  and  intervention)  are integrated  into  the conceptual 
understandings of all the units to ensure that a conceptual thread is woven throughout the course.
Conceptually focused teaching helps learners to:
• organize new information by categorizing groups of theories, ideas, tools, or facts according to 
patterns of similarity or difference
• deepen their understanding of today’s complex and dynamic economic environment
• approach concepts and content in different ways through multiple perspectives
• make connections with other subjects to enhance interdisciplinary learning.
Conceptual  understanding  therefore  enhances  the student’s  overall  understanding  of the course,  making 
the subject  more  meaningful.  This  understanding  assists  students  in showing  clear  evidence  of synthesis 
and evaluation in their responses to questions asked in the external assessment (even though the questions 
may  not be explicitly  concept  based).  In the internal  assessment,  however,  students  must  use the concepts 
as a lens through which to analyse their commentaries.
The definition,  relative  importance  and  relationship  of each  of the nine  key concepts  to the subject  of 
economics may be the subject of debate. Teachers should explore how in different contexts these concepts 
may  be understood  and  applied  differently.  The table  in Figure  4 provides  brief  understandings  of how  the 
key concepts may be initially understood in relation to the course.
Figure 4
The relationships between the key concepts and the course
Key concept Understanding in relation to the course
Scarcity The central concept in economics, scarcity refers to the limited availability of 
economic resources relative to society’s unlimited demand for goods and 
services. Thus, economics is the study of how to make the best possible use of 
scarce or limited resources to satisfy unlimited human needs and wants.
Choice Since resources are scarce, economics is a study of choices. It is clear that not all 
needs and wants can be satisfied; this necessitates choice and gives rise to the 
idea of opportunity cost. Economic decision-makers continually make choices 
between competing alternatives, and economics studies the consequences of 
these choices, both present and future.
Efficiency Efficiency is a quantifiable concept, determined by the ratio of useful output to 
total input. Allocative efficiency refers to making the best possible use of scarce Approaches to teaching and learning in economics
12 Economics guide
Key concept Understanding in relation to the course
resources to produce the combinations of goods and services that are 
optimum for society, thus minimizing resource waste.
Equity In contrast to equality, which describes situations where economic outcomes 
are similar for different people or different social groups, equity refers to the 
concept or idea of fairness. Fairness is a normative concept, as it means 
different things to different people. In economics, inequity is often interpreted 
to refer to inequality, which may apply to the distribution of income, wealth or 
human opportunity. Irrespective of economic system, inequity or inequality 
remain significant issues both within and between societies. The degree to 
which markets versus governments should, or are able to, create greater equity 
or equality in an economy is an area of much debate.
Economic well-being Economic well-being is a multidimensional concept relating to the level of 
prosperity and quality of living standards enjoyed by members of an economy. 
It includes:
• present and future financial security
• the ability to meet basic needs
• the ability to make economic choices permitting achievement of personal 
satisfaction
• the ability to maintain adequate income levels over the long term.
There are broad disparities in economic well-being both within and across 
nations.
Sustainability Sustainability in economics refers to the ability of the present generation to 
meet its needs without compromising the ability of future generations to meet 
their own needs. It refers to limiting the degree to which the current 
generation’s economic activities create harmful environmental outcomes 
involving resource depletion or degradation that will negatively affect future 
generations. Sustainability is proving increasingly important in all economic 
analysis as planetary boundaries are pushed to the limit.
Change An understanding of the concept of change is essential in economics. The 
economic world is in a continual state of flux and economists must be aware of 
this and adapt their thinking accordingly. The concept of change is important 
both in economic theory and the empirical world that economics studies. In 
economic theory, economics focuses not on the level of the variables it 
investigates, but on their change from one situation to another. Empirically, 
the world that is studied by economists is always subject to continuous and 
profound change at institutional, structural, technological, economic and social 
levels.
Interdependence Individuals, communities and nations are not self-sufficient. Consumers, 
companies, households, workers, and governments, all economic actors, 
interact with each other within and, increasingly, across nations in order to 
achieve economic goals. The greater the level of interaction, the greater will be 
the degree of interdependence. In a highly interdependent economic world, 
decisions by certain economic actors are likely to generate many, and often 
unintended, economic consequences for other actors. A consideration of 
possible economic consequences of interdependence is essential when 
conducting economic analysis.
Intervention Intervention in economics usually refers to government involvement in the 
workings of markets. While markets are considered the most efficient 
mechanism to organize economic activity, it is recognized that they may fail to Approaches to teaching and learning in economics
13 Economics guide
Key concept Understanding in relation to the course
achieve certain societal goals, such as equity, economic well-being, or 
sustainability. Failure to achieve such goals may be considered sufficient 
reason for government intervention. In the real world, there is often 
disagreement among economists and policymakers on the need for, and 
extent of, government intervention. There is a considerable debate about the 
merits of intervention versus the free market.
The Economics teacher support material  (TSM) provides further guidance on the approaches to teaching and 
learning in the course.
Engaging with sensitive topics
The study  of economics  provides  students  with  an opportunity  to engage  with  exciting,  stimulating  and 
personally relevant topics and issues. However, it should be noted that often such topics and issues can also 
be sensitive and personally challenging. Teachers should be aware of this and provide guidance to students 
on how  to approach  and  engage  with  such  topics  and  issues  in a responsible  and  inclusive  manner, 
providing due consideration to questions and issues that may arise.
Prior learning
The economics  course  requires  no specific  prior  learning  of economics.  No particular  background  in terms 
of specific  subjects  studied  for national  or international  qualifications  is expected  or required.  The specific 
skills  of the economics  course  are developed  within  the context  of the course  itself.  However,  the ability  to 
understand  and  explain  abstract  concepts,  and  write  in a logically  structured  manner  are distinct 
advantages  in economics  as is completing  the individuals  and  societies  course  in the Middle  Years 
Programme (MYP).
Links to the Middle Years Programme
The MYP  individuals  and  societies  subject  group  involves  inquiry  into  historical,  contemporary, 
geographical,  political,  social,  economic,  religious,  technological  and  cultural  contexts  that  influence  and 
impact  on the lives  and  environments  of people  and  communities.  This  subject  group  therefore  provides  a 
very useful foundation for students who go on to study economics in the DP.
The concept-based approach to teaching adopted in the MYP is also relevant to this economics course, with 
several  of the same  concepts  explored  in a more  comprehensive,  in-depth  and  critical  manner  than 
expected  in the MYP.  These  concepts  are woven  through  the entire  economics  syllabus  and  are meant  to 
provide a common framework for exploring micro, macro and global economics.
Inquiry-based  learning  is central  to individuals  and  societies  courses  in both  the MYP  and  the DP providing 
students  with  opportunities  to independently  and  collaboratively  investigate  and  analyse  global  issues.  As 
inquiry  develops  curiosity  and  promotes  critical  and  creative  thinking,  it is important  to emphasize  that 
pedagogically,  the Diploma  Programme  economics  learning  environment  should  emulate,  as far as 
possible,  the MYP  experience—students  should  explore  economics  in action  through  the investigation  of 
relevant issues, utilizing real-world data and examples.
MYP  students  in individuals  and  societies  are required  to hone  their  critical  thinking  and  communication 
skills, two of the MYP’s four assessment objectives. This establishes an important foundation for the internal 
assessment  component  in Diploma  Programme  economics.  As part  of their  internal  assessment,  students 
are expected  to write  clear  and  concise  analytical  commentaries  on current  news  articles  utilizing  the 
language and tools of economics.
Thus,  the study  of economics  naturally  extends  the skills  developed  in MYP  individuals  and  societies 
courses.  Furthermore,  students’  organization,  collaboration,  and  communication  strategies  that  began  in 
MYP will become more sophisticated as they move through the Diploma Programme economics course.Approaches to teaching and learning in economics
14 Economics guide
Links to the Career-related Programme
In the IB Career-related  Programme  (CP),  students  study  at least  two  DP subjects,  a core  consisting  of four 
components and a career-related study, which is determined by the local context and aligned with student 
needs.  Courses  can be chosen  from  any group  of the DP, and  it is possible  to study  more  than  one  course 
from the same group (for example, visual arts and film).
Economics develops the student’s logical reasoning skills which are highly desired across a range of career-
related  pursuits.  Economics  may  be an ideal  choice  for CP students  considering  careers  in management, 
finance,  law,  research,  government  and  non-governmental  organizations,  international  relations/
development, and so on.
The DP economics  course  emphasizes  the development  of: strong  written,  verbal,  and  diagrammatic 
communication  skills;  critical  and  complex  thinking;  and  ethical  considerations  that  will assist  students  in 
preparing  for the future  global  workplace.  This  in turn  fosters  the IB learner  profile  attributes  that  are 
transferable to the entire CP, providing relevance and support for the student’s learning.
For CP students,  DP courses  can be studied  at SL or HL. Schools  can explore  opportunities  to integrate  CP 
students with DP students.Approaches to teaching and learning in economics
15 Economics guide
Individuals and societies aims
The aims of all subjects in individuals and societies are to:
• encourage the systematic and critical study of: human experience and behaviour; physical, economic 
and social environments; the history and development of social and cultural institutions
• develop in the student the capacity to identify, analyse critically and evaluate theories, concepts and 
arguments about the nature and activities of the individual and society
• enable the student to collect, describe and analyse data used in studies of society, and to test 
hypotheses and interpret complex data and source material
• promote the appreciation of the way in which learning is relevant to both the culture in which the 
student lives and the culture of other societies
• develop an awareness in the student that human attitudes and opinions are widely diverse and that a 
study of society requires an appreciation of such diversity
• enable the student to recognize that the content and methodologies of the individuals and societies 
group are contestable and that their study requires the tolerance of uncertainty.
Economics aims
The aims of the economics course at SL and HL are to enable students to:
• develop a critical understanding of a range of economic theories, models, ideas and tools in the areas 
of microeconomics, macroeconomics and the global economy
• apply economic theories, models, ideas and tools and analyse economic data to understand and 
engage with real-world economic issues and problems facing individuals and societies
• develop a conceptual understanding of individuals’ and societies’ economic choices, interactions, 
challenges and consequences of economic decision-making.
Introduction
Aims
16 Economics guide
By the end  of the economics  course,  students  are expected  to achieve  the following  assessment  objectives 
(AOs).
1. Knowledge and understanding (AO1)
• Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of specified content
• Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the common SL/HL syllabus
• Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of current economic issues and data
• At HL only:  demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the extension topics
2. Application and analysis (AO2)
• Apply economic concepts and theories to real-world situations
• Identify and interpret economic data
• Analyse how economic information is used effectively in particular contexts
• In the internal assessment task: explain the link between key economic concepts and economic 
commentaries
• At HL only: demonstrate application and analysis of the extension topics
3. Synthesis and evaluation (AO3)
• Examine economic concepts and theories
• Use economic concepts and examples to construct and present an argument
• Discuss and evaluate economic information and theories
• At HL only :
▪ demonstrate economic synthesis and evaluation of the extension topics
▪ select and use economic data using economic theory to make policy recommendations.
4. Use and application of appropriate skills (AO4)
• Produce well-structured written material, using appropriate economic theory, concepts and 
terminology
• Produce and use diagrams to help explain economic theory, concepts and real-world issues
• Select, interpret and analyse appropriate extracts from the news media
• Interpret appropriate data sets
• Use quantitative techniques to identify, explain and analyse economic relationships
Introduction
Assessment objectives
17 Economics guide
Assessment 
objectivePaper 1 – SL and 
HLPaper 2 – SL and 
HLPaper 3 – HL only Internal 
assessment
SL and HL
Part a Part b
AO1 —knowledge 
and understanding√ √ √ √ √
AO2 —application 
and analysis√ √ √ √ √
AO3 —synthesis 
and evaluation√ √ √ √
AO4 —use and 
application of 
appropriate skills√ √ √ √ √
Command terms
Command terms are classified according to the AO levels.
Command  terms  related  to cognitive  demand  progress  from  AO1  to AO3,  while  AO4  command  terms  are 
specific  to particular  skills.  Teachers  and  students  must  be familiar  with  the assessment  objectives  and  the 
command  terms  in order  to understand  the depth  of treatment  required  in teaching  and  in examination 
questions.
For use of command terms in examination questions, please refer to the “ Assessment ” section of this guide.
The command  terms  within  each  assessment  objective  are listed  in alphabetical  order  in the following 
table.  Definitions  of the command  terms  are listed  in the “Glossary  of command  terms ” in the appendix  to 
this guide.
Assessment objective Key command term Depth
AO1 —knowledge and 
understandingDefine
Describe
List
Outline
StateThese terms require students to 
learn and comprehend the 
meaning of information.
AO2 —application and analysis Analyse
Apply
Comment
Distinguish
Explain
SuggestThese terms require students to 
use their knowledge and skills to 
break down ideas into simpler 
parts and to see how the parts 
relate.
AO3 —synthesis and evaluation Compare
Compare and contrastThese terms require students to 
rearrange component ideas into a 
Introduction
Assessment objectives in practice
18 Economics guide
Assessment objective Key command term Depth
Contrast
Discuss
Evaluate
Examine
Justify
Recommend
To what extentnew whole and make judgments 
based on evidence or a set of 
criteria.
AO4 —use and application of 
appropriate skillsCalculate
Construct
Derive
Determine
Draw
Identify
Label
Measure
Plot
Show
Show that
Sketch
SolveThese terms require students to 
demonstrate the selection and use 
of subject-specific skills and 
techniques.Assessment objectives in practice
19 Economics guide
Syllabus component Teaching hours
SL HL
Unit 1: Introduction to economics
1.1 What is economics?
1.2 How do economists approach the world?10 10
Unit 2: Microeconomics
2.1 Demand (includes HL only sub-topics) 
2.2 Supply (includes HL only sub-topics)
2.3 Competitive market equilibrium
2.4 Critique of the maximizing behaviour of consumers and producers
2.5 Elasticity of demand (includes HL only sub-topics)
2.6 Elasticity of supply (includes HL only sub-topics)
2.7 Role of government in microeconomics (includes HL only calculation)
2.8 Market failure—externalities and common pool or common access 
resources (includes HL only calculation)
2.9 Market failure—public goods
2.10 Market failure—asymmetric information (HL only)
2.11 Market failure—market power (HL only)
2.12 The market’s inability to achieve equity  (HL only)35 70
Unit 3: Macroeconomics
3.1 Measuring economic activity and illustrating its variations
3.2 Variations in economic activity—aggregate demand and aggregate supply
3.3 Macroeconomic objectives (includes HL only calculation)
3.4 Economics of inequality and poverty (includes HL only calculation)
3.5 Demand management (demand side policies)—monetary policy (includes 
HL only sub-topics)
3.6 Demand management—fiscal policy (includes HL only sub-topics)
3.7 Supply-side policies40 75
Unit 4: The global economy
4.1 Benefits of international trade (includes HL only subtopics and 
calculation)
4.2 Types of trade protection (includes HL only calculations)
4.3 Arguments for and against trade control/protection
4.4 Economic integration
4.5 Exchange rates (includes HL only sub-topic)
4.6 Balance of payments (includes HL only sub-topics) 
4.7 Sustainable development (includes HL only sub-topic)45 65
Syllabus
Syllabus outline
20 Economics guide
Syllabus component Teaching hours
SL HL
4.8 Measuring development
4.9 Barriers to economic growth and/or economic development
4.10 Economic growth and/or economic development strategies
Internal assessment
Portfolio of three commentaries20 20
Total teaching hours 150 240
The recommended  teaching  time  is 240 hours  to complete  HL courses  and  150 hours  to complete  SL 
courses as stated in the publication General regulations: Diploma Programme .Syllabus outline
21 Economics guide
Recommended teaching time: 10 hours
Conceptual understandings
• Economics is a social science characterized by interdependence , which focuses on how people 
interact with each other to improve their economic well-being , influenced and enabled by their 
values and their natural surroundings.
• The economic world is dynamic in nature and constantly subject to change .
• Economic theories are based on logic and empirical data, using models to represent and analyse this 
complex reality. Individual and collective motivations and behaviours are complex and diverse, and 
their understanding entails the interaction of a variety of disciplines such as philosophy, politics, 
history, and psychology.
• Economic decision-making impacts the relative economic well-being  of individuals and societies.
• The central problems of economics are scarcity  and choice . This forces societies to face trade-offs, 
opportunity costs and the challenge of sustainability .
• Debates exist in economics regarding the potential conflicts between economic growth and equity 
and between free markets and government intervention .
• Endless economic growth, based on the consumption of finite resources, cannot continue 
indefinitely. New economic models and social movements have challenged mainstream opinion 
about the purpose of growth and how the economy could be redesigned to support long-term 
prosperity.
Key  concepts:  scarcity,  choice,  efficiency,  equity,  economic  well-being,  sustainability,  change, 
interdependence, intervention.
Note:  All content  is SL and  HL unless  otherwise  stated.  HL only  topics,  diagrams  and  calculations  are in 
bold .
1.1 What is economics? Depth of 
teachingDiagrams
Economics as a social science
• The social nature of economics
• The basis of the study of economics: microeconomics and 
macroeconomics
• Introduction to the nine central concepts: scarcity, choice, 
efficiency, equity, economic well-being, sustainability, 
change, interdependence, interventionAO2
The problem of choice
• Factors of production—land, labour, capital and 
entrepreneurship
• Scarcity
▪ Unlimited human needs and wants to be met by 
limited resources
▪ Scarcity and sustainabilityAO2
Syllabus
Unit 1: Introduction to economics
22 Economics guide
1.1 What is economics? Depth of 
teachingDiagrams
• Opportunity cost
▪ The cost of choice
▪ Free goods
• The basic economic questions
▪ What/how much to produce, how to produce and for 
whom to produce?
• Means of answering the economic questions
▪ Market versus government intervention
▪ Economic systems: free market economy, planned 
economy and mixed economy
The production possibilities curve model (PPC)
• Assumptions of the model
• Increasing versus constant opportunity cost
• Features of the model: opportunity cost, scarcity, choice, 
unemployment of resources, efficiency, actual growth and 
growth in production possibilitiesAO2, AO4 Diagram: PPC illustrating 
choice and opportunity 
cost, unemployment of 
resources, actual growth 
and growth in production 
possibilities
Diagram: PPC showing 
increasing versus constant 
opportunity cost
Modelling the economy
• The circular flow of income model
• Interdependence between economic decision-makers 
interacting and making choices in an economy: 
households, firms, the government, the banks and 
financial sector, and the foreign sector (foreign firms and 
households)
• Leakages and injectionsAO2, AO4 Diagram: circular flow of 
income model, with 
leakages and injections
1.2 How do economists approach the world? Depth of 
teachingDiagrams
Economic methodology
• The role of positive economics
▪ The use of logic
▪ The use of hypotheses, models, theories
▪ The ceteris paribus  assumption
▪ Empirical evidence
▪ Refutation
• The role of normative economics
▪ Value judgments in policy making
▪ The meaning of equity and equalityAO2
Economic thought
• Origin of economic ideas in a historical context
▪ 18th century: Adam Smith and laissez faireAO2Unit 1: Introduction to economics
23 Economics guide
1.2 How do economists approach the world? Depth of 
teachingDiagrams
▪ 19th century: classical microeconomics (utility); the 
concept of the margin; Classical macroeconomics 
(Say’s law); Marxist critique of classical economic 
thought
▪ 20th century: Keynesian revolution; rise of 
macroeconomic policy; monetarist/new classical 
counter revolution
▪ 21st century: increasing dialogue with other 
disciplines such as psychology and the growing role 
of behavioural economics; increasing awareness of 
the interdependencies that exist between the 
economy, society and environment and the need to 
appreciate the compelling reasons for moving 
toward a circular economy
Theory of knowledge questions
• How realistic are economic models? How can we know what to include or exclude in a model?
• What assumptions do economists make when they apply economic theories to the real world?
• Many economists argue that economics as a social science is in its infancy, and that with time, as 
empirical testing methods and the quality of data improve, it will become more reliable in making 
accurate predictions. Do you agree with this statement?
• To what extent does the distinction between positive and normative statements exist in other 
academic disciplines?
• To what extent have individuals shifted the paradigms of economics?Unit 1: Introduction to economics
24 Economics guide
Recommended time for teaching and inquiry: SL—35 hours, HL—70 hours
Real-world issue 1
How do consumers and producers make choices in trying to meet 
their economic objectives?
Conceptual understandings
• Interaction between consumers and producers in a market is the main mechanism through which 
resources are directed to meet the needs and wants in an economy.
• Consumer and producer choices  are the outcome of complex decision-making.
• Welfare is maximized if allocative efficiency  is achieved.
• Constant change  produces dynamic markets.
Key  concepts:  scarcity,  choice,  efficiency,  equity,  economic  well-being,  sustainability,  change, 
interdependence, intervention.
Note:  All content  is SL and  HL unless  otherwise  stated.  HL only  topics,  diagrams  and  calculations  are in 
bold .
2.1 Demand Depth of teaching Diagrams and 
calculations
The law of demand—relationship between price and quantity 
demanded
• Assumptions underlying the law of demand (HL only)
▪ The income and substitution effects
▪ The law of diminishing marginal utility AO2
Demand curve AO4 Diagram: downward-
sloping demand 
curve
Relationship between an individual consumer’s demand and 
market demandAO2
Non-price determinants of demand
• Income
• Tastes and preferences
• Future price expectations
• Price of related goods (in the cases of substitutes and 
complements)
• Number of consumersAO2
Movements along the demand curve and shifts of the 
demand curveAO2, AO4 Diagram: movements 
along the demand 
Syllabus
Unit 2: Microeconomics
25 Economics guide
2.1 Demand Depth of teaching Diagrams and 
calculations
curve and shifts of 
the demand curve
2.2 Supply Depth of 
teachingDiagrams and calculations
The law of supply—relationship between price and quantity 
supplied
• Assumptions underlying the law of supply (HL only)
▪ The law of diminishing marginal returns
▪ Increasing marginal costs AO2
Supply curve AO4 Diagram: upward-sloping 
supply curve
Relationship between an individual producer’s supply and 
market supplyAO2
Non-price determinants of supply
• Changes in costs of factors of production (FOPs)
• Prices of related goods (in the cases of joint and 
competitive supply)
• Indirect taxes and subsidies
• Future price expectations
• Changes in technology
• Number of firmsAO2
Movements along and shifts of the supply curve AO2, AO4 Diagram: movements along 
and shifts of the supply 
curve
2.3 Competitive market equilibrium Depth of 
teachingDiagrams and 
calculations
Demand and supply curves forming a market equilibrium AO4 Diagram: market 
equilibrium
Shifting the demand and supply curves to produce a new 
market equilibrium, with reference to excess demand 
(shortage) and excess supply (surplus)AO2, AO4 Diagram: showing 
changes in equilibrium/
role of price mechanism
Functions of the price mechanism
• Resource allocation
▪ Signalling
▪ Incentive
• RationingAO2
Consumer and producer surplus AO2, AO4 Diagram: showing 
consumer surplus and 
producer surplus (social/
community surplus)—
maximized at Social/community surplus AO2, AO4
Allocative efficiency at the competitive market equilibrium:
• social/community surplus maximized at equilibriumAO2, AO4Unit 2: Microeconomics
26 Economics guide
2.3 Competitive market equilibrium Depth of 
teachingDiagrams and 
calculations
• marginal benefit (MB) equals marginal cost (MC) competitive market 
equilibrium
Calculation (HL only): 
consumer surplus and 
producer surplus from 
a diagram
2.4 Critique of the maximizing behaviour of consumers 
and producersDepth of 
teachingDiagrams and 
calculations
Rational consumer choice (HL only)
• Assumptions—consumer rationality, utility 
maximization and perfect information
• Behavioural economics—limitations of the 
assumptions of rational consumer choice
▪ Biases—rule of thumb, anchoring and framing, 
availability
▪ Bounded rationality
▪ Bounded self-control
▪ Bounded selfishness
▪ Imperfect informationAO3 
Behavioural economics in action (HL only)
• Choice architecture—default, restricted, and 
mandated choices
• Nudge theoryAO3
Business objectives (HL only)
• Profit maximization
• Alternative business objectives
▪ Corporate social responsibility
▪ Market share
▪ Satisficing
▪ GrowthAO3
2.5 Elasticities of demand Depth of teaching Diagrams and 
calculations
Concept of elasticity AO1, AO4 Diagram: relatively 
elastic and inelastic 
demand
Price elasticity of demand (PED)
• PED =percentage  change  in  quantity  demanded
percentage  change  in  price
• Degrees of PED—theoretical range of values for PED
• Changing PED along a straight line downward sloping 
demand curve (HL only)AO2, AO4 Diagram: constant 
PED—perfectly 
elastic, perfectly 
inelastic and 
unitary PED along a 
demand curve
Diagram (HL only): 
PED along the Unit 2: Microeconomics
27 Economics guide
2.5 Elasticities of demand Depth of teaching Diagrams and 
calculations
• Determinants of PED—number and closeness of 
substitutes, degree of necessity, proportion of income 
spent on the good, time
• Relationship between PED and total revenuestraight line 
demand curve 
Diagram: showing 
changes in revenue 
as a result of price 
changes when 
demand is price 
elastic and price 
inelastic
Calculation: PED, 
change in price, 
quantity demanded 
or total revenue 
from data provided• Importance of PED for firms and government decision-
makingAO3
• Reasons why the PED for primary commodities is 
generally lower than the PED for manufactured 
products (HL only)AO2
Income elasticity of demand (YED)
• YED =percentage  change  in  quantity  demanded
percentage  change  in  income
• Income elastic demand (services and luxury goods) and 
income inelastic demand (necessities)
• Significance of sign
▪ Positive YED (normal goods) and negative YED 
(inferior goods)
▪ Less than one (necessities) and greater than one 
(services and luxury goods)AO2, AO4 Diagram: showing 
income elastic, 
income inelastic 
and inferior goods 
on an Engel curve
Calculation: YED, 
change in income, 
quantity demanded 
from data provided
• Importance of YED (HL only):
▪ for firms 
▪ in explaining changes in the sectoral structure of 
the economy.AO3
2.6 Elasticity of supply Depth of teaching Diagrams and 
calculations
Price elasticity of supply (PES)
• PES =percentage  change  in  quantity  supplied
percentage  change  in  price
• Degrees of PES—theoretical range of values for PES
• Determinants of PES—time, mobility of factors of 
production, unused capacity, ability to store, rate at which 
costs increaseAO2, AO4 Diagram: relatively 
elastic and inelastic 
supply
Diagram: constant 
PES —perfectly 
elastic, perfectly 
inelastic and 
unitary PES along a 
supply curve
Calculation: PES, 
change in price or 
quantity supplied 
from data provided• Reasons why the PES for primary commodities is 
generally lower than the PES for manufactured 
products (HL only)AO2
Inquiry—possible areas to explore (not an exhaustive list)
• An investigation into the problems associated with volatile prices of commodity-dependent countries.Unit 2: Microeconomics
28 Economics guide
• An investigation into how choice architecture influences decision-making in different contexts (for 
example, its role in a supermarket, or how it may influence the rate of organ donation in different 
countries).
• A critical investigation into the CSR practices of different companies.
• An investigation into the extent to which firms actually use knowledge of elasticity to inform pricing 
decisions.
Theory of knowledge questions
• Is the assumption of rational consumer choice realistic?
• Can laws in economics, such as the law of demand and the law of supply, have the same status as laws 
in the natural sciences?
• Can the use of empirical evidence ever allow us to arrive at the truth about the real world?
• What practical problems does economics try to solve?
Real-world issue 2
When are markets unable to satisfy important economic objectives
—and does government intervention help?
Conceptual understandings
• The market mechanism may result in socially undesirable outcomes that do not achieve efficiency , 
environmental sustainability  and/or equity .
• Market failure, resulting in allocative inefficiency and welfare loss.
• Resource overuse, resulting in challenges to environmental sustainability .
• Inequity, resulting in inequalities.
• Governments have policy tools which can affect market outcomes, and government intervention  is 
effective, to varying degrees, in different real-world markets.
Key  concepts:  scarcity,  choice,  efficiency,  equity,  economic  well-being,  sustainability,  change, 
interdependence, intervention.
Note:  All content  is SL and  HL unless  otherwise  stated.  HL only  topics,  diagrams  and  calculations  are in 
bold .
2.7 Role of government in microeconomics Depth of 
teachingDiagrams and calculations
Reasons for government intervention in markets
• Influencing market outcomes in order to:
▪ earn government revenue
▪ support firms
▪ support households on low incomes
▪ influence level of production
▪ influence the level of consumption
▪ correct market failure
▪ promote equity.AO2
Main forms of government intervention in markets
• Price controls: price ceilings (maximum prices) and price 
floors (minimum prices)AO2, AO4 Diagram: showing the 
following measures and the Unit 2: Microeconomics
29 Economics guide
2.7 Role of government in microeconomics Depth of 
teachingDiagrams and calculations
• Indirect taxes and subsidies
• Direct provision of services
• Command and control regulation and legislation
• Consumer nudges (HL only)possible effects on markets 
and stakeholders
• Price ceiling 
(maximum price)
• Price floor (minimum 
price)
• Indirect tax
• Subsidy
Calculation (HL only): the 
effects on markets and 
stakeholders of:
• price ceilings 
(maximum prices) 
and price floors 
(minimum prices)
• indirect taxes and 
subsidies.
Government intervention in markets—consequences for 
markets and stakeholdersAO3
2.8 Market failure—externalities and common pool or 
common access resourcesDepth of 
teachingDiagrams and 
calculations
Socially optimum output: marginal social benefit (MSB) 
equals marginal social cost (MSC).
(MSB = MSC): allocative efficiency; social/community surplus 
maximized
• Positive externalities of production and consumption 
and welfare loss
• Merit goods
• Negative externalities of production and consumption 
and welfare loss
• Demerit goods
• Common pool resources
▪ Characteristics: Tragedy of commons, rivalrous but 
non-excludable
▪ Unsustainable production creating negative 
externalitiesAO2, AO4 Diagram: allocative 
efficiency
Diagram: showing market 
failure due to:
• negative externalities 
of production
• negative externalities 
of consumption
• positive externalities 
of production
• positive externalities 
of consumption.
Calculation (HL only): 
welfare loss from a 
diagram
Government intervention in response to externalities and 
common pool resources including:
• Indirect (Pigouvian) taxes
• Carbon taxes
• Legislation and regulation
• Education—awareness creation
• Tradable permits
• International agreementsAO2, AO4 Diagram: showing 
government responses to 
externalities
• Indirect (Pigouvian) 
taxes
• Carbon taxes 
showing effects on 
the market of a Unit 2: Microeconomics
30 Economics guide
2.8 Market failure—externalities and common pool or 
common access resourcesDepth of 
teachingDiagrams and 
calculations
• Collective self-governance
• Subsidies
• Government provisionparticular polluting 
industry
• Subsidies
• Legislation and 
regulation
• Education
Strengths and limitations of government policies to correct 
externalities and approaches to managing common pool 
resources including:
• challenges involved in measurement of externalities
• degree of effectiveness
• consequences for stakeholdersAO3
Importance of international cooperation
• Global nature of sustainability issues
• Challenges faced in international cooperation
• Monitoring, enforcementAO3
2.9 Market failure—public goods Depth of teaching Diagrams and 
calculations
Public goods
• Non-rivalrous, non-excludable
• Free rider problemAO2
Government intervention in response to public 
goods
• Direct provision
• Contracting out to the private sectorAO3
2.10 Market failure—asymmetric information (HL 
only)Depth of teaching Diagrams and 
calculations
Asymmetric information 
• Adverse selection
• Moral hazardAO2
Responses to asymmetric information
• Government responses: legislation and 
regulation, provision of information
• Private responses: signalling and screeningAO3
2.11 Market failure—market power (HL only) Depth of teaching Diagrams and calculations
Perfect competition–many firms, free entry, 
homogeneous productsAO2
Monopoly—single or dominant firm, high 
barriers to entry, no close substitutesAO2Unit 2: Microeconomics
31 Economics guide
2.11 Market failure—market power (HL only) Depth of teaching Diagrams and calculations
Imperfect competition
• Oligopoly—few large firms, high 
barriers to entry, interdependence
• Monopolistic competition—many firms, 
free entry, product differentiationAO2
Rational producer behaviour—profit 
maximization (HL only)
• Total revenue - Total costs (TR -TC)
• Marginal cost = Marginal revenue 
(MC=MR)
• Abnormal profit (AR > AC)*
• Normal profit (AR = AC)*
• Losses (AR < AC)*
* AR = Average revenue, AC = Average costAO2, AO4 Calculation (HL only): profit, 
MC, MR, AC, AR from data
Degrees of market power
• Meaning of market power
• Perfect competition—no market power
—firm as price taker 
▪ profit maximization:
▪ in the short run
▪ in the long run
▪ Meaning of allocative efficiency, 
necessary conditions
▪ Imperfect competition—varying 
degrees of market power—firm as 
price makerAO3, AO4 Diagram: perfectly competitive 
firm as price taker where,
*P = D = AR = MR
Diagram: perfectly competitive 
firm showing:
• abnormal profit 
• normal profit 
• losses 
Diagram: equilibrium in 
perfectly competitive market 
with reference to allocative 
efficiency when P = MC or MB = 
MC, maximum social/
community surplus.
*P = Price, D = Demand
Monopoly
• Profit maximization
• Allocative inefficiency (market failure)
• Welfare loss in a monopoly in 
comparison with perfect competition 
due to restricted output and higher 
price
• Natural monopolyAO3, AO4 Diagram: market power where 
AR > MC
Diagram: monopolist showing:
• abnormal profit 
• normal profit 
• losses 
Diagram: price/quantity 
comparison of a monopoly 
firm with a perfect competitive 
market. Also showing welfare 
loss under the monopoly.
Diagram: natural monopoly
Oligopoly
• Collusive versus non-collusive
• Interdependence, risk of price war, 
incentive to collude, incentive to cheatAO3, AO4 Diagram: collusive oligopoly 
acting as a monopolyUnit 2: Microeconomics
32 Economics guide
2.11 Market failure—market power (HL only) Depth of teaching Diagrams and calculations
• Allocative inefficiency (market failure)
simple game theory payoff matrix
• Price and non-price competition
• Measurement of market concentration – 
concentration ratios
Monopolistic competition
• Profit maximization:
▪ in the short run
▪ in the long run
• Less market power due to many 
substitutes—more elastic demand 
curve compared with monopoly
• Allocative inefficiency (market failure)
• Less inefficiency, more product varietyAO3, AO4 Diagram: monopolistically 
competitive firm showing:
• abnormal profit
• normal profit
• losses
Diagram: monopolistic 
competition (with a more 
elastic demand curve 
compared to a monopoly)
Advantages of large firms having significant 
market power, including:
• Economies of scale including natural 
monopolies
• Abnormal profits may finance 
investments in research and 
development (R&D), hence innovationAO3
Risks in markets dominated by one or a few 
very large firms
• Risks in terms of output, price, 
consumer choice AO3
Government intervention in response to 
abuse of significant market power
• Legislation and regulation
• Government ownership
• FinesAO3
2.12 The market’s inability to achieve 
equity (HL only)Depth of teaching Diagrams and calculations
• Workings of free market economy may 
result in an unequal distribution of 
income and wealthAO2 Diagram: showing the 
circular flow model to 
illustrate why the free 
market results in 
inequalities
Inquiry—possible areas to explore (not an exhaustive list)
• The impact of a price floor or price ceiling in a chosen market.
• The impact of a government policy to correct market failure resulting from externalities.
• How different communities approach the managing of a common access resource.
• The impact of a price war or of price fixing on stakeholders of a selected industry.
• The risks of increasing monopoly power and abuse in a selected industry (for example, technology).Unit 2: Microeconomics
33 Economics guide
• Examples of government intervention in response to abuse of market power.
• How government intervention to correct a market failure (other than externalities) affects different 
stakeholders.
• How a country’s economy could thrive without depending on the overuse of finite resources and still 
meet people’s needs.
Theory of knowledge questions
• What knowledge criteria should government policy makers use to make choices between alternative 
policies?
• The idea of environmental sustainability suggests that people should avoid destroying resources 
today so as not to penalize future generations. Is it possible to have knowledge of the future?
• Microeconomic theory is based on the assumption of rational consumer choice and rational self-
interest. Yet the principle of collective self-governance suggests that people also behave 
cooperatively. What assumptions do economists make about the roles of reason and emotion? Are 
these assumptions justified?
• How can we know when a problem is sufficiently large to justify government intervention?Unit 2: Microeconomics
34 Economics guide
Recommended time for teaching and inquiry: SL—40 hours, HL—75 hours 
Real-world issue 1
Why does economic activity vary over time and why does this 
matter?
Conceptual understandings
• Change  in the conditions of the demand and supply sides of the economy cause economic activity to 
vary over time.
• Fluctuations in economic activity impact the economic  well-being  of individuals and societies.
• Different schools of macroeconomic thought identify different causes and offer different solutions for 
macroeconomic problems.
Key  concepts:  scarcity,  choice,  efficiency,  equity,  economic  well-being,  sustainability,  change, 
interdependence, intervention.
Note:  All content  is SL and  HL unless  otherwise  stated.  HL only  topics,  diagrams  and  calculations  are in 
bold .
3.1 Measuring economic activity and illustrating its variations Depth of 
teachingDiagrams and 
calculations
National income accounting as a measure of economic activity AO2, AO4 Diagram: circular 
flow of income 
model showing 
the interactions 
between decision 
makers, leakages 
and injectionsEquivalence of the income, output and expenditure approaches 
to national income accounting, with reference to the circular flow 
modelAO2, AO4
[Nominal] Gross domestic product (GDP) as a measure of national 
outputAO2, AO4 Calculation: 
[nominal] GDP 
from sets of 
national income 
data, using the 
expenditure 
approach
[Nominal] Gross national income (GNI) as a measure of national 
outputAO2, AO4 Calculation: 
[nominal] GNI 
from data
Real GDP and real GNI AO2, AO4 Calculation: real 
GDP and real GNI, 
using a price 
deflator
Syllabus
Unit 3: Macroeconomics
35 Economics guide
3.1 Measuring economic activity and illustrating its variations Depth of 
teachingDiagrams and 
calculations
Real GDP/GNI per person (per capita)
Real GDP/GNI per person (per capita) at purchasing power parity 
(PPP)AO2, AO4 Calculation: real 
GDP per capita 
and real GNI per 
capita
Business cycle: short-term fluctuations and long-term growth 
trend (potential output)AO2, AO4 Diagram: business 
cycle showing 
short-term 
fluctuations and 
long-term growth 
trend (potential 
output)
Appropriateness of using GDP or GNI statistics to measure 
economic well-being—use of national income statistics for 
making:
• comparisons over time
• comparisons between countriesAO3
Alternative measures of well-being
• OECD Better Life Index
• Happiness Index
• Happy Planet IndexAO2
3.2 Variations in economic activity—aggregate demand 
and aggregate supplyDepth of 
teachingDiagrams and 
calculations
Aggregate demand (AD)
• Aggregate demand curveAO2, AO4 Diagram: AD curve
Components of AD: consumption (C) + investment (I) + 
government spending (G) + net exports (total exports [X] - 
total imports [M])AO2
Determinants of AD components
• C: consumer confidence, interest rates, wealth, income 
taxes, level of household indebtedness, expectations of 
future price level
• I: interest rates, business confidence, technology, 
business taxes, level of corporate indebtedness
• G: political and economic priorities
• X - M: income of trading partners, exchange rates, 
trade policiesAO2
Shifts of the AD curve caused by changes in determinants AO2, AO4 Diagram: shifts of the AD 
curve
Short-run aggregate supply (SRAS) curve and determinants 
of the SRAS curve
• costs of factors of production
• indirect taxesAO2, AO4 Diagram: SRAS curveUnit 3: Macroeconomics
36 Economics guide
3.2 Variations in economic activity—aggregate demand 
and aggregate supplyDepth of 
teachingDiagrams and 
calculations
Shifts of the SRAS curve AO2, AO4 Diagram: shifts of the 
SRAS curve
Alternative views of aggregate supply (AS)
• Monetarist/new classical view of the long-run 
aggregate supply (LRAS) curve
• Keynesian view of the AS curve
• Inflationary and deflationary/recessionary gapsAO2, AO4 Diagram: alternative 
views of the AS curve
Shifts of the AS curve over the long-run (monetarist/new 
classical LRAS) or over the long term (Keynesian AS)
• Changes in the quantity and/or quality of factors of 
production
• Improvements in technology
• Increases in efficiency
• Changes in institutionsAO2, AO4 Diagram: shifts of the 
LRAS or Keynesian AS
• Macroeconomic equilibrium
• Short-run equilibrium
• Equilibrium in the monetarist/new classical model
▪ Determination of long-run equilibrium at full 
employment level of output (potential output)
▪ Automatic adjustment to full employment 
equilibrium
▪ Unemployment at full employment equilibrium is 
equal to the natural rate of unemployment
• Equilibrium in the Keynesian model
▪ Persistence of deflationary/recessionary gaps: 
equilibrium level of output might not equal the 
full employment level of outputAO2, AO4 Diagram: 
macroeconomic 
equilibrium in both the 
short run and long run
Assumptions and implications of the monetarist/new 
classical and Keynesian modelsAO3
3.3 Macroeconomic objectives Depth of 
teachingDiagrams and 
calculations
Economic growth
• Short-term growth
▪ Actual growth in the PPC model
▪ Role of AD in the AD/AS model
• Long-term growth
▪ Shifts of the PPC (growth in production 
possibilities)
▪ Role of LRAS in the AD/AS model
• Measurement of economic growthAO2, AO4 Diagram: PPC model 
showing actual growth 
and growth in 
production possibilities
Diagram: AD increases 
showing increases in real 
output
Diagram: LRAS increases 
showing increases in full 
employment output
Calculation: the rate of 
economic growth from a 
set of data• Consequences of economic growth, including:
▪ impact on living standardsAO3Unit 3: Macroeconomics
37 Economics guide
3.3 Macroeconomic objectives Depth of 
teachingDiagrams and 
calculations
▪ impact on the environment
▪ impact on income distribution
Low unemployment
• Measurement of unemployment and the unemployment 
rate
• Difficulties of measuring unemployment
• Causes of unemployment—cyclical (demand deficient), 
structural, seasonal, frictional
• Natural rate of unemployment—sum of the structural, 
seasonal, frictional unemployment
• Costs of unemployment—personal costs, social costs, 
economic costsAO2, AO4 Calculation: the 
unemployment rate from 
a set of data
Diagram: minimum wage 
to show unemployment
Diagram: showing a fall 
in the demand for labour 
for a particular market or 
geographical area
Diagram: deflationary 
gap to show cyclical 
unemployment
Low and stable rate of inflation
• Measuring the inflation rate, using consumer price index 
(CPI) data
• The limitations of the CPI in measuring inflation
• Causes of inflation—demand-pull and cost-push
• Costs of a high inflation rate—uncertainty, redistributive 
effects, effects on saving, damage to export 
competitiveness, impact on economic growth, inefficient 
resource allocation
• Causes of deflation—changes in AD or SRAS
• Disinflation and deflation
• Costs of deflation—uncertainty, redistributive effects, 
deferred consumption, association with high levels of 
cyclical unemployment and bankruptcies, increase in the 
real value of debt, inefficient resource allocation, policy 
ineffectivenessAO2, AO4 Calculation (HL only): a 
weighted price index, 
using a set of data 
provided
Calculation: the inflation 
rate from a set of data 
using quantities 
purchased as weights in 
the CPI
Diagram: demand-pull 
inflation
Diagram: cost-push 
inflation
Diagrams: deflation
Relative costs of unemployment versus inflation AO3
Sustainable level of government (national) debt (HL only)
• Measurement of government (national) debt as a 
percentage of GDP
• Relationship between a budget deficit and 
government (national) debt
• Costs of a high government (national) debt—debt 
servicing costs, credit ratings, impacts on future 
taxation and government spendingAO2
• Potential conflict between macroeconomic objectives
▪ Low unemployment and low inflation
▪ Trade-off between unemployment and inflation 
(HL only)
▪ Short-run and long-run Phillips curve AO3
AO3, AO4 Diagram (HL only): 
AD/AS curves
Diagram (HL only): 
Phillips curve showing Unit 3: Macroeconomics
38 Economics guide
3.3 Macroeconomic objectives Depth of 
teachingDiagrams and 
calculations
the short-run and long-
run relationship 
between inflation and 
unemployment
• High economic growth and low inflation
• High economic growth and environmental sustainability
• High economic growth and equity in income distributionAO3
3.4 Economics of inequality and poverty Depth of teaching Diagrams, calculations and 
construction
Relationship between equality and equity AO2
The meaning of economic inequality
• Unequal distribution of income
• Unequal distribution of wealthAO2
Measuring economic inequality
• Lorenz curve and Gini coefficient (index)AO2, AO4 Diagram: Lorenz curve 
showing the distribution of 
income and possible 
changes in the distribution of 
income
Construction (HL only): a 
Lorenz curve from income 
quintile data
Meaning of poverty
• Difference between absolute and relative 
povertyAO2
Measuring poverty
• Single indicators including:
▪ international poverty lines
▪ minimum income standards
• Composite indicators including the 
Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI)AO2
Difficulties in measuring poverty AO2
Causes of economic inequality and poverty, 
including:
• inequality of opportunity
• different levels of resource ownership
• different levels of human capital
• discrimination (gender, race and others)
• unequal status and power
• government tax and benefits policies
• globalisation and technological change
• market-based supply side policiesAO2
The impact of income and wealth inequality on: AO3Unit 3: Macroeconomics
39 Economics guide
3.4 Economics of inequality and poverty Depth of teaching Diagrams, calculations and 
construction
• economic growth
• standards of living
• social stability
The role of taxation in reducing poverty, income and 
wealth inequalities
• Progressive, regressive and proportional taxes
▪ Average and marginal tax rates
• Direct taxes
▪ Personal income
▪ Corporate income
▪ Wealth
• Indirect taxesAO3, AO4 Calculation (HL only): given 
the indirect tax rate, the 
amount of indirect tax paid 
from a given level/ amount 
of expenditure 
Calculation (HL only): total 
tax and average tax rates 
from a set of data
Further policies to reduce poverty, income and 
wealth inequality, including:
• policies to reduce inequalities of opportunities/
investment in human capital
• transfer payments
• targeted spending on goods and services
• universal basic income
• policies to reduce discrimination
• minimum wagesAO3
Inquiry—possible areas to explore (not an exhaustive list)
• How the government of a chosen country has responded to business cycle fluctuations.
• The costs of unemployment or inflation on different stakeholders in a chosen country.
• The successes/failures in meeting government objectives, based on data collected for a variety of 
countries over a given period of time.
• The successes/failures of measures adopted to reduce income and/or wealth inequality, for a chosen 
country.
• How key stakeholders (such as businesses and governments) can continue to meet people’s needs 
with limited resources.
• The cause of trade-offs between economic growth and sustainable development and how these might 
be addressed.
• What sustainable economic growth might look like and how it might be achieved.
Theory of knowledge questions
• To what extent do political beliefs and ideologies influence a person’s preference for one school of 
macroeconomic thought over another?
• It is often the case that two or more economists, observing an identical set of macroeconomic data 
(national income accounts, inflation, unemployment), arrive at very different explanations of events. 
How can this be accounted for? Could this occur in a natural science?
• There are often conflicts between important macroeconomic objectives. What kind of knowledge 
criteria should policy makers use to make decisions in favour of pursuing one objective over another?Unit 3: Macroeconomics
40 Economics guide
• Using the concepts of natural rate of unemployment and full employment output, how may language 
affect perceptions about economic events or situations?
Real-world issue 2
How do governments manage their economy and how effective are 
their policies?
Conceptual understandings
• Government intervention  attempts to achieve macroeconomic objectives through a choice  of 
policies.
• Political, economic, social and environmental factors are interdependent  and will influence the 
effectiveness of government policies.
Key  concepts:  scarcity,  choice,  efficiency,  equity,  economic  well-being,  sustainability,  change, 
interdependence, intervention.
Note:  All content  is SL and  HL unless  otherwise  stated.  HL only  topics,  diagrams  and  calculations  are in 
bold .
3.5 Demand management (demand-side policies)—
monetary policyDepth of 
teachingDiagrams and 
calculations
Monetary policy
• Control of money supply and interest rates by the central 
bankAO1
Goals of monetary policy
• Low and stable rate of inflation
▪ Inflation targeting
• Low unemployment
• Reduce business cycle fluctuations
• Promote a stable economic environment for long-term 
growth
• External balanceAO2
The process of money creation by commercial banks (HL 
only)AO2
Tools of monetary policy (HL only)
• Open market operations
• Minimum reserve requirements
• Changes in the central bank minimum lending rate 
(base rate/discount rate/refinancing rate changes)
• Quantitative easingAO2
Demand and supply of money—determination of 
equilibrium interest rates (HL only)AO2, AO4 Diagram (HL only): 
showing the 
determination of 
equilibrium interest 
ratesUnit 3: Macroeconomics
41 Economics guide
3.5 Demand management (demand-side policies)—
monetary policyDepth of 
teachingDiagrams and 
calculations
Real versus nominal interest rates AO2 Calculation: real interest 
rates from given data
Expansionary and contractionary monetary policies to close 
deflationary/recessionary and inflationary gapsAO3, AO4 Diagram: AD/AS curves 
showing expansionary 
and contractionary 
monetary policy
Effectiveness of monetary policy
• Constraints on monetary policy, including:
▪ limited scope of reducing interest rates, when close 
to zero
▪ low consumer and business confidence
• Strengths of monetary policy, including:
▪ incremental, flexible and easily reversible
▪ short time lags
• Strengths and limitations in promoting growth, low 
unemployment, and low and stable rate of inflationAO3
3.6 Demand management—fiscal policy Depth of 
teachingDiagrams and 
calculations
Fiscal policy
• Sources of revenue—direct and indirect taxation, sale of 
goods and services from state-owned enterprises, sale of 
government assets
• Expenditures—current expenditures, capital expenditures, 
transfer paymentsAO2
Goals of fiscal policy
• Low and stable inflation
• Low unemployment
• Promote a stable economic environment for long-term 
growth
• Reduce business cycle fluctuations
• Equitable distribution of income
• External balanceAO2
Expansionary and contractionary fiscal policies in order to close 
deflationary/recessionary and inflationary gapsAO3, AO4 Diagram: AD/AS curves 
showing expansionary 
and contractionary 
fiscal policy for both 
Keynesian and 
monetarist/new 
classical schools of 
thought
Keynesian multiplier (HL only)
• 1
1 − MPC orAO2, AO4 Calculation (HL only): 
Keynesian multiplier
Calculation (HL only): 
the effect on GDP of a Unit 3: Macroeconomics
42 Economics guide
3.6 Demand management—fiscal policy Depth of 
teachingDiagrams and 
calculations
• 1
MPS + MPT + MPM
MPC— marginal propensity to consume 
MPS—marginal propensity to save
MPT—marginal propensity to tax
MPM—marginal propensity to importchange in an injection 
in investment, 
government spending 
or exports, using the 
Keynesian multiplier
Effectiveness of fiscal policy
• Constraints on fiscal policy, including:
▪ political pressure
▪ time lags
▪ sustainable debt
▪ crowding out (HL only)AO3
AO4 Diagram (HL only): 
showing the 
crowding-out effect
• Strengths of fiscal policy, including:
▪ targeting of specific economic sectors
▪ government spending effective in deep recession
• Automatic stabilizers: progressive taxes, 
unemployment benefits (HL only)
• Strengths and limitations in promoting growth, low 
unemployment, and low and stable rate of inflationAO3
3.7 Supply-side policies Depth of 
teachingDiagrams and 
calculations
Goals of supply-side policies
• Long-term growth by increasing the economy’s productive 
capacity
• Improving competition and efficiency
• Reducing labour costs and unemployment through labour 
market flexibility
• Reducing inflation to improve international 
competitiveness
• Increasing firms’ incentives to invest in innovation by 
reducing costsAO2
Market-based policies, including:
• policies to encourage competition, such as:
▪ deregulation
▪ privatization
▪ trade liberalization
▪ anti-monopoly regulation
• labour market policies, such as:
▪ reducing the power of labour unions
▪ reducing unemployment benefits
▪ abolishing minimum wagesAO2, AO4 Diagram: AD/AS model 
and LRAS curve to show 
the effect of supply-side 
policies
Diagram: showing 
minimum wageUnit 3: Macroeconomics
43 Economics guide
3.7 Supply-side policies Depth of 
teachingDiagrams and 
calculations
• incentive-related policies, such as:
▪ personal income tax cuts
▪ cuts in business tax and capital gains tax
Interventionist policies, including:
• education, training
• improving quality, quantity and access to health care
• research and development
• provision of infrastructure
• industrial policiesAO2
Demand-side effects of supply-side policies AO2
Supply-side effects of fiscal policies AO2
Effectiveness of supply-side policies
• Constraints on supply-side policies
▪ Market based—equity issues, time lags, vested 
interests, environmental impact
▪ Interventionist—costs, time lags
• Strengths of supply-side policies
▪ Market based—improved resource allocation, no 
burden on government budget
▪ Interventionist—direct support of sectors important 
for growth
• Strengths and limitations in promoting growth, low 
unemployment, and low and stable rate of inflationAO3
Inquiry—possible areas to explore (not an exhaustive list)
• The successes and constraints of fiscal policy in achieving low unemployment as a macroeconomic 
objective, for a chosen country.
• The economic and social impacts on different stakeholders of monetary policy, for a chosen country.
Theory of knowledge questions
• Can political beliefs and ideologies affect a person’s preference for one particular policy over another?
• When evaluating economic policies, how important are cultural differences?
• How much statistical data should economists use in determining the reliability of any economic policy 
result?
• Economists and those who use economic theory may disagree with each other about the outcome of 
economic policies. On what basis might we make judgments about their relative conclusions?Unit 3: Macroeconomics
44 Economics guide
Recommended time for teaching and inquiry: SL—45 hours, HL—65 hours 
Real-world issue 1
Who are the winners and losers of the integration of the world’s 
economies?
Conceptual understandings
• The increased interdependence  of economies has benefits and costs.
• Increased economic integration may result in efficiency , welfare gains and improvements in 
economic well-being  but the benefits may not result in equity .
Key  concepts:  scarcity,  choice,  efficiency,  equity,  economic  well-being,  sustainability,  change, 
interdependence, intervention.
Note:  All content  is SL and  HL unless  otherwise  stated.  HL only  topics,  diagrams  and  calculations  are in 
bold .
4.1 Benefits of international trade Depth of 
teachingDiagrams and calculations
Benefits of international trade, including:
• increased competition
• lower prices
• greater choice
• acquisition of resources
• more foreign exchange earnings
• access to larger markets
• economies of scale
• more efficient resource allocation
• more efficient productionAO2, AO4 Diagram: free trade illustrating 
exports when world price is 
above domestic price
Diagram: free trade illustrating 
imports when world price is 
below domestic price
Calculation (HL only): from a 
diagram, the quantity of 
exports, quantity of imports, 
import expenditure, export 
revenue
Absolute and comparative advantage (HL only)
• Gains from trade
• Sources of comparative advantage
• Opportunity costsAO2, AO4 Diagram (HL only): linear PPC 
showing differing 
opportunity costs and the 
potential gains from 
specialization and trade as a 
result of comparative 
advantage 
Calculation (HL only): 
opportunity costs from a set 
of data in order to identify 
comparative advantage
Syllabus
Unit 4: The global economy
45 Economics guide
4.1 Benefits of international trade Depth of 
teachingDiagrams and calculations
Limitations of the theory of comparative advantage 
(HL only)AO3
4.2 Types of trade protection Depth of 
teachingDiagrams and calculations
Tariffs
• Effects on markets and stakeholdersAO3, AO4 Diagram: showing the effect of 
a tariff on price, production, 
consumption, expenditures, 
revenues, welfare
AO4 (HL only) Calculation (HL only): from a 
diagram, the effects on 
stakeholders of tariffs
Quota
• Effects on markets and stakeholdersAO3, AO4 Diagram: showing the effect of 
a quota on price, production, 
consumption, expenditures, 
revenues, welfare
AO4 (HL only) Calculation (HL only): from a 
diagram, the effects on 
stakeholders of quotas
Subsidy/export subsidy
• Effects on markets and stakeholdersAO3, AO4 Diagram: showing the effect of 
a subsidy on price, production, 
consumption, expenditures, 
revenues, welfare
AO4 (HL only) Calculation (HL only): from a 
diagram, the effects on 
stakeholders of subsidies
Administrative barriers
• Standards and regulationsAO3
4.3 Arguments for and against trade control/
protectionDepth of 
teachingDiagrams and calculations
Arguments for trade protection/advantages of trade 
protection, including:
• protection of infant (sunrise) industries
• national security
• health and safety
• environmental standards
• anti-dumping
• unfair competition
• balance of payments correction
• government revenue
• protection of jobs
• Economically least developed country (ELDC) 
diversificationAO2Unit 4: The global economy
46 Economics guide
4.3 Arguments for and against trade control/
protectionDepth of 
teachingDiagrams and calculations
Arguments against trade protection/disadvantages of 
trade protection, including:
• misallocation of resources
• retaliation
• increased costs
• higher prices
• less choice
• domestic firms lack incentive to become more 
efficient
• reduced export competitivenessAO2
Free trade versus trade protection AO3
4.4 Economic integration Depth of 
teachingDiagrams and calculations
Preferential trade agreements
• Bilateral
• Regional
• Multilateral (the World Trade Organization)AO1
Trading blocs
• Free trade areas/agreements
• Customs unions
• Common marketsAO2
Advantages and disadvantages of trading blocs
Advantages, including:
• trade creation (HL only)
• greater access to markets offer potential for 
economies of scale
• with freedom of labour, there are greater 
employment opportunities
• membership in a trading bloc may allow for 
stronger bargaining power in multilateral 
negotiations
• greater political stability and cooperation
Disadvantages, including:
• trade diversion (HL only)
• loss of sovereignty
• challenge to multilateral trading negotiationsAO3
Monetary union AO2
Advantages and disadvantages of monetary union 
(HL only)AO3
The World Trade Organization (WTO)
• Objectives and functionsAO2Unit 4: The global economy
47 Economics guide
4.4 Economic integration Depth of 
teachingDiagrams and calculations
• Factors affecting the influence of the WTO, 
including:
▪ difficulties of reaching agreement on services/
primary products
▪ unequal bargaining power of members
4.5 Exchange rates Depth of 
teachingDiagrams and 
calculations
Floating exchange rates
• Determination
▪ Depreciation and appreciation of a currencyAO2, AO4 Diagram: showing the 
exchange rate 
determination and 
changes in equilibrium in 
a floating exchange rate 
system
Calculation: using 
exchange rates, the price 
of a good in different 
currencies
Changes in demand and supply for a currency—factors 
including:
• foreign demand for exports
• domestic demand for imports 
•  inward/outward foreign direct investment
• inward/outward portfolio investment
• remittances
• speculation
• relative inflation rates
• relative interest rates
• relative growth rates
• central bank interventionAO2, AO4 Calculation: changes in the 
value of a currency from a 
set of data
Consequences of changes in the exchange rate on 
economic indicators, such as:
• the inflation rate
• economic growth
• unemployment
• the current account balance
• living standardsAO3, AO4 Diagram: AD/AS curves to 
show potential 
consequences of changes 
in the exchange rate on 
the economy
Fixed exchange rate
• Devaluation and revaluation of a currency
• How fixed exchange rates are maintainedAO2, AO4 Diagram: showing how a 
fixed exchange rate is 
maintained
Managed exchange rates
• Overvalued currencies
• Undervalued currenciesAO2, AO4 Diagram: showing the 
exchange rate 
determination and 
changes in equilibrium in Unit 4: The global economy
48 Economics guide
4.5 Exchange rates Depth of 
teachingDiagrams and 
calculations
a managed exchange rate 
system
Fixed versus floating exchange rate systems (HL only) AO3
4.6 Balance of payments Depth of 
teachingDiagrams and 
calculations
Balance of payments
• Credit and debit items
• Surplus or deficit on an accountAO1, AO4 Calculation: elements of 
the balance of payments 
from a set of data
Components of the balance of payments
• Current account
▪ Balance of trade in goods
▪ Balance of trade in services
▪ Income
▪ Current transfers
• Capital Account
▪ Capital transfers
▪ Transaction in non-produced, non-financial 
assets
• Financial account
▪ Foreign direct investment (FDI)
▪ Portfolio investment
▪ Reserve assets
▪ Official borrowingAO2
Interdependence between the accounts
• Zero balance in the balance of payments
• Credits matched by debits
• Deficits matched by surplusesAO2
Relationship between the current account and the 
exchange rate (HL only)AO2, AO4 Diagram (HL only): on 
exchange rate showing 
the relationship between 
the current account 
balance and the 
exchange rate
Relationship between the financial account and the 
exchange rate (HL only)AO2
Implications of a persistent current account deficit in 
terms of: (HL only)
• exchange rates
• interest rates
• foreign ownership of domestic assets
• debt
• credit ratingsAO3Unit 4: The global economy
49 Economics guide
4.6 Balance of payments Depth of 
teachingDiagrams and 
calculations
• demand management
• economic growth
Methods to correct a persistent current account deficit 
(HL only)
• Expenditure switching
• Expenditure reducing
• Supply-side policiesAO2
Effectiveness of measures to correct a persistent 
current account deficit (HL only).AO3
The Marshall-Lerner condition and the J-curve effect 
(HL only)AO2, AO4 Diagram (HL only): J- 
curve with reference to 
the Marshall Lerner 
condition
Implications of a persistent current account surplus in 
terms of (HL only) :
• domestic consumption and investment
• exchange rates
• inflation
• employment
• export competitivenessAO3
Inquiry—possible areas to explore (not an exhaustive list)
• The impacts of changes in the exchange rate on different stakeholders and the economy, for a chosen 
country.
• Why a government chooses to manage the exchange rate, for a chosen country.
• Methods a government uses to manage its exchange rate and why, for a chosen country.
• The patterns of current account deficits/current account surpluses for different countries.
Theory of knowledge questions
• Free trade is advocated on the grounds that it leads to greater efficiency. Yet it results in both winners 
and losers. Do economists have a moral responsibility toward the losers when they advocate free 
trade?
• To what extent would increased economic integration ever be considered undesirable?
• Is it ethically sound for economically developed countries to demand that less developed countries 
remove their trade barriers in the interests of free trade when they continue to provide income 
support to their farmers? Can one country know what is right for another to do?
• To what extent does possession of knowledge carry with it an ethical responsibility?
Real-world issue 2
Why is economic development uneven?
Conceptual understandings
• Perceptions of the meanings of development and equity  change over time and vary across cultures.Unit 4: The global economy
50 Economics guide
Conceptual understandings
• Governments and other economic agents may intervene in an attempt to promote  economic well-
being  and equity  in societies.
• The pursuit of sustainability  is subject to various constraints.
• Effective strategies should take account of the relevant social, economic, and political context.
Key  concepts:  scarcity,  choice,  efficiency,  equity,  economic  well-being,  sustainability,  change, 
interdependence, intervention.
Note:  All content  is SL and  HL unless  otherwise  stated.  HL only  topics,  diagrams  and  calculations  are in 
bold .
4.7 Sustainable development Depth of teaching Diagrams and 
calculations
The meaning of sustainable development AO2
Sustainable Development Goals AO2
Relationship between sustainability and poverty (HL only) AO2 
4.8 Measuring development Depth of teaching Diagrams and 
calculations
The multidimensional nature of economic development AO2
Single indicators
• GDP/GNI per person (per capita) at PPP
• Health and education indicators
• Economic/social inequality indicators
• Energy indicators
• Environmental indicatorsAO2
Composite indicators
• Human Development Index (HDI)
• Gender Inequality Index (GII)
• Inequality adjusted Human Development Index (IHDI)
• Happy Planet IndexAO2
Strengths and limitations of approaches to measuring 
economic developmentAO3
Possible relationship between economic growth and economic 
developmentAO3
4.9 Barriers to economic growth and/or economic 
developmentDepth of 
teachingDiagrams and 
calculations
Poverty traps/poverty cycles AO2, AO4 Diagram: a poverty cycle 
showing any linked 
combination of factors that 
perpetuate poverty
Economic barriers
• Rising economic inequalityAO2Unit 4: The global economy
51 Economics guide
4.9 Barriers to economic growth and/or economic 
developmentDepth of 
teachingDiagrams and 
calculations
• Lack of access to infrastructure and appropriate 
technology
• Low levels of human capital—lack of access to 
healthcare and education
• Dependence on primary sector production
• Lack of access to international markets
• Informal economy
• Capital flight
• Indebtedness
• Geography including landlocked countries
• Tropical climates and endemic diseases
Political and social barriers
• Weak institutional framework
▪ Legal system
▪ Ineffective taxation structures
▪ Banking system
▪ Property rights
• Gender inequality
• Lack of good governance/corruption
• Unequal political power and statusAO2
Significance of different barriers to economic growth and/or 
economic developmentAO3
4.10 Economic growth and/or economic development 
strategiesDepth of 
teachingDiagrams and calculations
Strategies to promote economic growth and/or economic 
development
• Trade strategies
▪ Import substitution
▪ Export promotion
▪ Economic integration
• Diversification
• Social enterprise
• Market-based policies
▪ Trade liberalization
▪ Privatization
▪ Deregulation
• Interventionist policies
▪ Redistribution policies including tax policies, 
transfer payments and minimum wages
• Provision of merit goods
▪ Education programsAO2, AO4 Diagrams: in this section 
students are expected to 
draw from the diagrams 
used in the other sectionsUnit 4: The global economy
52 Economics guide
4.10 Economic growth and/or economic development 
strategiesDepth of 
teachingDiagrams and calculations
▪ Health programs
▪ Infrastructure including energy, transport, 
telecommunications, clean water and 
sanitation
• Inward foreign direct investment
• Foreign aid
▪ Humanitarian aid/development aid
▪ Debt relief
▪ Official Development Assistance (ODA)
▪ Non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
• Multilateral development assistance
▪ The World Bank
▪ International Monetary Fund
• Institutional change
▪ Improved access to banking, including 
microfinance and mobile banking
▪ Increasing women’s empowerment
▪ Reducing corruption
▪ Property rights
▪ Land rights
Strengths and limitations of strategies for promoting 
economic growth and economic developmentAO3
Strengths and limitations of government intervention 
versus market-oriented approaches to achieving 
economic growth and economic developmentAO3
Progress toward meeting selected Sustainable 
Development Goals in the context of two or more 
countriesAO3
Inquiry—possible areas to explore (not an exhaustive list)
• The patterns of economic development for countries in a region, using selected data.
• The relationship between economic growth and development, for chosen countries.
• The impact of a poverty reduction strategy, for a chosen country.
• The impacts of FDI in a chosen country on economic growth and development.
• The impacts of a microfinance project/debt relief/health programme/education programme in a 
chosen country/region.
Theory of knowledge questions
• Economic development draws from a set of values set out by Denis Goulet in 1971 (life sustenance, 
self-esteem and freedom). Does this make the pursuit of economic development unscientific?
• What knowledge questions might be encountered in constructing a composite indicator to measure 
development?
• Are the values on which development is based universal or do they depend on culture? Are there 
some goals among the Sustainable Development Goals that may not be acceptable to some cultures?Unit 4: The global economy
53 Economics guide
• Do economically more developed nations have a moral obligation to assist economically less 
developed nations, such as through foreign aid or World Bank lending? What criteria should 
economists use to make such judgments?Unit 4: The global economy
54 Economics guide
General
Assessment  is an integral  part  of teaching  and  learning.  The most  important  aims  of assessment  in the 
Diploma  Programme  are that  it should  support  curricular  goals  and  encourage  appropriate  student 
learning.  Both  external  and  internal  assessments  are used  in the Diploma  Programme.  IB examiners  mark 
work produced for external assessment, while work produced for internal assessment is marked by teachers 
and externally moderated by the IB.
There are two types of assessment identified by the IB.
• Formative assessment informs both teaching and learning. It is concerned with providing accurate and 
helpful feedback to students and teachers on the kind of learning taking place and the nature of 
students’ strengths and weaknesses in order to help develop students’ understanding and capabilities. 
Formative assessment can also help to improve teaching quality, as it can provide information to 
monitor progress towards meeting the course aims and objectives.
• Summative assessment gives an overview of previous learning and is concerned with measuring 
student achievement at, or towards the end of the course of study.
A comprehensive  assessment  plan  is viewed  as being  integral  with  teaching,  learning  and  course 
organization. For further information, see the IB Programme standards and practices  document.
The approach  to assessment  used  by the IB is criterion-related,  not norm-referenced.  This  approach  to 
assessment  judges  students’  work  by their  performance  in relation  to identified  levels  of attainment,  and 
not in relation  to the work  of other  students.  For further  information  on assessment  within  the Diploma 
Programme  please  refer  to the publication  Assessment:  principles  and  practice—Quality  assessments  in a 
digital age .
To support teachers in the planning, delivery and assessment of the Diploma Programme courses, a variety 
of resources can be found on the programme resource centre or purchased from the IB store (store.ibo.org). 
Additional  publications  such  as specimen  papers  and  markschemes,  TSMs,  subject  reports  and  grade 
descriptors  can also  be found  on the programme  resource  centre.  Past  examination  papers  as well  as 
markschemes can be purchased from the IB store.
Methods of assessment
The IB uses several methods to assess work produced by students.
Assessment criteria
Assessment  criteria  are used  when  the assessment  task  is open-ended.  Each  criterion  concentrates  on a 
particular  skill that  students  are expected  to demonstrate.  An assessment  objective  describes  what 
students should be able to do, and assessment criteria describe how well they should be able to do it. Using 
assessment criteria allows discrimination between different answers and encourages a variety of responses. 
Each  criterion  comprises  a set of hierarchically  ordered  level  descriptors.  Each  level  descriptor  is worth  one 
or more marks. Each criterion is applied independently using a best-fit model. The maximum marks for each 
criterion may differ according to the criterion’s importance. The marks awarded for each criterion are added 
together to give the total mark for the piece of work.
Markbands
Markbands  are a comprehensive  statement  of expected  performance  against  which  responses  are judged. 
They represent a single holistic criterion divided into level descriptors. Each level descriptor corresponds to 
Assessment
Assessment in the Diploma Programme
55 Economics guide
a range  of marks  to differentiate  student  performance.  A best-fit  approach  is used  to ascertain  which 
particular mark to use from the possible range for each level descriptor.
Analytic markschemes
Analytic  markschemes  are prepared  for those  examination  questions  that  expect  a particular  kind  of 
response and/or a given final answer from students. They give detailed instructions to examiners on how to 
break down the total mark for each question for different parts of the response.
Marking notes
For some  assessment  components  marked  using  assessment  criteria,  marking  notes  are provided.  Marking 
notes give guidance on how to apply assessment criteria to the particular requirements of a question.
Inclusive access arrangements
Inclusive  access  arrangements  are available  for candidates  with  access  requirements.  Standard  assessment 
conditions may put candidates with assessment access requirements at a disadvantage by preventing them 
from  demonstrating  their  attainment  level.  Inclusive  access  arrangements  enable  candidates  to 
demonstrate their ability under assessment conditions that are as fair as possible.
The IB document  Access  and  inclusion  policy  (updated  2018)  provides  details  on all the inclusive  access 
arrangements  available  to candidates.  The IB document  Learning  diversity  in IB programmes:  Removing 
barriers  to learning  (updated  2019)  outlines  the position  of the IB with  regard  to candidates  with  diverse 
learning  needs  in the IB programmes.  For candidates  affected  by adverse  circumstances,  the IB documents 
General  regulations:  Diploma  Programme  (September  2016)  and  the Diploma  Programme  Assessment 
procedures  (updated annually) provide details on access consideration.
Responsibilities of the school
The school  is required  to ensure  that  equal  access  arrangements  and  reasonable  adjustments  are provided 
to candidates  with  learning  support  requirements  that  are in line with  the IB documents  Access  and 
inclusion policy  and Learning diversity and inclusion in the IB programmes.Assessment in the Diploma Programme
56 Economics guide
First assessment 2022
Assessment component Weighting
External assessment (3 hours) 70%
Paper 1  (1 hour and 15 minutes)
An extended response paper (25 marks)
Assessment objectives: AO1, AO2, AO3, AO4
Syllabus content (excluding HL extension material)
Students answer one question from a choice of three. (25 marks)30%
Paper 2  (1 hour and 45 minutes)
A data response paper (40 marks)
Assessment objectives: AO1, AO2, AO3, AO4
Syllabus content (excluding HL extension material). Includes some quantitative questions.
Students answer one question from a choice of two. (40 marks)40%
Internal assessment  (20 teaching hours)
This component is internally assessed by the teacher and externally moderated by the IB at 
the end of the course.
Students produce a portfolio of three commentaries, based on different units of the syllabus 
(excluding the introductory unit) and on published extracts from the news media. Each of 
the three commentaries should use a different key concept as a lens through which to 
analyse the published extracts.
Maximum 800 words for each commentary (45 marks)30%
Assessment
Assessment outline—SL
57 Economics guide
First assessment 2022
Assessment component Weighting
External assessment  (4 hours and 45 minutes) 80%
Paper 1  (1 hour and 15 minutes)
An extended response paper (25 marks)
Assessment objectives: AO1, AO2, AO3, AO4
Syllabus content including HL extension material.
Students answer one question from a choice of three. (25 marks)20%
Paper 2 (1 hour and 45 minutes)
A data response paper (40 marks)
Assessment objectives: AO1, AO2, AO3, AO4
Syllabus content including HL extension material. Includes some quantitative questions.
Students answer one question from a choice of two. (40 marks)30%
Paper 3  (1 hour and 45 minutes)
A policy paper (60 marks)
Assessment objectives: AO1, AO2, AO3, AO4
Syllabus content including HL extension material. Includes both quantitative and qualitative 
questions.
Students answer two compulsory questions. (30 marks per question)30%
Internal assessment (20 teaching hours)
This component is internally assessed by the teacher and externally moderated by the IB at 
the end of the course.
Students produce a portfolio of three commentaries, based on different units of the syllabus 
(excluding the introductory unit) and on published extracts from the news media. Each of 
the three commentaries should use a different key concept as a lens through which to 
analyse the published extracts.
Maximum 800 words for each commentary (45 marks)20%
Assessment
Assessment outline—HL
58 Economics guide
Two different methods are used to assess students.
• Analytic markschemes
• Markbands
For all three  examination  papers,  there  are analytic  markschemes  and  markbands.  The markbands  are 
related to the assessment objectives established for the economics course and the individuals and societies 
grade  descriptors  and  are published  in the guide.  The analytic  markschemes  are specific  to each 
examination and are published separately in a markscheme document.
Written papers
The external  assessment  in economics  consists  of two  examination  papers  at SL and  three  examination 
papers  at HL that  are externally  set and  externally  moderated.  They  are designed  to allow  students  to 
demonstrate  their  competencies  in relation  to the economics  assessment  objectives  and  specific  parts  of 
the economics  syllabus,  namely  the common  topics  and  the HL extension  material.  All questions  on the 
examination papers will be based on the topics in this guide.
The external  components  contribute  70%  to the final  assessment  at SL, and  80%  to the final  assessment  at 
HL.
In common  with  all examination  papers,  students  at SL and  HL are given  five minutes  of reading  time 
before they begin answering the papers.
Command terms
Teachers  and  students  must  be familiar  with  the command  terms  used  at each  assessment  objective  level 
to understand  the depth  of treatment  required  in examination  questions.  Cognitive  demands  terms 
progress from AO1 to AO3, while AO4 terms are specific to particular skills.
Examination  questions  may  use any command  term  from  the assessment  objective  level  specified  in the 
“Syllabus”  section  or a less demanding  command  term  from  a lower  level.  For example,  if the assessment 
objective  level  for a topic  is AO2,  an examination  question  could  contain  any of the command  terms  for 
AO2,  such  as “explain”,  “distinguish”  and  so on. Alternatively,  the examination  question  could  contain  a 
command  term  from  AO1,  such  as “describe”.  However,  a more  demanding  command  term,  such  as 
“evaluate”, from a higher level (AO3 in this case), cannot be used.
The command  terms  used  in each  question  (or part  thereof)  indicate  the depth  required.  The command 
terms  are organized  by assessment  objective  level  in the “Assessment  objectives”  section  earlier  in the 
guide and defined in the “ Glossary of command terms ” in the appendix.
Use of diagrams
Students  are expected,  where  appropriate,  to include  correctly  labelled  and  clearly  drawn  diagrams. 
Sometimes  individual  questions  specify  that  the use of diagrams  is essential  because  more  detailed 
information is required from the students in order to show specific knowledge and understanding.
Use of examples
Students  are expected,  where  appropriate,  to illustrate  their  answers  with  real-world  examples  in order  to 
reach  the highest  markbands.  Examples  should  be used  to highlight  economic  concepts,  theories  and 
relationships in the real world. When examples are used, students should not just state the example (as this 
is too limited) but should also offer some explanation of the example in relation to the question asked.
Assessment
External assessment
59 Economics guide
Use of economic terms
Students  are expected  to demonstrate  the ability  to appropriately  define,  use and  apply  the economics 
terms included in the “ Syllabus ” section.
Use of calculators
Paper 1 (SL/HL)
Calculators are not permitted.
Paper 2 (SL/HL) and Paper 3 (HL only)
While all questions requiring a calculator can be answered fully using a four function (plus, minus, multiply, 
divide)  calculator,  graphic  display  calculators  (GDCs)  are allowed  during  the examination.  The graphing 
functions  on these  calculators  may  assist  students  and  it is therefore  recommended  that  all students  are 
familiar with the use of GDCs.
Teachers  and  schools  must  adhere  to the regulations  regarding  the use of electronic  calculators  in 
examinations,  and  students  must  be made  aware  of these.  This  information  can be found  in “Annex  2: 
Calculators guidance” of the Diploma Programme Assessment procedures .
Links to the specific details in the syllabus
Examination questions will be drawn from the four units of the syllabus, namely:
• Unit 1: Introduction to Economics
• Unit 2: Microeconomics
• Unit 3: Macroeconomics
• Unit 4: The global economy.
External assessment details—SL
Paper 1
Duration: 1 hour 15 minutes
Weighting: 30%
The structure of this paper is the same as the HL paper 1 but the questions that require extended responses 
may be the same as, or different from, the HL paper 1 questions.
• Students answer one question from a choice of three.
• The questions are each subdivided into two parts, (a) and (b).
Students are expected to demonstrate the following assessment objectives.
Assessment objective Part (a) Part (b)
AO1—knowledge and 
understanding√ √
AO2—application and analysis √ √
AO3—synthesis and evaluation √
AO4—use and application of 
appropriate skills√ √
Marks (maximum per part) 10 15
Maximum for paper 1 25External assessment
60 Economics guide
• Questions in this paper are drawn from the four units of the syllabus excluding  the HL extension 
material and topics studied at HL only.
• The command terms  used in each question indicate the depth required.
• Marks are allocated using a combination of an analytic markscheme and markbands.
Paper 2
Duration: 1 hour 45 minutes
Weighting: 40%
The structure of this paper is the same as HL paper 2.
The text/data used and questions may be the same at SL and at HL.
• Students answer one question from a choice of two.
• The questions are each subdivided into seven parts, (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f) and (g). Parts (a) and (b) both 
have subparts showing (i and ii)
• Students are expected to demonstrate the following assessment objectives.
Assessment 
objectivePart a
(i, ii)Part b
(i, ii)Part c Part d Part e Part f Part g
AO1—
knowledge and 
understanding√ √ √ √ √ √ √
AO2—
application and 
analysis√ √ √ √ √ √
AO3—synthesis 
and evaluation√
AO4—use and 
application of 
appropriate skills√ √ √ √ √ √
Marks 
(maximum per 
part/subpart)4 (2 + 2) 5* 4 4 4 4 15
Maximum 
marks for paper 
240
• Questions in this paper are drawn from the four units of the syllabus excluding  the HL extension 
material and topics studied at HL only.
• The command terms used in each question indicate the depth required.
• Marks are allocated using a combination of an analytic markscheme and markbands.
• Maximum marks are available per part and per subpart.
* Questions in (b) may be further subdivided into parts (i) and (ii) with 3 marks allocated in the first part and 
up to 2 marks in the other, or vice versa. The maximum for part (b) is 5 marks.
External assessment details—HL
Paper 1
Duration: 1 hour 15 minutesExternal assessment
61 Economics guide
Weighting: 20%
• The structure of this paper is the same as SL paper 1. However, the questions that require extended 
responses may be the same as, or different from, the SL paper. Questions in this paper are drawn from 
the four units of the syllabus including the HL extension material and topics studied at HL only.
Please refer to the section “ External assessment details—SL ”, for further details
Paper 2
Duration: 1 hour 45 minutes
Weighting: 30%
The structure  of this paper  is the same  as SL paper  2. However,  the data  response  questions  may  be the 
same  as, or different  from,  the SL paper.  Questions  in this paper  are drawn  from  the four  units  of the 
syllabus including  the HL extension material and topics studied at HL only.
Please refer to the section “ External assessment details—SL ”, for further details.
Paper 3
Duration: 1 hour 45 minutes
Weighting: 30%
• Students answer two compulsory questions.
• The questions are subdivided into parts (a) and (b). Part (a) has subparts.
Students are expected to demonstrate the following assessment objectives.
Assessment objective Part (a) Part (b)
AO1—knowledge and 
understanding√ √
AO2—application and analysis √ √
AO3—synthesis and evaluation √
AO4—use and application of 
appropriate skills√ √
Marks (maximum) 20 10
Marks (maximum per question) 30
Maximum marks for paper 3 (for 
two questions)60
• Questions in this paper are drawn from the four units of the syllabus including the HL extension 
material and topics studied at HL only.
• The command terms used indicate the depth of response required.
• Marks are allocated using a combination of an analytic markscheme and markbands.
• Many question parts require the use of a calculator. GDCs are allowed during the examination, and 
students should be familiar with their use. Full details are given in the section “ Use of calculators ”.
• An answer booklet will be provided, and additional answer sheets may be used if necessary.External assessment
62 Economics guide
External assessment markbands—SL and HL
Paper 1 (SL/HL)
Part (a) 10-mark question
Marks
0–10Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–2 • The response indicates little understanding of the specific demands of the question.
• Economic theory is stated but it is not relevant.
• Economic terms are stated but they are not relevant.
3–4 • The response indicates some understanding of the specific demands of the 
question.
• Relevant economic theory is described.
• Some relevant economic terms are included.
5–6 • The response indicates understanding of the specific demands of the question, but 
these demands are only partially addressed.
• Relevant economic theory is partly explained.
• Some relevant economic terms are used appropriately.
• Where appropriate, relevant diagram(s) are included.
7–8 • The specific demands of the question are understood and addressed.
• Relevant economic theory is explained.
• Relevant economic terms are used mostly appropriately.
• Where appropriate, relevant diagram(s) are included and explained.
9–10 • The specific demands of the question are understood and addressed
• Relevant economic theory is fully explained.
• Relevant economic terms are used appropriately throughout the response.
• Where appropriate, relevant diagram(s) are included and fully explained
Part (b) 15-mark question
Marks
0–15Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–3 • The response indicates little understanding of the specific demands of the 
question.
• Economic theory is stated but it is not relevant
• Economic terms are stated but they are not relevant.
• The response contains no evidence of synthesis or evaluation.
• A real-world example(s) is identified but it is irrelevant.
4–6 • The response indicates some understanding of the specific demands of the 
question.
• Relevant economic theory is described.External assessment
63 Economics guide
Marks
0–15Level descriptor
• Some relevant economic terms are included.
• The response contains evidence of superficial synthesis or evaluation.
• A relevant real-world example(s) is identified.
7–9 • The response indicates understanding of the specific demands of the question, 
but these demands are only partially addressed.
• Relevant economic theory is partly explained.
• Some relevant economic terms are used appropriately.
• Where appropriate, relevant diagram(s) are included.
• The response contains evidence of appropriate synthesis or evaluation but 
lacks balance.
• A relevant real-world example(s) is identified and partly developed in the 
context of the question.
10–12 • The specific demands of the question are understood and addressed.
• Relevant economic theory is explained.
• Relevant economic terms are used mostly appropriately.
• Where appropriate, relevant diagram(s) are included and explained.
• The response contains evidence of appropriate synthesis or evaluation that is 
mostly balanced.
• A relevant real-world example(s) is identified and developed in the context of 
the question.
13–15 • The specific demands of the question are understood and addressed.
• Relevant economic theory is fully explained.
• Relevant economic terms are used appropriately throughout the response.
• Where appropriate, relevant diagram(s) are included and fully explained.
• The response contains evidence of effective and balanced synthesis or 
evaluation.
• A relevant real-world example(s) is identified and fully developed to support 
the argument.
Paper 2 (SL/HL)
For parts (a) to (f) a markscheme will be used.
Part (g) 15-mark question
Marks
0–15Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–3 • The response indicates little understanding of the specific demands of the 
question.
• Economic theory is stated but it is not relevant.
• Economic terms are stated but they are not relevant.
• The response contains no evidence of synthesis or evaluation.External assessment
64 Economics guide
Marks
0–15Level descriptor
• The response contains no use of text/data.
4–6 • The response indicates some understanding of the specific demands of the 
question.
• Relevant economic theory is described.
• Some relevant economic terms are included.
• The response contains evidence of superficial synthesis or evaluation.
• The response contains limited use of text/data.
7–9 • The response indicates understanding of the specific demands of the question, but 
these demands are only partially addressed.
• Relevant economic theory is partly explained.
• Some relevant economic terms are used appropriately.
• Where appropriate, relevant diagram(s) are included.
• The response contains evidence of appropriate synthesis or evaluation but lacks 
balance.
• The response includes some relevant information from the text/data.
10–12 • The specific demands of the question are understood and addressed.
• Relevant economic theory is explained.
• Relevant economic terms are used appropriately.
• Where appropriate, relevant diagram(s) are included and explained.
• The response contains evidence of appropriate synthesis or evaluation that is 
mostly balanced.
• The use of information from the text/data is generally appropriate, relevant, and 
applied correctly.
13–15 • The specific demands of the question are understood and addressed.
• Relevant economic theory is fully explained.
• Relevant economic terms are used appropriately throughout the response.
• Where appropriate, relevant diagram(s) are included and fully explained.
• The response contains evidence of effective and balanced synthesis or evaluation.
• The use of information from the text/data is appropriate, relevant, and is used to 
formulate a reasoned argument supported by analysis/evaluation.
Paper 3 (HL only)
For part (a) a markscheme will be used.
Part (b) 10-mark question
Recommend —present  an advisable  course  of action  with  appropriate  supporting  evidence/reason  in 
relation to a given situation, problem or issue.
Marks
0–10Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–2 • The response identifies a policy.External assessment
65 Economics guide
Marks
0–10Level descriptor
• The response uses no economic theory to support the recommendation.
• Economic terms are stated but are not relevant.
• The response contains no use of text/data to support the recommendation.
• The response contains no evidence of synthesis or evaluation.
3–4 • The response identifies an appropriate policy.
• The response uses limited economic theory to support the recommendation in a 
superficial manner.
• Some relevant economic terms are included.
• The response contains no use of relevant text/data to support the 
recommendation.
• The response contains superficial evidence of synthesis or evaluation.
5–6 • The response identifies and explains an appropriate policy.
• The response uses relevant economic theory to partially support the 
recommendation.
• Some relevant economic terms are used appropriately.
• The response includes some relevant information from the text/data to support 
the recommendation.
• The response contains evidence of appropriate synthesis or evaluation but lacks 
balance.
7–8 • The response identifies and fully explains an appropriate policy.
• The response uses relevant economic theory to support the recommendation.
• Relevant economic terms are used mostly appropriately.
• The use of information from the text/data is generally appropriate, relevant and 
applied correctly to support the recommendation.
• The response contains evidence of appropriate synthesis or evaluation that is 
mostly balanced.
9–10 • The response identifies and fully explains an appropriate policy.
• The response uses relevant economic theory effectively to support the 
recommendation.
• Relevant economic terms are used appropriately throughout the response.
• The use of information from the text/data is appropriate, relevant and supports the 
analysis/evaluation effectively.
• The response contains evidence of effective and balanced synthesis or evaluation.External assessment
66 Economics guide
Purpose of internal assessment
Internal  assessment  is an integral  part  of the course  and  is compulsory  for both  SL and  HL students.  It 
enables students to demonstrate the application of their skills and knowledge, and to pursue their personal 
interests,  without  the time  limitations  and  other  constraints  that  are associated  with  written  examinations. 
The internal  assessment  should,  as far as possible,  be woven  into  normal  classroom  teaching  and  not be a 
separate activity conducted after a course has been taught.
The internal  assessment  requirements  at SL and  at HL are the same  for the economics  course.  Both  SL and 
HL economics  students  produce  a portfolio  of three  commentaries  based  on articles  from  published  news 
media.
Guidance and authenticity
The portfolio  submitted  for internal  assessment  must  be the student’s  own  work.  However,  it is not the 
intention  that  students  should  decide  on the appropriate  articles  and  then  be left to work  on the internally 
assessed  component  without  any further  support  from  the teacher.  The teacher  should  play  an important 
role during both the planning stage and the period when the student is working on the internally assessed 
work. It is the responsibility of the teacher to ensure that students are familiar with:
• the requirements of the type of work to be internally assessed—the nature of the sources of the 
articles, and the formal requirements of the portfolio—and the IB’s academic honesty policy
• the assessment criteria; students must understand that the work submitted for assessment must 
address these criteria effectively.
Teachers and students must discuss the internally assessed work. Students should be encouraged to initiate 
discussions  with  the teacher  to obtain  advice  and  information,  and  students  must  not be penalized  for 
seeking guidance. As part of the learning process, teachers should read and give advice to students on one 
draft  of the work.  The teacher  should  provide  oral  or written  advice  on how  the work  could  be improved 
but must  not edit  the draft.  The next  version  handed  to the teacher  must  be the final  version  for 
submission.
It is the responsibility of teachers to ensure that all students understand the basic meaning and significance 
of concepts  that  relate  to academic  honesty,  especially  authenticity  and  intellectual  property.  Teachers 
must  ensure  that  all student  work  for assessment  is prepared  according  to the requirements  and  must 
explain  clearly  to students  that  the internally  assessed  work  must  be entirely  their  own.  Where 
collaboration between students is permitted, it must be clear to all students what the difference is between 
collaboration and collusion.
All work  submitted  to the IB for moderation  or assessment  must  be authenticated  by a teacher  and  must 
not include  any known  instances  of suspected  or confirmed  malpractice.  Each  student  must  confirm  that 
the work  is his or her authentic  work  and  constitutes  the final  version  of that  work.  Once  a student  has 
officially  submitted  the final  version  of the work  it cannot  be retracted.  The requirement  to confirm  the 
authenticity  of work  applies  to the work  of all students,  not just the sample  work  that  will be submitted  to 
the IB for the purpose of moderation. For further details refer to the IB publication Academic honesty in the IB 
educational context , The Diploma Programme: From principles into practice  and the relevant articles in General 
regulations: Diploma Programme .
Authenticity may be checked by discussion with the student on the content of the work and scrutiny of one 
or more of the following:
• the student’s initial choice of articles
Assessment
Internal assessment 
67 Economics guide
• the first draft of the written work
• the references cited
• the style of writing compared with work known to be that of the student
• the analysis of the work by a web-based plagiarism detection service (for example, turnitin.com.)
The same piece of work cannot be submitted to meet the requirements of both the internal assessment and 
the EE.
Time allocation
Internal assessment is an integral part of the economics course, contributing 30% to the final assessment in 
the SL course  and  20%  to the final  assessment  in the HL course.  This  weighting  should  be reflected  in the 
time  that  is allocated  to teaching  the knowledge,  skills  and  understanding  required  to undertake  the work, 
as well as the total time allocated to carry out the work.
It is recommended  that  a total  of approximately  20 hours  should  be allocated  to the portfolio  at both  SL 
and HL. This should include:
• time for the teacher to explain to students the requirements of the internal assessment
• class time for students to work on the internal assessment component
• time for consultation between the teacher and each student
• time to review and monitor progress and to check authenticity.
Requirements and recommendations
It is important  for the integrity  of the moderation  process  that  the internal  assessment  by the teacher  is 
based  on the same  evidence  as that  available  to the moderator.  When  there  is more  than  one  teacher 
teaching students in this component, internal standardization must take place.
Using assessment criteria for internal assessment
For internal  assessment,  a number  of assessment  criteria  have  been  identified.  Each  assessment  criterion 
has level  descriptors  describing  specific  achievement  levels,  together  with  an appropriate  range  of marks. 
The level  descriptors  concentrate  on positive  achievement  although,  for the lower  levels,  failure  to achieve 
may be included in the description.
Teachers  must  judge  the internally  assessed  work  at SL and  at HL against  the criteria  using  the level 
descriptors.
• The same assessment criteria are provided for SL and HL.
• The aim is to find, for each criterion, the descriptor that conveys most accurately the level attained by 
the student, using the best-fit model. A best-fit approach means that compensation should be made 
when a piece of work matches different aspects of a criterion at different levels. The mark awarded 
should be one that most fairly reflects the balance of achievement against the criterion. It is not 
necessary for every single aspect of a level descriptor to be met for that mark to be awarded.
• When assessing a student’s work, teachers should read the level descriptors for each criterion until 
they reach a descriptor that most appropriately describes the level of the work being assessed. If a 
piece of work seems to fall between two descriptors, both descriptors should be read again and the 
one that more appropriately describes the student’s work should be chosen.
• Where there are two or more marks available within a level, teachers should award the upper marks if 
the student’s work demonstrates the qualities described to a great extent; the work may be close to 
achieving marks in the level above. Teachers should award the lower marks if the student’s work 
demonstrates the qualities described to a lesser extent; the work may be close to achieving marks in 
the level below.
• Only whole numbers should be recorded; partial marks (fractions and decimals) are not acceptable.Internal assessment 
68 Economics guide
• Teachers should not think in terms of a pass or fail boundary but should concentrate on identifying the 
appropriate descriptor for each assessment criterion.
• The highest level descriptors do not imply faultless performance but should be achievable by a 
student. Teachers should not hesitate to use the extremes if they are appropriate descriptions of the 
work being assessed.
• A student who attains a high achievement level in relation to one criterion will not necessarily attain 
high achievement levels in relation to the other criteria. Similarly, a student who attains a low 
achievement level for one criterion will not necessarily attain low achievement levels for the other 
criteria. Teachers should not assume that the overall assessment of the students will produce any 
particular distribution of marks.
• It is recommended that the assessment criteria be made available to students .
Internal assessment details—SL and HL
Portfolio
Duration: 20 hours
Weighting: 30% (SL), 20% (HL)
Rationale
Internal assessment in economics enables students to demonstrate the application of their knowledge and 
understanding of economic theory in relation to real-world situations.
Requirements
Both  SL and  HL economics  students  produce  a portfolio  of three  commentaries  based  on articles  from 
published  news  media.  Each  article  must  be based  on a different  unit  of the syllabus  (excluding  Unit  1: 
Introduction  to economics):  Unit  2: Microeconomics,  Unit  3: Macroeconomics  and  Unit  4: The global 
economy.
Articles
The articles  may  be from  a newspaper,  a journal  or the internet,  but must  not be from  television  or radio 
broadcasts.  If a student  includes  a relatively  lengthy  article,  which  is discouraged,  the student  must 
highlight  the section(s)  of the article  upon  which  the commentary  is based.  Articles  used  must  have  been 
published no earlier than one year before the writing of the commentary.
The article  on which  the commentary  is based  should,  where  possible,  be in the same  language  as the 
commentary.  If an extract  in another  language  is used,  the student  must  provide  an accurate  translation  of 
the whole article. Students must also include the original article in their portfolio.
Individual work
Students  must  select  their  own  articles  to discuss.  It may  happen  that  more  than  one  student  bases  his or 
her commentary  on the same  article,  but the article  must  not be given  to the class  by the teacher,  and  the 
production  of the commentary  must  be each  student’s  individual  work.  A commentary  must  not be 
prepared collaboratively.
Key concepts
Each  of the three  commentaries  must  use a different  key concept  as a lens  through  which  to analyse  the 
published  extracts.  Students  will risk losing  3 marks  in criterion  D if they  use the same  key concept  in two 
commentaries and up to 6 marks if the same key concept is used in three commentaries. Please refer to the 
Economics teacher support material for further guidance.
Focus
Each commentary must:Internal assessment 
69 Economics guide
• explain the links between the article, a key concept and economic theory taken from the unit of the 
syllabus on which the article is based
• demonstrate economic insights into the implications of the article (that is, it should provide evidence 
of the student’s ability to discuss current events from the point of view of an economist).
On each commentary students must record:
• the title of the article
• the source of the article (including date of access to the site if from the internet)
• the date the article was published
• the date the commentary was written
• the word count of the commentary
• the unit of the syllabus to which the article relates
• the key concept being used
Each  commentary  in the portfolio  is assessed  individually  against  the internal  assessment  criteria.  The 
teacher  will initially  assess  each  student’s  work.  Please  note  that  internal  standardization  must  take  place  if 
more than one teacher is assessing the work. A sample of the work will then be moderated by the IB.
Please  refer  to Diploma  Programme  Assessment  procedures  for details  on how  to present  the work  for 
moderation.
Word limit
Students must produce a portfolio of three commentaries. Each commentary must not exceed 800 words.
Note:  Moderators will not read beyond 800 words for each commentary.
The following are not included in the word count.
• Acknowledgments
• Contents page
• Diagrams
• Labels—of five words or fewer
• Headings on diagrams—of 10 words or fewer
• Tables of statistical data
• Equations, formulae and calculations
• Citations (which, if used, must be in the body of the commentary)
• References (which, if used, must be in the footnotes/endnotes)
Please  note  that  footnotes/endnotes  may  be used  for referencing  purposes  only.  Definitions  of economic 
terms  and  quotations,  if used,  must  be in the body  of the work  and  are included  in the word  count.  Please 
note  that  a citation  is a shorthand  method  of making  a reference  in the body  of the commentary,  which  is 
then linked to the full reference in the footnotes/endnotes.
Rubric requirements
If students  do not adhere  to the following  requirements,  they  can lose  marks  under  criterion  F: Rubric 
requirements.
1. Articles
Each article must be based on a different unit of the syllabus (excluding Unit 1: Introduction to economics).
2. Sources
Students must use a different source for each commentary.Internal assessment 
70 Economics guide
3. Contemporary articles
Students  need  to look  for articles  relating  to current  events,  and  these  must  be published  no earlier  than 
one year before the writing of the commentary.
Internal assessment criteria—SL and HL
Overview
There are five internal assessment criteria for each commentary.
Criterion Commentary section Marks
Criterion A Diagrams 3 marks
Criterion B Terminology 2 marks
Criterion C Application and analysis 3 marks
Criterion D Key concept 3 marks
Criterion E Evaluation 3 marks
Total 14 marks
There is one internal assessment criterion for the whole portfolio.
Criterion F Rubric requirements 3 marks
Each  commentary  is assessed  individually  for the first five assessment  criteria  (criteria  A–E)  and  then 
criterion F is applied to the whole portfolio.
The maximum  for the portfolio  is 45 marks:  (14 marks  x 3 commentaries)  + 3 marks  = 42 + 3 marks.  The 
assessment criteria are related to the assessment objectives.
• Criterion A: AO2 and AO4
• Criterion B: AO1
• Criterion C: AO2
• Criterion D: AO2
• Criterion E: AO3
• Criterion F: AO4
Economics internal assessment portfolio (SL/HL)
Criterion A: Diagrams
This criterion assesses the extent to which the student is able to construct and explain diagrams.
Marks Descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1 Relevant diagram(s) are included but not explained, or the explanations are incorrect.
2 Relevant, accurate and correctly labelled diagram(s) are included, with a limited 
explanation.
3 Relevant, accurate and correctly labelled diagram(s) are included, with a full explanation.
Criterion B: Terminology
This criterion assesses the extent to which the student uses appropriate economic terminology.Internal assessment 
71 Economics guide
Marks Descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1 Economic terminology relevant to the article is included in the commentary.
2 Economic terminology relevant to the article is used appropriately throughout the 
commentary.
Criterion C: Application and analysi s
This  criterion  assesses  the extent  to which  the student  recognizes,  understands,  applies  and  analyses 
economic theory in the context of the article.
Marks Descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1 Relevant economic theory is applied to the article with limited analysis.
2 Relevant economic theory is applied to the article throughout the commentary with 
appropriate economic analysis.
3 Relevant economic theory is applied to the article throughout the commentary with 
effective economic analysis.
Criterion D: Key concept
This  criterion  assesses  the extent  to which  the student  recognizes,  understands  and  links  a key concept  to 
the article.
Marks Descriptor
0 Either the work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below or the 
key concept identified has already been used in another commentary.
1 A key concept is identified and there has been an attempt to link it to the article.
2 A key concept is identified and the link to the article is partially explained.
3 A key concept is identified and the link to the article is fully explained.
Criterion E: Evaluation
This criterion assesses the extent to which the student’s judgments are supported by reasoned argument.
Marks Descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1 Judgments are made that are supported by limited reasoning.
2 Judgments are made that are supported by appropriate reasoning.
3 Judgments are made that are supported by effective and balanced reasoning.
Criterion F: Rubric requirements
This  criterion  assesses  the extent  to which  the student  meets  the three  rubric  requirements  for the 
complete portfolio.
• Each article is based on a different unit of the syllabus.
• Each article is taken from a different and appropriate source.
• Each article was published no earlier than one year before the writing of the commentary.Internal assessment 
72 Economics guide
Marks Descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1 One rubric requirement is met.
2 Two rubric requirements are met.
3 Three rubric requirements are met.Internal assessment 
73 Economics guide
Command terms for economics
Students should be familiar with the following key terms and phrases used in examination questions, which 
are to be understood  as described  below.  Although  these  terms  will be used  frequently  in examination 
questions, other terms may be used to direct students to present an argument in a specific way.
Command term Assessment 
objective 
levelDefinition
Analyse AO2 Break down in order to bring out the essential elements or 
structure.
Apply AO2 Use an idea, equation, principle, theory or law in relation to a given 
problem or issue.
Calculate AO4 Obtain a numerical answer showing the relevant stages in the 
working.
Comment AO2 Give a judgment based on a given statement or result of a 
calculation.
Compare AO3 Give an account of the similarities between two (or more) items or 
situations, referring to both (all) of them throughout.
Compare and contrast AO3 Give an account of similarities and differences between two (or 
more) items or situations, referring to both (all) of them throughout.
Construct AO4 Display information in a diagrammatic or logical form.
Contrast AO3 Give an account of the differences between two (or more) items or 
situations, referring to both (all) of them throughout.
Define AO1 Give the precise meaning of a word, phrase, concept or physical 
quantity.
Derive AO4 Manipulate a mathematical relationship to give a new equation or 
relationship.
Describe AO1 Give a detailed account.
Determine AO4 Obtain the only possible answer.
Discuss AO3 Offer a considered and balanced review that includes a range of 
arguments, factors or hypotheses. Opinions or conclusions should 
be presented clearly and supported by appropriate evidence.
Distinguish AO2 Make clear the differences between two or more concepts or items.
Draw AO4 Represent by means of a labelled, accurate diagram or graph, using 
a pencil. A ruler (straight edge) should be used for straight lines. 
Diagrams should be drawn to scale. Graphs should have points 
correctly plotted (if appropriate) and joined in a straight line or 
smooth curve.
Evaluate AO3 Make an appraisal by weighing up the strengths and limitations.
Appendices
Glossary of command terms
74 Economics guide
Command term Assessment 
objective 
levelDefinition
Examine AO3 Consider an argument or concept in a way that uncovers the 
assumptions and interrelationships of the issue.
Explain AO2 Give a detailed account including reasons or causes.
Identify AO4 Provide an answer from a number of possibilities.
Justify AO3 Give valid reasons or evidence to support an answer or conclusion.
Label AO4 Add labels to a diagram.
List AO1 Give a sequence of brief answers with no explanation.
Measure AO4 Obtain a value for a quantity.
Outline AO1 Give a brief account or summary.
Plot AO4 Mark the position of points on a diagram.
Recommend AO3 Present an advisable course of action with appropriate supporting 
evidence/reason in relation to a given situation, problem or issue.
Show AO4 Give the steps in a calculation or derivation.
Show that AO4 Obtain the required result (possibly using information given) 
without the formality of proof. “Show that” questions do not 
generally require the use of a calculator.
Sketch AO4 Represent by means of a diagram or graph (labelled as 
appropriate). The sketch should give a general idea of the required 
shape or relationship and should include relevant features.
Solve AO4 Obtain the answer(s) using algebraic and/or numerical and/or 
graphical methods.
State AO1 Give a specific name, value or other brief answer without 
explanation or calculation.
Suggest AO2 Propose a solution, hypothesis or other possible answer.
To what extent AO3 Consider the merits or otherwise of an argument or concept. 
Opinions and conclusions should be presented clearly and 
supported with appropriate evidence and sound argument.Glossary of command terms
75 Economics guide
Refer to the “Glossary” section in the Economics teacher support material .
Appendices
Glossary of subject-specific  terms
76 Economics guide
This  bibliography  lists  the principal  works  used  to inform  the curriculum  review.  It is not an exhaustive  list 
and does not include all the literature available—judicious selection was made in order to better advise and 
guide teachers. This bibliography is not a list of recommended textbooks.
Acemoglu,  D and  Robinson,  JA. 2012.  Why  Nations  Fail:  The  Origins  of Power  Prosperity,  and  Poverty.  London, 
UK. Profile Books Ltd.
Ariely, D. 2009. Predictably Irrational: The Hidden Forces that Shape Our Decisions . London: HarperCollins.
Baldissone,  R. 2013.  “And  the Real  Butchers,  Brewers  and  Bakers?  Towards  the Integration  of Ethics  and 
Economics”. Economic Thought . Vol 2, number 1. Pp 54–62.
Banerjee,  AV and  Duflo,  E. 2011.  Poor  Economics:  A Radical  Rethinking  of the Way  to Fight  Global  Poverty. 
London, UK. Penguin Books.
Barton, D. 2011. “Capitalism for the Long Term”. Harvard Business Review . March 2011 issue. Pp 84–91.
Brooks,  D. 2011.  “Social  animal:  how  the new  sciences  of human  nature  can help  make  sense  of a life”.  The 
New Yorker . January 17, 2011 issue. Pp 26–32.
Cohen,  S. 2011.  Sustainability  Management:  Lessons  from  and  for New  York  City,  America  and  the Planet . New 
York, USA. Columbia University Press.
Colander, DC. 2013. Economics, 9th Edition. New York, USA. McGraw-Hill/Irwin.
Foot, P. 2001. Natural Goodness. New York, USA. Oxford University Press.
Haidt,  J. 2006.  The  Happiness  Hypothesis:  Putting  Ancient  Wisdom  to the Test  of Modern  Science . London,  UK. 
William Heinemann.
Harrison, K. 2013. “Ontological Commitments of Ethics and Economics”. Economic Thought.  Vol. 2 number 1. 
Pp 1–19.
Helbing,  D and  Kirman,  A. 2013.  “Rethinking  economics  using  complexity  theory”.  Real-World  Economics 
Review . Issue 64. Pp 23–51.
Homer-Dixon, T. 2011. “Complexity Science”. Oxford Leadership Journal . Vol 2, number 1. Pp 1–15.
Hursthouse, R. 1999. On Virtue Ethics. New York, USA. Oxford University Press.
Immordino-Yang, MH and Fischer, KW. 2010. “Neuroscience bases of learning”. In International Encyclopedia 
of Education (3rd edition).  Oxford, UK. Elsevier. Pp 310–316.
Institute  for New  Economic  Thinking.  2014.  New  Economic  Teaching  – Bridging  Four  Gaps.  Accessed  1 
January  2017.  https://www.ineteconomics.org/uploads/papers/CARLIN_Wendy_New-Economic-
Teaching.pdf
Judt, T. 2011. Ill Fares the Land . London, UK. Penguin Books.
Kahneman, D. 2012. Thinking, Fast and Slow. London, UK. Penguin Books.
Kay,  J. 2011.  The  Map  is Not  the Territory:  An Essay  on the State  of Economics . Accessed  1 January  2017. 
https://www.johnkay.com/2011/10/04/the-map-is-not-the-territory-an-essay-on-the-state-of-economics/
amer.
MR and Porter, ME. 2011. “Creating Shared Value”. Harvard Business Review . Vol 89, number 1. Pp 2–17.
Layard, R. 2011. Happiness: Lessons from a New Science (2nd edition) . London, UK. Penguin Books.
Lietaer,  B, Arnsperger  C, Goerner,  S and  Brunnhuber,  S. 2012.  Money  and  Sustainability:  The  Missing  Link . 
Axminster, UK. Triarchy Press.
Moyo, D. 2010. Dead Aid. London, UK. Penguin Books.
Appendices
Bibliography
77 Economics guide
Nussbaum,  MC.  2011.  Creating  Capabilities:  The  Human  Development  Approach.  Cambridge,  USA.  The 
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Raworth,  K. 2017.  Doughnut  Economics:  Seven  Ways  to Think  Like  a 21st  Century  Economist . White  River 
Junction, USA. Chelsea Green Publishing.
Reardon,  J. 2012.  “A radical  reformation  of economics  education:  educating  real world  economists”.  Real-
World Economics Review . Issue 62. Pp 2–19.
Reimers,  FM, and  Kanter,  RM. 2012.  Teaching  What  Matters  Most.  A Synthesis  of Ideas  from  the Harvard 
University Leadership Initiative Think Tank . Cambridge, USA. The Harvard University Leadership Initiative.
Robbins,  L. 2007.  An Essay  on the Nature  and  Significance  of Economic  Science . Toronto,  Canada.  The 
Macmillan Company.
Sachs, JD. 2012. The Price of Civilization . London, UK. Vintage Books.
Smith, A. 1776. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations . Oxford, UK. Clarendon Press.
Stiglitz,  JE. 2010.  Freefall:  America,  Free  Markets  and  the Sinking  of the World  Economy . New  York,  USA.  W. W. 
Norton & Company.
Wilkinson, R and Pickett, K. 2009. The Spirit Level. London, UK. Penguin Books.Bibliography
78 Economics guide
