M22/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                       Markscheme


                               May 2022


                           Geography


                           Higher level


                               Paper 3




12 pages
                                            –2–                 M22/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2022

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2022

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2022

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                       –3–                 M22/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 3 part (a) markbands

 Marks   Level descriptor
         AO1: Knowledge and understanding of                 AO3: Synthesis       AO4: Selection, use and
         specified content                                   and evaluation       application of a variety of
                                                                                  appropriate skills and techniques
         AO2: Application and analysis of knowledge
         and understanding
   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
  1–3    The response is general, not focused on the question, and lacks detail and structure.
         • The response is very brief or general, listing a • No evidence of • Information is listed but is not
            series of unconnected comments or largely         synthesis or     grouped together in paragraphs,
            irrelevant information. Evidence is general or    evaluation is    or paragraphing is erratic.
            relevant to the topic, but not to the question.   expected.      • If present, the conclusion is brief,
         • Evidence (that is, facts, statistics, examples or                   does not summarize the argument
            theories) is listed, lacks detail, and the                         and/or does not address the
            relevance to the question is unclear.                              question.
         • Evidence is not used to formulate an argument
            or an analysis.
         • Everyday language is used; there is little use
            of geographical terminology or it is used with
            errors in understanding.
  4–6    The response only partially addresses the question; evidence is both relevant and irrelevant and is
         largely unstructured.
         • The response partially addresses the question • No evidence of • Paragraphs do not reflect
           and/or does not meet the requirements of the      synthesis or    grouping of information that
           command term. Key evidence is not included.       evaluation is   addresses a specific element of
         • A mix of relevant and irrelevant evidence is      expected.       the question.
           outlined (that is, facts, statistics, examples or               • If present, the conclusion is one-
           theories) and any links to the question are only                  sided, addressing only part of the
           listed.                                                           question.
         • The evidence presented supports only one
           element or interpretation of the question.
         • Key geographical terms are defined briefly.
           The terminology used is both relevant and
           irrelevant to the question.
  7–9    The response addresses most parts of the question and outlines an analysis supported by relevant
         evidence but may lack clear links between paragraphs.
         • The question is broken down into parts and        • No evidence of     • A series of standalone paragraphs
           most parts of the question are addressed in         synthesis or         each addressing a specific
           the response, with supporting evidence for          evaluation is        element of the question but
           each aspect of the question. The response           expected.            lacking clear links connecting
           meets the requirements of the command term.                              them all into a coherent whole.
         • Relevant evidence (that is, facts, statistics,                         • The conclusion repeats and
           examples or theories) is described, focused                              summarizes the analysis or
           on the question and mostly correct. Links with                           argument, but may contain new
           the question are described.                                              information as well.
         • The analysis outlines a two-sided argument
           briefly (if appropriate) and is mostly
           descriptive, using examples as explanation.
         • Correct definitions are given, and relevant and
           irrelevant specialist geographical terms are
           used with occasional errors; or everyday
           language is used.
                                                           –4–                M22/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


10–12   The response addresses all aspects of the question; the analysis is explained using evidence
        integrated in the paragraphs, and it is well structured.
        • All aspects of the question are addressed        • No evidence of    • Paragraphs focus on a relevant point
          and the response meets the requirements            synthesis or        of the argument and integrate the
          of the command term.                               evaluation is       supporting evidence. Paragraphs
        • Detailed evidence (that is, facts, statistics,     expected.           are linked and support the logical
          examples or theories) are integrated in                                flow of the argument and response.
          sentences and paragraphs, and links made                             • The conclusion summarizes the
          between evidence and the question are                                  evidence and argument, and links all
          explained and relevant.                                                back to the question.
        • The response explains how the two sides
          of the argument (if appropriate) are
          supported by detailed evidence that is
          integrated in sentences.
        • Clear, correct definitions and use of
          geographical language is integrated in the
          sentences and throughout the response.
                                                        –5–                 M22/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 3 part (b) markbands

 Marks   Level descriptor
         AO1: Knowledge and understanding of            AO3: Synthesis and           AO4: Selection, use and
         specified content                              evaluation                   application of a variety of
                                                                                     appropriate skills and
         AO2: Application and analysis of
                                                                                     techniques
         knowledge and understanding
   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
  1–4    The response is general, not focused on the question, and lacks detail and structure.
         • The response is very brief or general,        • No synthesis or           • Information is listed but is
            listing a series of unconnected comments       evaluation is expected at   not grouped together in
            or largely irrelevant information. Evidence    this level.                 paragraphs, or paragraphing
            is general or relevant to the topic, but not • No links are presented      is erratic.
            the question.                                  between the response      • If present, the conclusion is
         • Evidence (that is, facts, statistics,           and (sub)topics in the      brief, does not summarize
            examples or theories) is listed, lacks         guide.                      the argument and/or does
            detail, and the relevance to the question is • No valid opinion or         not address the question.
            unclear.                                       perspective on the issue
         • Evidence is not used to formulate an            is formulated.
            argument or an analysis.
         • Everyday language is used; there is little
            use of geographical terminology or it is
            used with errors in understanding.
  5–8    The response only partially addresses the question with limited links to the guide; evidence is both
         relevant and irrelevant and is largely unstructured.
         • The response partially addresses the         • No synthesis or             • Paragraphs do not reflect
           question and/or does not meet the              evaluation is expected at     grouping of information that
           requirements of the command term. Key          this level.                   addresses a specific element
           evidence is not included.                    • The link(s) between the       of the question.
         • A mix of relevant and irrelevant evidence      response and the guide      • If present, the conclusion is
           is outlined (that is, facts, statistics,       focus on one topic; other     one-sided, addressing only
           examples or theories) and any links to the     potential links are listed.   part of the question.
           question are only listed.                    • A valid but limited opinion
         • The evidence presented supports only one       or perspective on the
           element or interpretation of the question.     issue is formulated.
         • Key geographical terms are defined
           briefly. Terminology used is both relevant
           and irrelevant to the question.
                                                      –6–                 M22/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


9–12    The response addresses most parts of the question with developed links to the guide and outlines
        an analysis supported by relevant evidence but may lack clear links between paragraphs.
        • The question is broken down    • Synthesis or evaluation is required at • A series of standalone
          into parts and most parts of     this level.                               paragraphs each addressing
          the question are addressed in • Links between the response and the         a specific element of the
          the response, with supporting    guide refer to multiple topics and are    question but lacking clear
          evidence for each aspect of      described.                                links connecting them all into
          the question. The response     • Opinion or perspective presented is       a coherent whole.
          meets the requirements of the    aligned with the response but the       • The conclusion repeats and
          command term.                    links are not made explicit or the link   summarizes the analysis or
        • Relevant evidence (that is,      is a general statement.                   argument, but may contain
          facts, statistics, examples or   Other perspectives or interpretations     new information as well.
          theories) is described,          are listed without details.
          focused on the question and
          mostly correct. Links with the
          question are described.
        • The analysis outlines a two-
          sided argument briefly (if
          appropriate) and is mostly
          descriptive, using examples
          as explanation.
        • Correct definitions are given,
          and relevant and irrelevant
          specialist geographical terms
          are used with occasional
          errors; or everyday language
          is used.
13–16   The response addresses all aspects of the question; the analysis is explained and evaluated using
        evidence integrated in the paragraphs, and it is well structured.
        • All aspects of the question are   •   Synthesis and evaluation is           • Paragraphs focus on a
          addressed and the response            required at this level.                 relevant point of the
          meets the requirements of the     •   Links between the response and          argument and integrate the
          command term.                         (sub)topics from the guide are          supporting evidence.
        • Detailed evidence (that is,           explained and supported by the          Paragraphs are linked and
          facts, statistics, examples or        evidence in the response.               support the logical flow of
          theories) are integrated in       •   The opinion or perspective              the argument and response.
          sentences and paragraphs,             presented is explicitly linked to the • The conclusion summarizes
          and links made between                range of evidence included in the        the evidence and argument,
          evidence and the question are         response, including critical analysis    and links all back to the
          explained and relevant.               of the relative certainty of evidence    question.
        • The response explains how             used, describing other perspectives
          the two sides of the argument         or interpretations of evidence.
          (if appropriate) are supported
          by detailed evidence that is
          integrated in sentences.
        • Clear, correct definitions and
          use of geographical language
          is integrated in the sentences
          and throughout the response.
                                                  –7–                M22/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.   (a)   Using examples, explain how two types of financial flow connect different
           places together.                                                                            [12]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on pages 3 to 4.

           Financial flows link places, societies and environments together to varying degrees and at
           varying scales: a good geographical response may explain links between particular urban or
           rural localities in addition to international linkages. One flow can generate multiple
           connections / links / interdependencies, which could be economic, social, cultural or political
           in character. Flows between places are sometimes asymmetric (one-way flows, for example
           the sending of aid) or more balanced (two-way flows, for example remittance flows
           accompany migration in the other direction, with both flows connecting together host and
           source countries).

           Possible themes include:
           • Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) by transnational corporations (TNCs) – links are
             economic but may become cultural too, as cultural traits are exchanged alongside flows of
             money and commodities (particular local places may become highly connected eg export
             processing zones)
           • global trade in financial services – particular trading centres / cities / hubs (Zurich,
             Singapore) may become especially well connected (flows may also connect two hubs
             within the same country (New York and Los Angeles)
           • international aid, loans and debt relief – aid may be targeted at particular places inside
             countries eg disaster relief aid flows; the connections are economic but also political (this
             can be a soft power strategy used by some states to build friendship with other countries)
           • global/international flows of migrant remittances – linking together local-scale places
             (eg particular cities and rural villages) within different countries.

           Credit material dealing with trade in commodities (where return flows of money from
           sales/profits can be inferred) if the account serves to further the geographic analysis of how
           places become connected together by flows.

           Good answers may apply (AO2) a wider range of knowledge and understanding (AO1) in a
           well-structured way (AO4). One approach might be to explain connections at varying scales
           (local places and states, for example). Another approach might be to provide a structured
           systematic explanation of the different kinds of connection which the two chosen flows create
           (migration can foster economic, cultural and political linkages for example). Another
           approach might be to analyse the strength/symmetry of the connections (for example,
           analysing the relative strength and significance of migration and remittance flows for two
           linked countries).

           For 4–6 marks, expect some weakly-evidenced outlining of one or two flows (most likely
           using narrow supporting evidence such as a very basic or general remittance or trade study)

           For 7–9 marks, expect a structured, evidenced explanation of:
           • either the connectivity which is fostered by the two chosen financial flows (may begin to
             explain cultural and political connections in addition to economic connections)
           • or the varied dimensions/geography of place connectivity (eg explains connections at
             different national and more local scales, or asymmetrical connections).

           For 10–12 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                              –8–                M22/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   “The environmental costs of global economic growth outweigh the social gains.” To what
      extent do you agree with this statement?                                               [16]

      Credit all content in line with the markbands. Marks should be allocated according to the
      markbands on pages 5 to 6. Credit unexpected approaches wherever relevant.

      Environmental costs stem from industrialization, agribusiness, transport, urbanization – ie
      the totality of economic growth and development. Global economic growth can be viewed
      as the rise over time in global gross domestic product (GDP) per capita and increased
      industrialization/urbanization. Social gains of economic growth include improved life
      expectancy, health and diet; access to education; and changing social attitudes eg
      empowerment of women and minority groups.

      Possible applied themes (AO2) include knowledge and understanding (AO1) of:

      Environmental costs:
      • Global shift of polluting industries and transboundary pollution (6.2)
      • Food production system and agribusiness issues (6.2)
      • Localized pollution and waste (Unit 3)
      • Climate change impacts (Unit 2)

      Social gains:
      • Improved HDI scores (5.1)
      • Gender equality progress (5.1)
      • Affirmative action is support of diversity (5.1)
      • Progressive cultural changes eg attitudes towards the environment (6.3)

      Do not credit poorly focused writing about environmental benefits and/or social costs – the
      question does not ask for these to be debated. Any such material may be marked as ‘irrelevant’
      if its inclusion cannot be justified (eg see point below about differing perspectives).

      Good answers may synthesise (AO3a) three or more of the above (or other) themes in a
      well-structured (AO4) way.

      Good answers may additionally offer a critical evaluation (AO3b) of the statement, and the
      balance of costs and gains in particular place contexts (for example in relation to global shift).
      Another approach might be to critically evaluate different environmental costs (climate
      change, transboundary pollution, biodiversity loss, etc) and the extent to which they are
      experienced at local and/or global scales. Another approach might be to evaluate differing
      perspectives on whether social changes are viewed as ‘gains’ or problems (such as the
      spread of cultural traits via social media). Another approach might be to evaluate the
      possibility of problems being mitigated (new technologies and changing attitudes). A good
      discussion may conclude with a substantiated final judgement on the overall balance of
      newly-created and solved problems.

      For 5–8 marks, expect weakly-evidenced and/or imbalanced outlining of two or three
      relevant themes.

      For 9–12 marks, expect:
      • either a structured synthesis which links together several well-evidenced themes from the
        Guide
      • or a critical conclusion (or on-going evaluation) informed by geographical concepts and/or
        perspectives.

      For 13–16 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                 –9–                 M22/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   (a)   Analyse how interactions between places can be affected by the physical environment.           [12]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on pages 3 to 4.

           The physical environment sets parameters that can limit or accelerate interactions between
           places at varying scales: a good geographical response may analyse interactions between
           particular urban or rural localities in addition to international interactions.
           • The focus should be an analysis of the physical environment’s effects, not a discussion of
              alternative influences on interactions between countries, such as political isolationism.
           • However, credit may and should be given to an analysis of how far physical isolation can
              be overcome using technology (and the recognition that the role of the physical
              environment as a limiting factor is often over-stated).
           • Only limited credit should be given to highly deterministic answers asserting that climate
              limits human development (unless any arguments can be substantiated).

           Possible themes include:
           • natural resource availability
           • potentially limiting effects of isolation for rural or mountainous areas, or islands
           • the importance of a coastline for trade
           • the role of physical factors supporting activities that generate global flows, for example
             touristic flows
           • the role of technology in overcoming isolation
           • the importance of transit chokepoints such as Strait of Hormuz.

           Good answers may apply (AO2) a wider range of knowledge and understanding (AO1) in a
           well-structured way (AO4). One approach might be to provide a structured systematic
           analysis of the different aspects of the physical environment that may impact on interactions
           and connectivity. Another approach might be to analyse the influence of the physical
           environment at varying scales (local, national and world region scales). Another approach
           might be to critically analyse how far physical challenges can be mitigated for example by
           technology. Another approach might be to sequentially analyse different activities that
           depend on physical environments (tourism, trade, etc).

           For 4–6 marks, expect some weakly-evidenced outlining of one or more ways the physical
           environment limits or helps human activity (connectivity may only be implied).

           For 7–9 marks, expect a structured, well-evidenced analysis of:
           • either multiple ways (two or more) in which the physical environment helps and/or hinders
             spatial interactions
           • or interactions in varied place contexts (may consider different scales and/or access to
             technology).

           For 10–12 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                             – 10 –             M22/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   “New technologies solve more global problems than they create.” To what extent do you
      agree with this statement?                                                            [16]

      Credit all content in line with the markbands. Marks should be allocated according to the
      markbands on pages 5 to 6. Credit unexpected approaches wherever relevant.

      New technologies may include social media, artificial intelligence (AI), drones, crowd-
      sourcing and surveillance, etc. Credit may be given for a discussion of historical technologies
      (1990s - internet; 1950s - container shipping) which were ‘new’ in their day provided they are
      applied to a discussion of legitimate global problems. Global problems may be economic,
      social, cultural and environmental; short-term or long-term. Some are created by technology,
      others are solved by them (the content of a good answer should provide some balance, but
      do not expect a perfect balance). Credit consideration of local/individual problems (such as
      identity theft, or ‘fake news’ in a particular country’s election) if the answer addresses (or
      implies strongly) these are issues which the entire global community is facing.

      Possible applied themes (AO2) include knowledge and understanding (AO1) of:
      • the shrinking world (4.2)
      • isolated societies (4.3)
      • supply chain monitoring (4.2, 6.3)
      • various kinds of environmental monitoring (6.2, 6.3)
      • cybersecurity issues (at a global scale) (6.3)
      • crowdsourcing capabilities (at a global scale) (6.3).

      Some answers may describe a range of online issues (hacking, identity theft, bullying/trolling
      etc) for the citizens of ‘global society’ in general. These are unlikely to progress to the 9-12
      band without some located knowledge of actual contexts where these issues are manifest.

      Good answers may synthesise (AO3a) three or more of the above (or other) themes in a well-
      structured (AO4) way.

      Good answers may additionally offer a critical evaluation (AO3b) of the statement, and the
      extent to which problems are being created or solved in a planetary-scale context. Another
      approach might be to critically evaluate different types of technology (ICT, robotics, drones,
      3D printing, transport), and the extent to which they each create or solve problems for
      specific evidenced places - and sometimes do both. Another approach might be to evaluate
      the extent to which perspectives may vary on whether the changes they cause are viewed as
      problems or not (such as the spread of cultural traits and memes via social media). A good
      discussion may conclude with a substantiated final judgement on the overall balance of
      newly-created and solved problems.

      For 5–8 marks, expect weakly-evidenced and/or imbalanced outlining of two or three
      relevant themes.

      For 9–12 marks, expect:
      • either a structured synthesis that links together several well-evidenced themes from the
        Guide
      • or a critical conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) informed by geographical concepts and/or
        perspectives.

      For 13–16 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                  – 11 –             M22/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   (a)   Explain the strengths of the United Nations (UN) Sustainable Development Goals as a way
           of supporting the human development process.                                          [12]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on pages 3 to 4.

           The focus should be on what the SDGs’ criteria are, and why there is inherent value in this
           approach to setting goals using diverse criteria. The UN Sustainable Development Goals
           make use of 17 social, economic, environmental and political criteria. Their strength derives
           (i) from this holistic/multi-strand approach to understanding the human development
           process (i.e. their theoretical/philosophical/ontological merit) and (ii) the way they can be
           used as targets to guide and measure development progress (i.e. their practical/empirical
           value).

           Possible strengths include:
           • the inclusion of climate and biodiversity goals/targets
           • the highlighting of gender as an important issue
           • the primacy of poverty and hunger alleviation
           • the way countries and regions can monitor progress towards these goals
           • the way the SDGs provide the global community with a ‘shared roadmap’ or blueprint for
             development (prior to marking, this can be viewed at: https://sdgs.un.org/goals).

           Do not credit explanation of weaknesses or failures of the SDGs (or the concept of
           development) – the question clearly does not ask for those elements to be explained on this
           occasion. Any such material should be marked as ‘irrelevant’.

           Good answers may apply (AO2) a wider range of knowledge and understanding (AO1) in a
           well-structured way (AO4). One approach might be to provide a structured systematic
           explanation of firstly the philosophical/contextual value of the SDGs and, secondly, their
           practical/goal-orientated usefulness. Another approach might be to explain different types of
           goal (social, economic, environmental and political criteria) and the strengths of this holistic
           approach.

           For 4–6 marks, expect some weakly-evidenced outlining of the SDGs and/or human
           development.

           For 7–9 marks, expect a structured, evidenced explanation of:
           • either different dimensions of the human development process that are included in the
             SDGs
           • or the practical value/strength of using multiple criteria to generate targets and measure
             outcomes.

           For 10–12 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                             – 12 –               M22/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   “Economic challenges are the main cause of opposition to globalization.”
      To what extent do you agree with this statement?                                             [16]
      Credit all content in line with the markbands. Marks should be allocated according to the
      markbands on pages 5 to 6. Credit unexpected approaches wherever relevant.
      Opposition to globalization movements can take many forms. Economic challenges and
      injustices stemming from global shift, immigration or neo-colonialism may give rise to
      different forms and strengths of opposition. However, non-economic concerns with
      sovereignty and cultural identity are important foci for opposition too; also, environmental
      concerns such as climate change and biodiversity losses.
      Possible applied themes (AO2) include knowledge and understanding (AO1) of:
      • actual and perceived costs of economic migration for places (4.2)
      • winners and losers of free trade (4.3)
      • accusations of economic harm linked with work of global lending institutions, and ideas
          about neo-colonialism (and before this, colonialism) (4.1, 4.2)
      • cultural imperialism and cultural change (5.2, 5.3)
      • sovereignty threats (6.1)
      • environmental costs of globalization (6.2).

      Material focused on political or trade barriers to globalization should explain their origin ie how
      these barriers are a result of anti-globalization opposition or movements. Material dealing with
      physical barriers (isolation, relief) will most likely need to be marked as irrelevant.

      Good answers may synthesise (AO3a) three or more of the above (or other) themes in a
      well-structured (AO4) way.

      Good answers may additionally offer a critical evaluation (AO3b) of the statement, and the
      extent which economic challenges have primacy in the debate in different place contexts.
      Another approach might be to critically evaluate different kinds of cultural/social interaction
      which have occurred independent of economic changes, and the extent to which these may
      be a main cause of opposition to globalization. Another approach might be to evaluate the
      extent to which perspectives may vary on whether economic changes and challenges are
      actually real or perceived. A good discussion may conclude with a substantiated final
      judgement on the overall importance of economic challenges.

      For 5–8 marks, expect weakly-evidenced outlining of two or three relevant themes

      For 9–12 marks, expect:
      • either a structured synthesis that links together several well-evidenced themes from the
        Guide
      • or a critical conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) informed by geographical concepts and/or
        perspectives.

      For 13–16 marks, expect both of these traits.
