© International Baccalaureate Organization 2022

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2022

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2022

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Information technology in a global society
Higher level
Paper 1

Tuesday 17 May 2022 (afternoon)


2 hours 15 minutes


Instructions to candidates
y   Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y   Section A: a
                nswer two questions.
y   Section B: a
                nswer one question.
y   Each question is worth [20 marks].
y   The maximum mark for this examination paper is [60 marks].




                                                                                               2222 – 5511
      9 pages                                              © International Baccalaureate Organization 2022
                                                     –2–                                        2222 – 5511


                                                   Section A

Answer two questions. Each question is worth [20 marks].

1.   Medical data shared in online apps

     Many people use smartwatches to monitor their vital signs and manage their health.
     Information such as heart rate, blood pressure and body temperature can be obtained from
     an app* like yourHealth on a smartwatch.

                             Figure 1: The yourHealth app and smartwatch

                                              4G
                           8:30
                                            h
                                  yourHealt
                                     Steps
                                      6784
                                                                  HR 6
                                                                      7
                                    Heart rate
                                               :                 8:30
                                                               BP 1
                                     67 bpm
                                                                    20/
                                                               37.0 75
                                                                    °C

                                              ssure:
                                   Blood pre
                                     120 / 75
                                              perature:
                                  Body tem
                                        37.0 °C



     Some users of the smartwatch app are concerned that their privacy might be invaded.


* app: small specialized program run on mobile devices, the internet, a computer or
  other electronic device

     (a)   (i)     Define the term privacy.                                                             [2]

           (ii)    Identify two ways the smartwatch and cellphone (mobile phone) could use to
                   communicate with each other.                                                         [2]

           The uniform resource locator (URL) for the smartwatch app in Figure 1 is
           https://www.yourhealthwatch.com/2020/03/export-data-yourhealth-watch-health-app.html.

           (iii)   State the domain name.                                                               [1]

           (iv)    State the protocol used in the URL.                                                  [1]

(This question continues on the following page)
                                                  –3–                                            2222 – 5511


(Question 1 continued)

     (b)   (i)	The team developing the smartwatch app followed the product development life
                cycle (PDLC).

                  Explain why end-users should be involved in the development of products such
                  as the smartwatch app.                                                                [3]

           (ii)   Explain why a feasibility study would be used in the development of products
                  such as the smartwatch app.                                                           [3]

     (c)   Many people use smartwatches to monitor their vital signs and manage their health.

           To what extent should an individual use a smartwatch to manage their health?                 [8]




                                                                                                 Turn over
                                                            –4–                                            2222 – 5511


2.      Investigation of ocean disasters
        A system called the Marine Accident Data Analysis Suite (MADAS) uses data collected from
        marine accidents to create a simulation to help understand what has happened (see Figure 2).
                                   Figure 2: An example of a MADAS simulation
      MADAS Replay                                                          Navigation Data
 File    Edit   View   Tools     Trend Charts       Help                    CITY OF ROTTERDAM
            Measure Grab          Zoom in Zoom out                             Date 03/12/15      Time 20:40:32
                                                                            Latitude 53.53534 Longitude 0.04357
                            Menu bar                                        Bearing 140.00
                                                                            PRIMULA SEAWAYS
                                                                               Date 03/12/15      Time 20:40:32
                                                 Navigation data
                                                                            Latitude 53.53491 Longitude 0.04511
                                                                            Bearing 295.00
                Previous position


                        CITY OF ROTTERDAM
                                                                   PRIMULA SEAWAYS

                                          Collision




            Distance scale


                                    Kilometers
                                                                                     Timeline and events
 0.000      0.030   0.060      0.090   0.120       0.150   0.180    0.210   0.240


     Start: 03/12/2015 20:00:00 Current: 03/12/2015 20:40:32
     Cursor Coordinates: Lat: 53.58733 Long: 0.03953

        Cruise ships are required to carry a voyage data recorder (VDR), which uses sensors to
        monitor the conditions in the ship at all times. The data from the sensors is collected and
        input into a relational database (see Figure 3) that is a part of the MADAS system (see Figure 4).
                       Figure 3: Part of the relational database in the MADAS system

                                 Accident                                           Ship

                            Accident_ID                                     Ship_ID

                            Ship_ID                                         Year_Built

                            Date                                            Country_of_Reg

                            Location                                        Length

                            More fields                                     More fields

(This question continues on the following page)
                                                    –5–                                      2222 – 5511


(Question 2 continued)

                                        Figure 4: The MADAS system

                               Ship 1
                   ● Sensor
                   ● Sensor               VDR
                   ● Sensor                                           MADAS

                                                             Relational      Visualization
                                                             database
                               Ship 2
                   ● Sensor
                   ● Sensor               VDR
                   ● Sensor


     (a)   The voyage data recorder (VDR) records weather conditions during a voyage.

           (i)     Identify two sensors that may be used to detect data about the weather
                   conditions.[2]

           (ii)    State the primary key in the Ship table in Figure 3.[1]

           (iii)   State the relationship between the Ship table and Accident table in Figure 3.[1]

           (iv)    Outline one advantage of using a relational database rather than a flat-file
                   database.[2]

     (b)   (i)     Distinguish between data validation and data verification.                       [2]

           (ii)    The MADAS system uses data visualization.

                   Explain why data visualization is used by the MADAS system.                      [4]

     (c)   To what extent can the use of simulations like the MADAS system help prevent
           future accidents?                                                                        [8]




                                                                                             Turn over
                                                    –6–                                             2222 – 5511


3.   Schools told not to use cloud computing software applications

     Schools in the German state of Hesse will no longer be able to use cloud computing services
     and software applications, such as G Suite and Office 365, due to new data protection rules.
     This has identified the risk of schools’ data being stored and accessed by third parties from
     outside of Germany.

     In contrast, many schools in other parts of the world use cloud computing services and
     software applications. These applications allow students to access software that was
     previously only installed on their computers.

     (a)   (i)	Identify two types of cloud computing software applications that students might
                use at school.                                                                             [2]

           (ii)    If the schools in Hesse can no longer use cloud computing software applications,
                   they will need to store their data on a local file server and access it through a
                   local area network (LAN).

                   Identify two ways in which data could be secured if the school stored it locally.       [2]

           (iii)   The change from cloud computing software applications may require the school
                   to change the type of licence they need to purchase.

                   Identify two types of licence that the school could purchase to allow them to
                   install and run software applications on their local area network (LAN).                [2]

     (b)   The European Union’s (EU) General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) governs
           data protection and privacy in the EU. Its regulations give users certain rights in terms
           of their data.

           Explain three principles that should be included in data protection regulations such
           as GDPR.                                                                                        [6]

     (c)   A new school has opened in Switzerland and its IT Manager is considering two options:

           Option 1: Using a local client–server network.

           Option 2: Using a cloud-based service.

           Evaluate the implications of these two options for the IT Manager.                              [8]
                                                   –7–                                           2222 – 5511


                                               Section B

Answer one question. Each question is worth [20 marks].

4.   Cameras in school

     The principal at Flynn School has received requests from parents saying that they would like
     to monitor their children’s performance in school more closely. He is considering extending
     the school’s IT system by installing cameras linked to facial recognition software that can
     record student behaviour in lessons.

     The facial recognition software can determine a student’s attention level and behaviour,
     such as identifying if they are listening, answering questions, talking with other students, or
     sleeping. The software uses machine learning to analyse each student’s behaviour and gives
     them a weekly score that is automatically emailed to their parents.

     (a)   (i)	Identify the steps used by the facial recognition software to identify an
                individual student.                                                                     [4]

           (ii)   A data flow diagram was used in the development of the facial recognition software.

                  Identify two characteristics of a data flow diagram.                                  [2]

     (b)   The school’s IT manager has received a report of several IT-related incidents that
           occurred in the last week.

           y Incident 1: Students installed and played a video game during a history lesson.
           y Incident 2: The facial recognition software detected that students appeared to be
             talking a lot in a French class.
           y Incident 3: There was an unreliable internet connection during the streaming of a
             video as part of a biology lesson.
           y Incident 4: Internet connection was lost just as final-year geography students were
             about to begin online examinations.

           Explain how the IT manager could determine the order of priority for these four incidents. [6]

     (c)   Discuss whether Flynn School should introduce a facial recognition system that uses
           machine learning to analyse each student’s behaviour and give them a score that is
           automatically emailed to their parents.                                                      [8]




                                                                                                Turn over
                                                     –8–                                          2222 – 5511


5.   Robotic Surgery

     Sandy Parkar, the manager of a large hospital, is considering using robots controlled by
     surgeons to carry out surgical procedures. The surgeon uses a computer console to control
     the robot (see Figure 5).

                                         Figure 5: Robotic surgery




     All the robot’s movements, and the surgical procedure, are recorded. This allows information
     to be collected about each procedure.

     The software for the surgical robot was developed using an agile project management
     methodology that includes prototyping, alpha testing and beta testing.

     (a)   (i)     System developers use prototypes as part of the development process.

                   Identify two characteristics of a prototype.                                          [2]

           (ii)    Identify two characteristics of alpha testing.                                        [2]

           (iii)   Identify two characteristics of beta testing.                                         [2]

     (b)   (i)     The surgical robot uses machine learning software that utilizes neural networks.

                   Explain why neural networks are utilized in the machine learning process.             [3]

           (ii)    Explain why an agile project management methodology would be used in the
                   development of the software for a surgical robot.                                     [3]

     (c)   In 2020, a patient died while undergoing a surgical procedure in which a surgical robot
           was used. A court case followed to determine who was accountable.

           Discuss whether the surgeon, the manufacturer of the surgical robot, or the hospital
           manager should be held accountable.                                                           [8]
                                                      –9–                                         2222 – 5511


6.    Marlowe sees the vet
      Marlowe, Sandra’s cat, has not been feeling well. He is one year old and has not been eating.
      East Side Vets mainly treats dogs, cats, and rabbits. To reduce the work for the
      veterinarians* (vets), a new procedure has been introduced to determine if an appointment is
      necessary. Sandra will have to answer a series of questions from an expert system that will
      advise her whether Marlowe needs an appointment to see a vet. This expert system uses a
      decision tree, such as the one in Figure 6.
                      Figure 6: A decision tree in the East Side Vets expert system


                                                Is your pet eating
                                                    normally?


                                         No                          Yes



                               Is your pet sleeping            Pet does not need
                                    normally?                    to see a vet.


                         No                           Yes



      Richard has also used this expert system to inquire about his 12-year-old cat, Scooby.
      Unfortunately, the expert system has output that Scooby may have multiple conditions and
      has suggested that Richard book an appointment for Scooby to see a vet.


* veterinarians: people qualified to treat sick or injured animals

      (a)   (i)     Identify two components of an expert system.                                         [2]

            (ii)    Identify two reasons why a prototype of the East Side Vets expert system
                    would have been developed before its release.                                        [2]

            (iii)   The vets have found that many pets have multiple conditions, and they are
                    considering upgrading the expert system to one that uses fuzzy logic.

                    Identify two reasons why the East Side Vets expert system should use fuzzy logic.    [2]

      (b)   (i)     Explain why forward chaining is used in the East Side Vets expert system.            [2]

            (ii)    When the East Side Vets expert system was introduced, a direct changeover
                    methodology was used rather than a phased changeover.

                    Explain why a direct changeover methodology was used to introduce the
                    new system.                                                                          [4]

      (c)   To what extent does the use of the expert system by East Side Vets provide benefits
            for both the vets and their customers?                                                       [8]

References:

Figure 2. With permission from the International Union of Marine Insurance. Source adapted.

Figure 5. mathisworks / iStock.

All other texts, graphics and illustrations © International Baccalaureate Organization 2022
