M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                               May 2022


                               Philosophy


           Higher level and standard level


                                Paper 2




34 pages
                                            –2–                   M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2022

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2022

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2022

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                     –3–                  M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


   I. QIG availability
The following QIGs are usually available for qualification, but this will be confirmed at the start of the
marking session:

     QIG number                        Text/author                        English QIG      Spanish QIG
                                                                          availability      availability
                      Simone de Beauvoir The Second Sex, Vol. 1
           01
                      part 1, Vol. 2 part 1 and Vol. 2 part 4

           02         René Descartes Meditations

                      David Hume Dialogues Concerning Natural
           03
                      Religion

           04         John Stuart Mill On Liberty

           05         Friedrich Nietzsche The Genealogy of Morals

                      Martha Nussbaum Creating Capabilities:
           06
                      The Human Development Approach

           07         Ortega y Gasset The Origin of Philosophy

           08         Plato The Republic, Books IV–IX

           09         Peter Singer The Life You Can Save

           10         Charles Taylor The Ethics of Authenticity

           11         Lao Tzu Tao Te Ching

           12         Zhuangzi Zhuangzi, Inner Chapters


   II. Candidates who overlook the Paper 2 rubric of answering both parts a and b of
       one question

However clearly the IB sets out its expectations on how candidates should answer exam questions,
there are occasions when we receive work that does not match what we asked for. There is a specific
case in exams where we ask students to select particular questions to answer and they fail to follow
these rules (rubrics).

This note is intended to clarify how we deal with these situations through a series of scenarios.
The actions have been checked to ensure that they are supported by RM Assessor.

Overarching principles
The following statements underpin our decisions below:
   1. No candidate should be disadvantaged for following the rules.
   2. Whenever possible candidates should receive credit for what they know.
                                                     –4–                  M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Example
To help understand the different scenarios we will make reference to an example assessment.
Instruction: candidates must respond to both parts of one question.
Q7. (a)     Explain Mill’s view of the relationship between liberty and utility.                  (10 marks)
      (b)   To what extent are liberty and utility fundamentally conflicting concepts?            (15 marks)

Q9. (a)     Explain the view that morality has a clear and traceable genealogy.                   (10 marks)
      (b)   To what extent do you agree with the genealogy Nietzsche proposes?                    (15 marks)

Scenario 1. Candidate answers parts from two different questions.
Example: Candidate answers 7(a) and 9(a) or answers 7(b) and 9(a)
Action:
Mark all of the candidate’s answers. The student will receive their best mark from one question.
In the second example this means the best mark for either 7(b) or 9(a).
This requires that examiners assign each mark to the correct question part (ie: gives the mark for 9(a) to
9(a) and not 7(a) – if question is QIGed this will happen automatically).

Scenario 2. Candidate does not split their answer according to the sub-parts.
Example: Candidate writes one answer which they label as question 7 or they indicate they have only
answered 9(a) but actually answer both 9(a) and 9(b) in that answer.
Action:
Examiners use their best judgement to award marks for all sub-parts as if the candidate has correctly
labelled their answer.
In the example this means the candidate would be able to gain up to 25 marks despite only labelling the
answer as 9(a).
Exception – where the nature of the two parts of the question means it is important to differentiate
between the two answers, for example the first part should be done before the second part (in maths) or
the candidate needs to show they understand the difference between the two parts of the question then
examiners should use their judgement and only award marks if it is clear that the candidate has simply
made a mistake in numbering their answers.
Scenario 3. Candidate duplicates their answer to the first part in the second part.
Example: Candidate answers 7(a) and the repeats the same text as part of 7(b)
Action:
Only give credit for the answer once (in the first part of the question). The assessment criteria should
assess distinct skills when there are parts to a question so this problem should not occur.

Scenario 4. Candidate provides the wrong question number for their answer.
Example: Candidate states they are answering 7(a) and 7(b) but their response clearly talks about
Nietzsche (Q9) rather than Mill’s (Q7).
Action:
Mark the answer according to the mark scheme for the question that they should have indicated.
Exception – this only applies when there is no ambiguity as to which question the student has
attempted, for example if they have rephrased the question in their opening paragraph. It is not the role
of the examiner to identify which question is the best fit for their answer (ie: which questions their answer
would get most marks for). If the given question number is a plausible match with their answer then the
student should be marked according to that question. Only in exceptional circumstances should this rule
be applied to sub-questions (ie: assuming the candidate had mistakenly swapped their answers for
Q7(a) and Q7(b).
                                                   –5–                  M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


How to use the Diploma Programme Philosophy markscheme

The assessment markbands constitute the formal tool for marking examination scripts, and in these
assessment markbands examiners can see the skills being assessed in the examinations. The
markschemes are designed to assist examiners in possible routes taken by candidates in terms of the
content of their answers when demonstrating their skills of doing philosophy through their responses.
The points listed are not compulsory points, and not necessarily the best possible points. They are a
framework to help examiners contextualize the requirements of the question, and to facilitate the
application of marks according to the assessment markbands listed on page 8 for part A responses,
and page 9 for part B responses.

It is important that examiners understand that the main idea of the course is to promote doing
philosophy, and this involves activity and engagement throughout a two-year programme, as opposed
to emphasizing the chance to display knowledge in a terminal set of examination papers. Even in the
examinations, responses should not be assessed on how much candidates know as much as how they
are able to use their knowledge in support of an argument, using the skills referred to in the various
assessment markbands published in the subject guide, reflecting an engagement with philosophical
activity throughout the course. As a tool intended to help examiners in assessing responses, the
following points should be kept in mind when using a markscheme:

• The Diploma Programme Philosophy course is designed to encourage the skills of doing philosophy
  in the candidates. These skills can be accessed through reading the assessment markbands in the
  subject guide
• The markscheme does not intend to outline a model/correct answer
• The markscheme has an introductory paragraph which contextualizes the emphasis of the question
  being asked
• The bullet points below the paragraph are suggested possible points of development that should not
  be considered a prescriptive list but rather an indicative list where they might appear in the answer
• If there are names of philosophers and references to their work incorporated into the markscheme,
  this should help to give context for the examiners and does not reflect a requirement that such
  philosophers and references should appear in an answer: they are possible lines of development.
• Candidates can legitimately select from a wide range of ideas, arguments and concepts in service of
  the question they are answering, and it is possible that candidates will use material effectively that is
  not mentioned in the markscheme
• Examiners should be aware of the command terms for Philosophy as published on page 54 of the
  Philosophy subject guide when assessing responses
• In markschemes for Paper 2 there is a greater requirement for specific content as the Paper requires
  the study of a text by the candidates and the questions set will derive from that text. The markscheme
  will show what is relevant for both part A and part B answers. In part B responses, candidates may
  select other material they deem as relevant
• Responses for part A and part B should be assessed using the distinct assessment markbands.


Note to examiners

Candidates at both Higher Level and Standard Level answer one question on the prescribed texts.
Each question consists of two parts, and candidates must answer both parts of the question (a and b).
                                                –6–                 M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 2 part A markbands


 Marks                                         Level descriptor

   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

          There is little relevant knowledge of the specified idea/argument/concept from the text.
  1–2     The explanation is minimal.
          Philosophical vocabulary is not used, or is consistently used inappropriately.

          Some knowledge of the specified idea/argument/concept from the text is demonstrated but
           this lacks accuracy, relevance and detail.
  3–4
          The explanation is basic and in need of development.
          Philosophical vocabulary is not used, or is consistently used inappropriately.

          Knowledge of the specified idea/argument/concept from the text is mostly accurate and
           relevant, but lacking in detail.
  5–6
          There is a satisfactory explanation.
          Philosophical vocabulary is used, sometimes appropriately.

          The response contains accurate and relevant knowledge of the specified idea/
           argument/concept from the text.
  7–8
          The explanation is clear, although may be in need of further development.
          Philosophical vocabulary is mostly used appropriately.

          The response contains relevant, accurate and detailed knowledge of the specified
           idea/argument/concept from the text.
  9–10
          The explanation is clear and well developed.
          There is appropriate use of philosophical vocabulary throughout the response.
                                                  –7–                 M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 2 part B markbands


 Marks                                           Level descriptor

   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

            There is little relevant knowledge of the text.
            Philosophical vocabulary is not used, or is consistently used inappropriately.
  1–3
            The response is mostly descriptive with very little analysis.
            There is no discussion of alternative interpretations or points of view.

            Some knowledge of the text is demonstrated but this lacks accuracy and relevance.
            Philosophical vocabulary is used, sometimes appropriately.
  4–6       There is some limited analysis, but the response is more descriptive than analytical.
            There is little discussion of alternative interpretations or points of view.
            Some of the main points are justified.

            Knowledge of the text is mostly accurate and relevant.
            Philosophical vocabulary is used, sometimes appropriately.
  7–9       The response contains analysis, but this analysis lacks development.
            There is some discussion of alternative interpretations or points of view.
            Many of the main points are justified.

            The response contains accurate and relevant knowledge of the text.
            Philosophical vocabulary is mostly used appropriately.
 10–12      The response contains clear critical analysis.
            There is discussion and some assessment of alternative interpretations or points of view.
            Most of the main points are justified.

            The response contains relevant, accurate and detailed knowledge of the text.
            There is appropriate use of philosophical vocabulary throughout the response.
 13–15      The response contains clear and well developed critical analysis.
            There is discussion and assessment of alternative interpretations or points of view.
            All or nearly all of the main points are justified.
                                              –8–                 M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Simone de Beauvoir: The Second Sex, Vol. 1 part 1, Vol. 2 part 1 and Vol. 2 part 4

1.   (a)
                                                                                          [10]

     (b)
                                                                                          [15]




                      Questions and answers removed for copyright reasons
                                               –9–                M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   (a)
                                                                                                [10]

     (b)   Evaluate de Beauvoir’s view on women’s homosexuality.                                [15]




                       Question and answer removed for copyright reasons




           Possible discussion points include (part B):
           • Whether women’s homosexuality can be seen as a reaction to men’s dominance
           • Whether women’s homosexuality can be seen in terms of a reaction to the conception of a
             passive body and a submitted flesh
           • Whether women’s homosexuality can be related to specific professions, eg: athletes,
             artists, writers
                                    – 10 –              M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


• Whether de Beauvoir’s arguments on the lesbian woman are somehow linked to her views
  on art for women: both homosexuality and art as means to gain success and react to the
  males’ dominance
• Whether de Beauvoir’s view on the lesbian woman as a reaction to the males’ dominance
  contradicts her statement that women can achieve success by social recognition
• Whether the relationship between the mother and the adolescent girl is a feasible way to
  interpret women’s homosexuality
• The role of “the Oedipus Complex” in women’s homosexuality
• The contrast between de Beauvoir’s appraisal of the psychoanalytic explanations of
  women’s homosexuality and her criticism presented elsewhere in the book
• Whether the homosexual choice offers women a complete solution or their sexuality still
  remains somehow “halfway”
• Whether de Beauvoir’s viewpoint is still viable in the present times.
                                                 – 11 –               M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


René Descartes: Meditations

3.   (a)   Explain Descartes’s proofs of God’s existence.                                             [10]

     (b)   Evaluate Descartes’s proofs of God’s existence.                                            [15]

           In the third Meditation there are two sections with arguments for God’s existence. The term
           for Descartes’s argument is known as the “trademark argument”. The general thrust is that
           God has placed the idea of him-/herself in us, as this is not an idea that an imperfect being
           such as a human could come up with her-/himself. This idea of the placing of the idea is
           based on a notion of cause that does not allow for a greater reality to be brought into effect
           than is present in the causal agency. Descartes offers the example of a stone, which cannot
           be made unless produced by some agency that contains all the elements of the stone, or
           some even greater elements than the stone (see Kenny). Such reasoning is applicable to
           ideas, which if they contain some property – such as perfection – then the cause of the idea
           must contain in them as much “causal efficiency” as would be required in the case of the
           making of a stone. Descartes looks at his idea of God and discounts the possibilities that the
           idea of God could come out of nowhere, or out of speculation about our own inadequacy (eg:
           Hume). Descartes concludes that his idea of God can only come from God, therefore God
           must exist. Later in the third Meditation, Descartes asks if he could exist if there was no
           being more perfect than him. Descartes asks, if so, from where would he get his existence?
           Descartes proceeds by eliminating himself, his parents and any other source less great than
           God. Descartes involves a form of the cosmological argument in eliminating his parents,
           since their existence is dependent on their own parents, and so on. The “trademark
           argument” is reliant on the principle that something greater must cause any effect. This is
           discussed by thinkers in light of Descartes’s argument. In the fifth Meditation Descartes
           offers his version of the ontological argument concluding God’s existence from the necessity
           of existence in a being whose nature has all the perfections. The issue of how perfection
           relates to existence and whether existence can be used as a predicate in the way Descartes
           does, is an issue that might be evaluated.

           Candidates might explore (part A):
           • The causal principle at the heart of the trademark argument
           • The need for a perfect source to create the effect of a perfect idea
           • The relation of ideas to reality in the argument
           • Reality as a part of perfection
           • The necessity of God’s existence in the ontological argument
           • Existence is wrapped up – and necessitated – in the idea of God.

           Possible discussion points include (part B):
           • The causal principle – is it convincing?
           • Can the idea of something necessitate its reality?
           • Can perfection be used as a predicate?
           • Does it add anything to a concept to say that it exists? eg: Russell
           • Does the ontological argument only apply in reality if something exists, as opposed to
             necessitating existence in the first place?
                                                 – 12 –                M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   (a)   Explain Descartes’s answers to the initial skepticism of the first Meditation.              [10]

     (b)   Evaluate Descartes’s answers to the initial skepticism of the first Meditation.             [15]

           Descartes begins his work outlining a general, and deep, skepticism about the possibility of
           certain knowledge. Descartes tests possible candidates for knowledge in three “waves of
           doubt”. In the first wave he recognizes that sense perception can sometimes deceive us.
           This is not a particularly global doubt because he sees no reason to condemn all sense
           knowledge on the grounds that occasionally we have been deceived. In the second wave
           Descartes speculates on the possibility that his knowledge of the external world is similar to
           the experience of a dream, where, during the dream itself, he has no means of distinguishing
           it from waking reality. But Descartes accepts there is a relationship between the imagery of
           dreams and what those dreams are depicting, so a relationship with reality is possible, even
           if not from within the experience of the dream at the time. Descartes moves to his third wave,
           which is more radical. Here, Descartes speculates about a deceiving God or a malicious
           demon planting the idea of reality on a subject like a brain in a vat. Following this radical
           wave, Descartes posits the basis of “the cogito” (the phrase itself does not appear here but in
           other works) as a response to show that in achieving doubt, he is achieving thought, thus at
           the very least he must exist. There is discussion to be had about whether Descartes is
           peddling an inference – a sense of “because I am thinking, therefore I exist”, or a more direct
           experience of “I am thinking, I exist to be doing this”. The earlier inference can be challenged
           as it says something general about any thinking thing to stand up. In addition, there can be a
           question of whether the “I” properly can refer to Descartes as an individual rather than, say, a
           network of thinking shared by more than an individual. In the end Descartes can say that as
           long as he is thinking he exists, and that is a proposition immune from the waves of doubt in
           the first Meditation.

           Candidates might explore (part A):
           • Doubt through lack of trust in the complete reliability of the sense perceptions
           • Doubt due to dreaming, and responses to that
           • Doubt due to the malicious demon
           • The response, termed “the cogito” but not used in the classic statement of the cogito in
             the second Meditation not containing the sense of “therefore” found in later works
           • The question of whether there is inference in Descartes’s statement in the second
             meditation
           • Descartes concludes he is a thinking thing and goes on to explore the possible nature of a
             thinking thing, concluding that a thinking thing could be termed a “substance” because it
             exists independently.

           Possible discussion points include (part B):
           • Responses to the waves of doubt – see objections to the idea that dreams or sense
             unreliability should cause the extent of skepticism Descartes is seeking
           • Descartes deals with the inadequacy of the first two waves, but is he correct in seeing the
             malicious demon (or as more recently stated, the brain in the vat) as achieving the
             skepticism he must answer?
           • Is the statement of the cogito in the second Meditation an inference? If so, what are the
             implications for Descartes’s quest for certainty
           • How does the “I” work in the experience Descartes is exploring as a thinking thing?
           • Descartes’s conclusion that a thinking thing is a substance and the origins of Cartesian
             dualism.
                                                    – 13 –                 M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


David Hume: Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion

5.   (a)   Explain Demea’s claim that “the science of natural theology is the most profound
           and abstruse of any”.                                                                          [10]

     (b)   Evaluate Demea’s claim that “the science of natural theology is the most profound
           and abstruse of any”.                                                                          [15]

           The claim is presented by Demea at the very beginning of Hume’s Dialogues. It invites an
           exploration of the different views that the characters of the dialogue have on the educational
           methodology for philosophy students and for the learning of theological doctrines.
           Candidates might consider Demea’s argument on the necessity for students to postpone the
           study of theology as a science and focus on the concept of piety only at the beginning.
           Responses might also discuss Demea’s method, which aims to induce students to distrust all
           sciences, in order for them to embrace religion. As he explains, “I imprint deeply on their
           young minds a habitual reverence for all the principles of religion. While they pass through
           every other branch of knowledge, I comment on the uncertainty of each branch, on the
           eternal controversies of men, on the obscurity of all philosophy, and on the strange,
           ridiculous conclusions that some of the greatest geniuses have derived from the principles of
           mere human reason” (Part 1). Candidates might present Philo’s view on Demea’s argument
           and discuss the reasons why the “common folk” have contempt for philosophy, while holding
           “even more firmly to the great points of theology” (Part 1). Philo’s skeptical position extends
           Demea’s argument, since he states that “our best protection against such arrogance in
           religious matters is ignorance” (Part 1). The central topic of Part 1 then goes beyond the
           educational issues presented at the beginning and ends up into a dispute on skepticism
           between Philo and Cleanthes. Responses might analyse Philo’s suggestion to adopt and
           improve Demea’s principles, in order to become aware of the weakness of human reasoning
           and “the errors and deceits of our senses [should] be kept in mind” (Part 1). Candidates
           might present Cleanthes’s reply to Philo’s argument and his criticism of Philo’s skepticism in
           making it a durable means to solve everyday issues, including a comparison between Stoics
           and Skeptics. Responses might pinpoint Cleanthes’s concern about the dangers of a “crude
           and ignorant” skepticism held by common people, grounded in “a general prejudice against
           things that they can’t easily understand […] This sort of skepticism is fatal to knowledge, not
           to religion” (Part 1). Candidates might extend their discussion to other philosophical views of
           skepticism or focus on the role that opinions and senses play as means to knowledge for
           other philosophers, eg: Plato, Aristotle, Descartes, Locke, Kant.

                     [Source: David Hume: 1779, Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, London, Unknown.
                                https://archive.org/details/bub_gb_E7dbAAAAQAAJ/mode/2up.]



           Candidates might explore (part A):
           • Demea’s view on religion and theology
           • Philo’s skepticism
           • Cleanthes’s criticism of Philo’s skepticism
           • The role of ignorance according to Philo
           • The arrogance, weakness, blindness of mere human reasoning
           • Differences between Stoics and Skeptics
           • The dangerous kind of skepticism that Cleanthes highlights
           • The role of senses and human reasoning.
                                    – 14 –              M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




Possible discussion points include (part B):
• The importance of an educational methodology for philosophy students, particularly with
  reference to theological issues
• Whether Demea’s methodology is feasible for the proper understanding of theology
• Whether the theological doctrines stem from the uncertainty of human reasoning or they
  are a specific kind of reasoning, as Locke believed
• Whether Philo’s view of ignorance is linked to a proper skeptical standpoint
• Whether skepticism can be a means for approaching everyday issues
• Whether skepticism is dangerous, as Cleanthes highlights
• The limits of human reasoning and the consequences for human knowledge, eg: Plato,
  Descartes, empiricism
• Whether senses are fallacious and hence not a valid source of knowledge, eg: Descartes,
  Spinoza, or otherwise, eg: Kant.
                                                    – 15 –                 M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


6.   (a)   Explain Philo’s claim that “the world is an animal and that God is the mind of
           the world”.                                                                                    [10]
     (b)   Evaluate Philo’s claim that “the world is an animal and that God is the mind of
           the world”.                                                                                    [15]
           The claim is presented by Philo in the opening section of Part 6 of Hume’s Dialogues. Philo
           presents his argument in criticizing Cleanthes’s view on the impossibilities to attribute specific
           qualities to God, as presented in the previous parts of the text. Candidates might refer to
           Philo’s argument of the similarities: “Where several known circumstances are observed to be
           similar, the unknown will also be found similar” (Part 6). Candidates might explore Philo’s
           parallel of the universe and the animal or organic body, in which waste is repaired, circulation
           of matter is continuous. Moreover, according to Philo, “the different parts of the whole system
           are seen to act in harmony with one another; and each part of the world or member of an
           organism, in doing its proper job, operates both for its own preservation and for that of the
           whole” (Part 6). Responses might discuss Philo’s standpoint that matter cannot stay in a
           disordered state: “No hypothesis, whether skeptical or religious, should make room for
           chance; everything is surely governed by steady, inviolable laws” (Part 6). Responses might
           take into account the dualism of mind and body as an argument explaining the traditional
           misunderstanding of the nature of the universe, which could be structured differently from the
           human experience of a mind in a body. Candidates might discuss Cleanthes’s reply to Philo
           and the criticism grounded in the argument of a universe resembling more like a plant than
           like an animal. Also, responses might consider other Cleanthes’s argument against the
           eternity of the universe and evaluate his theory on the beginning of the universe and his
           proofs in favour of the idea that the world is young, eg: cherry-trees, Columbus. Candidates
           might highlight the fact that the arguments that Hume presents on the nature of the universe
           are the ground for the real scope of the discussion: the nature of God and the possibilities to
           attribute qualities to God. Candidates might include an evaluation of other philosophical
           views, from the idea of an ordered universe and a prefixed becoming, like in Plato, Aristotle
           or in the Christian philosophy, to the idea of change, transformation and probabilistic
           assumptions, like in evolutionism, pragmatism, or quantum theory. Bishop Butler stated that
           “probability is the very guide of life”.
                     [Source: David Hume: 1779, Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, London, Unknown.
                                https://archive.org/details/bub_gb_E7dbAAAAQAAJ/mode/2up.]
           Candidates might explore (part A):
           • The argument from design and the idea of a designer in the causation of the world
           • Philo’s view on order, waste, circulation, matter
           • Philo’s argument of similarities
           • Parallel of the universe and animal or organic body
           • Philo’s criticism of mind-body dualism
           • Cleanthes’s criticism of Philo’s view; universe as a plant
           • Cleanthes’s argument and proofs against the eternity of universe
           • The role of steady and inviolable laws in the universe.
           Possible discussion points include (part B):
           • Whether Philo’s argument on matter is feasible nowadays
           • Whether the argument of similarities is a strong one or it is ascribable to a mere inductive
             one
           • Whether the argument of the universe as an animal or organic body has had further
             philosophical developments, eg: environmental ethics, deep ecology, the Gaia hypothesis
           • Other views on the dualism mind-body, eg: Descartes, and possible criticisms, eg: Dewey,
             James, Damasio
           • Whether Cleanthes’s proofs against the eternity of the universe are viable
           • The role of change and mutation in the universe in contrast with the idea of a prefixed
             order
           • Whether the design argument conflicts with the idea of evolution
           • The theories of an ordered universe, as in Plato, Aristotle, or in Christian philosophy
           • Order and disorder in the light of evolutionism
           • Chaos, chance, probability as alternative structures of the universe, eg: quantum theory.
                                                    – 16 –                  M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


John Stuart Mill: On Liberty

7.   (a)   Explain Mill’s principle that self-protection is the only end for which mankind is
           warranted in interfering with the liberty of action.                                            [10]
     (b)   Evaluate Mill’s principle that self-protection is the only end for which mankind is
           warranted in interfering with the liberty of action.                                            [15]

           The question is focused on this central idea as it is presented in the introductory first chapter.
           Mill states that the object of his essay is to assert one very simple principle. It has come to be
           known as the Harm Principle, since it defines the limits of individual liberty in terms of harm
           to others. This principle has to govern the relations between society and the individual from
           the point of view of compulsion and control. The means used might be physical force in the
           form of legal penalties or the moral coercion of public opinion. That principle is that the sole
           end for which mankind are warranted, individually or collectively in interfering with the liberty
           of action of any of their number, is self-protection; “the only purpose for which power can be
           rightfully exercised over any member of a civilized community, against his will, is to prevent
           harm to others” (Chapter 1). His own good, either physical or moral, is not a sufficient
           warrant, “He cannot rightfully be compelled to do or refrain because it will be better for him to
           do so, because it will make him happier, because, in the opinions of others, to do so would
           be wise, or even right” (Chapter 1). According to Mill these might be good reasons to argue
           with him, but not for compelling him. He clearly stresses that the only justification for which
           power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilized community, against his will,
           is to prevent harm to others. His own good, either physical or moral, is not a sufficient
           reason. The obligation of non-interference that the principle imposes rules out two
           justifications for limiting individual liberty: paternalism (restriction on actions harmful only to
           self) and moralism (restriction on harmless actions on the ground that they are immoral).
                      [Source: John Stuart Mill: 1867, On Liberty, London, Longmans, Green, and Company.
                                       https://archive.org/details/bub_gb_jUu6GjuSzOEC.]
           Candidates might explore (part A):
           • The only aspect of the conduct of any one, for which he is amenable to society, is that
             which concerns others. In that what merely concerns himself, his independence is, of
             right, absolute. Over himself, over his own body and mind, the individual is sovereign
           • Since this principle defines the limits of individual liberty in terms of harm to others, it has
             come to be known as the Harm Principle
           • The principle is meant to apply only to human beings in the maturity of their faculties
           • A person may cause evil to others not only by his actions but by his inaction, and in either
             case she is justly accountable to them for the injury
           • The exclusion of justifications for limiting individual liberty, eg: paternalism and moralism.
           Possible discussion points include (part B):
           • The possible implications of the principle. It requires liberty of tastes and pursuits; of
             framing the plan of our life to suit our own character; of doing as we like, subject to such
             consequences as may follow; without impediment so long as what we do does not harm
             others, even though they might consider our conduct to be foolish, perverse, or wrong
           • From the liberty of each individual, follows the liberty, within the same limits, of
             combination among individuals; freedom to unite, for any purpose not involving harm to
             others
           • The Harm Principle and utility. Utility as the ultimate appeal on all ethical questions; but it
             must be utility in the largest sense, grounded in the permanent interests of man as a
             progressive being
           • The extent to which Mill (as critics have sometimes thought) was frightened by the
             prospect of a mass democracy in which working-class opinion would be oppressive and
             perhaps violent
           • Mill’s principle rules out paternalistic interventions to save people from themselves, and
             ideal interventions to make people behave “better”
           • Different views on liberty, some are grounded not in the individual but in social or
             collective realities, eg: Marxism.
                                                     – 17 –                  M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


8.   (a)   Explain Mill’s statement that the subject of his essay is not the liberty of the will,
           but civil or social liberty.                                                                   [10]

     (b)   Evaluate Mill’s statement that the subject of his essay is not the liberty of the will,
           but civil or social liberty.                                                                    [15]
           The question gives an opportunity to explain and evaluate the core of Mill’s argument as
           stated at the very start of the text: “The nature and limits of the power which can be
           legitimately exercised by society over the individual.” From an historical perspective the issue
           can be framed within four stages of civil or social development. At the earliest stage, liberty
           meant protection against the tyranny of the political rulers. In the second stage, liberty came
           to mean not limitation of government power but the people’s self-rule (by means of temporary
           representatives revocable at the majority’s will). In the third stage, the struggle for liberty
           became a struggle for limited democratic government. Liberty now meant people’s self-rule
           within certain fundamental legal limits (constitutional checks) designed to secure minorities
           against injustice by the people’s majority. By means of constitutional checks, “the consent of
           the community, or of a body of some sort supposed to represent its interests” is made “a
           necessary condition to some of the more important acts of the governing power” (Chapter 1).
           Further, Mill is worried about a fourth stage of social development in which the people’s
           majority has vastly expanded power to ensure that all conform to its opinions and customs.
                     [Source: John Stuart Mill: 1867, On Liberty, London, Longmans, Green, and Company.
                                      https://archive.org/details/bub_gb_jUu6GjuSzOEC]
           Candidates might explore (part A):
           • According to Mill the question has been seldom stated, and hardly ever discussed.
              However, it deeply “influences the practical controversies of the age by its latent presence,
              and is likely soon to make itself recognized as the vital question of the future”
           • The question is far from being new and has divided mankind, almost from the remotest
              ages, but in the stage of progress into which the more civilized portions of the species
              have now entered, it presents itself under new conditions, and requires a different and
              more fundamental treatment
           • In the fourth stage protection is needed against the tyranny of the prevailing opinion and
              feeling; against the tendency of society to impose, by means other than civil penalties, its
              own ideas and practices as rules of conduct on those who dissent from them
           • The different philosophical approaches between metaphysical analyses of freedom of the
              will (eg: freedom and determinism) and the social issue regarding the power which can be
              legitimately exercised by society over the individual.
           Possible discussion points include (part B):
           • Historical moments and political theories in relation to the stages, eg: Machiavelli’s
             Discourses and Locke’s Second Treatise, Rousseau’s Of the Social Contract, the United
             States as the first society that entered into the third stage, and de Tocqueville’s
             Democracy in America
           • Mill feared that a prosperous middle-class society would care nothing for individual liberty:
             obedience to prevailing customs and norms typically regarded as important, not the
             freedom to explore diverse paths of self-development and to form one’s opinions and
             character as one thinks best
           • Social and individual exercise of liberty as one of the elements of well-being
           • Forms of civil liberty, eg: the liberty of thought and discussion
           • The relation between liberty and social progress
           • Mill’s principle of liberty aims to encourage individuality as an element of general utility.
             The principle of liberty and utilitarianism
           • Mill’s principle of liberty as a classic statement of liberal feminism (The Subjection of
             Women 1869): if freedom is a good for men, it is for women; further, women should have
             access to everything to which men have access
           • The idea of negative and positive liberty
           • Different conceptions of autonomy
           • Mill’s defence of liberty against different forms of totalitarianisms and totalitarian ideas:
             projections up to present days.
                                                      – 18 –                   M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Friedrich Nietzsche: The Genealogy of Morals

9.   (a)   Explain Nietzsche’s account of “bad conscience” in the second essay.                                      [10]

     (b)   Evaluate Nietzsche’s account of “bad conscience”.                                                         [15]

           In the second essay Nietzsche employs the genealogical method to trace the origins of our
           conscience, and hence our moral sense. Interacting in society has the effect of making
           individuals predictable, using their memories to have the ability to make promises. Out of this
           process comes a “sovereign individual” able to make autonomous decisions, not based on
           guilt or a need to conform, but through a way of exercising individual free will. This comes
           with a sense of individual responsibility, which Nietzsche terms “conscience”. Nietzsche also
           identifies a “bad conscience” based on the language of debt and a sense of guilt. This arises
           when a promise is unfulfilled or a debt unpaid. Punishment is applied out of a sense of
           cruelty or pleasure in seeing suffering. This was the historical explanation for seeing debts
           paid, where the offender is harmed in some way as part of the advantage of being the one
           owed. Nietzsche sees such enjoyment of suffering as not being negative. Rather, he sees it
           as an explanation for the meaning of suffering in ancient times, before some divine figure
           was created in the minds of humans to oversee suffering. This ensured it had some purpose
           for the one who was suffering, as opposed to the one exercising the punishment. The bad
           conscience is created after the leaders of society force unwitting and “formless, still roaming
           about” humans, who are originally hunters, to be organized as a crowd in a society. In this
           state the majority of people are turned in and on themselves and the bad conscience occurs
           as the “will to power” is suffocated and given no chance to be expressed. This forms part of
           Nietzsche’s explanation for the invention of the gods/God. The essay ends with Nietzsche
           offering a role for the bad conscience with its destructive dynamic to work on the position
           humans find themselves in and to attack the sickness of the human condition in the modern
           state.
                [Source: Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche: 1887, The genealogy of morals, New York, Boni and Liveright.
                                  https://archive.org/details/genealogyofmoral00nietuoft/mode/2up.]

           Candidates might explore (part A):
           • Nietzsche proposes a historical explanation for the organization of society and the
             experience of the majority of its members
           • The link between freedom, free-will and conscience
           • The account of bad conscience and its associations with punishment and debt
           • The account of suffering and punishment
           • The account of the need for the powerful to attribute praise to those who have gone
             before them and to set up their ancestors in a powerful light
           • The implications for Nietzsche’s account of the creation of belief in the gods/God – the
             holding in the highest esteem of ancestors.

           Possible discussion points include (part B):
           • The genealogical account – is it convincing?
           • Is Nietzsche guilty of committing the genetic fallacy?
           • Is this philosophical argument or anthropology?
           • Other cultural accounts of the formation of tribes and customs, eg: African and native
             Indian traditions
           • Nietzsche describes the cruelty as in some sense “joyful”, like a festival – is this
             convincing? Can any of this be empirically demonstrated?
           • Is Nietzsche basing his account too heavily on the notion – important at his time – of
             freedom, making a hypothesis about ancient cultures that had not considered this notion
             in their account of human life and organization?
                                                        – 19 –                   M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


10.   (a)   Explain how the ascetic ideal is related to the human “will to nothingness”.                               [10]
      (b)   Evaluate how the ascetic ideal is related to the human “will to nothingness”.                              [15]
            In the third essay Nietzsche explores the issue of human will, and in this he discusses the
            nature of “the ascetic ideal”, a term with a very broad reach, given he finds a way to apply it to
            a wide variety of groups, ranging from artists to priests. The issue of humans preferring to “will
            nothingness than not will” gives Nietzsche a device, through the ascetic ideal, by which he
            can explore the activities of different sections of society. The main fulcrum of the ideal is the
            need for humankind to assert or believe in a goal – that humans will “rather will nothingness
            than not will”. Nietzsche talks about artists, philosophers, priests, women and saints.
            Philosophers share a view of the world with priests, who inhabit the modes of living, “poverty,
            humility, chastity” and in so doing move away from promoting the exercising of the will. He
            ascribes a different purpose to each group and then proposes so-called enemies of the ideal
            in the work of scientists, historians and those self-appointed experts who see themselves as
            contemplating the ideal but who, in fact, bring a mockery to it. The ascetic ideal is both a
            denier and preserver of the conditions by which life can be led. It involves a relationship with
            truth, but the scientist attacks the ascetic ideal through a wrong-headed approach to objective
            truth. Nietzsche makes assumptions about the violent condition of humankind and asserts
            that the ascetic ideal is a way of coping with this. This offers an alternative to humankind
            being ready to embrace full freedom and mastery, instead falling back into the slave morality
            of the crowd, led by the ideals of the priest and supported by the philosophers who attempt to
            deny the will. Nietzsche discusses the role of guilt and ressentiment in the masses, as a
            response to the ascetic ideal peddled by those they come across in society.
                  [Source: Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche: 1887, The genealogy of morals, New York, Boni and Liveright.
                                   https://archive.org/details/genealogyofmoral00nietuoft/mode/2up.]
            Candidates might explore (part A):
            • In the ultimate willing of nothingness, Nietzsche says philosophers, nonetheless, are
              exercising the will
            • The ascetic ideal and the artist – Nietzsche’s example of Wagner and Schopenhauer
              where Wagner would not express his art without his leaning on Schopenhauer, who
              himself attributed parts of his philosophy to what music achieved
            • Philosophers and the ascetic ideal – a seeking of power through knowledge and spreading of
              fear due to original mistrust in a contemplative, rather than violent, mode of activity
            • For the priests, the ascetic life demands a turning away from pleasure
            • The ascetic ideal’s role in allowing civilization and public life to occur – Nietzsche says
              that the ascetic ideal springs from a protective instinct as humans strive to survive in the
              face of hardship
            • The relationship between the ascetic ideal and truth, where knowledge is cast as illusion
              and the subjectivity of humans denied
            • The contrast between the ascetic ideal and scientists
            • The ascetic ideal and the slave morality
            • Nietzsche’s perspectivism.
            Possible discussion points include (part B):
            • The idea that the ascetic ideal is the “will to nothingness”
            • The contradiction that the ascetic ideal is life preserving while endorsing a will to nothingness
            • The strong and the view that they should not be curtailed by guilt over feeling strong and
              having power
            • Is it fair of Nietzsche to condemn his fellow citizens as being sick, having sickness from
              our turmoil and hardship?
            • The ascetic priest and the ressentiment of the crowd
            • Nietzsche’s account of truth, the myth of objectivity in science and his perspectivism
            • Is perspectivism acceptable in any quest for knowledge?
            • Is Nietzsche convincing that we are all subject to deeply entrenched violent tendencies by
              virtue of being members of the human race?
            • Is Nietzsche’s psychological account capable of falsification/verification? Is this philosophy
              or more like cultural anthropology from a psychological perspective?
                                                      – 20 –                 M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Martha Nussbaum: Creating Capabilities: The Human Development Approach

11.   (a)   Explain the relationship between capabilities and human rights.                                      [10]

      (b)   Evaluate the relationship between capabilities and human rights.                                     [15]

            In Creating Capabilities: The Human Development Approach, Nussbaum introduces the idea
            of capabilities as an approach to “comparative quality-of-life assessment and to theorizing
            about social justice” (Chapter 2). A capability is an “area of freedom”, and the capabilities
            approach demands that the capabilities required for a dignified life should be provided for by
            nations. Nussbaum points out that “the Capabilities Approach is closely allied with the
            international human rights movement” (Chapter 3). She states that one way of understanding
            the Capabilities Approach is as a “species of human rights approach” (Chapter 3). This is
            because both approaches claim that all people have a core set of entitlements, and that this
            imposes duties on the state to uphold these entitlements. Furthermore, Nussbaum says that
            the capabilities overlap with those on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. She
            highlights the shared idea that both rights and core capabilities imply that the state has duties
            to protect the liberties of its citizens.

            Candidates might explore (part A):
            • The contrast Nussbaum draws between human rights and general capabilities
            • The relationship between capabilities and duties
            • The duties of the state in relation to human rights, and whether comparable duties arise
              from core capabilities
            • How the capabilities approach “supplements the standard human rights approaches”
            • Nussbaum’s claim that “the very idea of “negative liberty” […] is an incoherent idea […] all
              require the inhibition of interference by others” (Chapter 3)
            • How the case of Vasanti can be analysed in terms of both capabilities and human rights.

            Possible discussion points include (part B):
            • Whether human rights are central to a liberal society
            • Sen’s idea that capabilities and rights are different, as contrasted to Nussbaum’s view that
              core capabilities overlap with rights
            • Capabilities as stemming from the author’s arguments in the book
            • How far the state has a duty to protect human rights
            • Possible difficulties defining a list of core human rights
            • Whether it is possible to come up with a set of rights which protect human dignity
            • Whether all of the rights listed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights are consistent
              with Nussbaum’s core capabilities list
            • The notion of duties in relation to human rights
            • Deontological versus utilitarian ethics and the ethical foundations of rights
            • The possible relationship between the capabilities approach and virtue ethics
            • An evaluation of the idea of moral imperatives, such as those proposed by Kant.

              [Source: CREATING CAPABILITIES: THE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT APPROACH by Martha C. Nussbaum,
             Cambridge, Mass.: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Copyright © 2011 by Martha C. Nussbaum.
                                             Used by permission. All rights reserved.]
                                                      – 21 –                 M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


12.   (a)   Explain Nussbaum’s concept of freedom.                                                               [10]

      (b)   Evaluate Nussbaum’s concept of freedom.                                                              [15]

            Freedom is a central concept in Nussbaum’s work. She says that “the capabilities approach,
            in my version, focuses on the protection of areas of freedom so central that their removal
            makes a life not worthy of human dignity” (Chapter 2). She draws on the work of Sen, who
            sees a capability as “the substantive freedom to achieve alternative functioning
            combinations” (Chapter 2), and De Shalit and Wolff who talk about fertile functionings.
            Freedom requires “combined capabilities” on Nussbaum’s account. This captures the idea
            that an individual requires certain internal capabilities combined with external capabilities to
            possess a freedom. For example, having the capability to read, combined with the capability
            to access a library are both needed for the combined capability to read novels. The centrality
            of freedom to Nussbaum’s capabilities approach helps to set it apart from common
            approaches to assessing social justice and quality of life in nations. Nussbaum sets out the
            problem as such: measuring the GDP of a country is not sensitive to the lives of the people
            living in that country, as the measure is an aggregate and does not capture discrepancies
            between individuals, or capture the fact that sometimes wealthy individuals lack freedom.
            Nussbaum also considers the role of freedom in alternative accounts of social justice such as
            Rawls’s work, and the implications of utilitarian and deontological ethical theories.

            Candidates might explore (part A):
            • Sen’s use of the term freedom as “the substantive freedom to achieve alternative
              functioning combinations” (Sen, in Nussbaum, Chapter 2)
            • The idea of combined capabilities which “are the totality of the opportunities… for choice
              and action in… specific political, social and economic situation[s]” (Chapter 2)
            • The close relationship between the capabilities and freedoms
            • The relationship between justice and freedom
            • The relationship between freedom and liberty
            • The relationship between the Capabilities Approach and political liberalism
            • The contrast between the role of freedom in the Capabilities Approach and the role of
              freedom in other accounts of social justice, eg: Rawls’s account.


            Possible discussion points include (part B):
            • How well Nussbaum’s focus on freedom measures up against other accounts of social
              justice, for example Rawls’s focus on fairness
            • Whether the sort of freedom Nussbaum holds in esteem is realistic for nation states to try
              to bring about
            • Comparisons between Nussbaum’s conception of “freedom” and concepts of liberty such
              as Berlin’s concept of negative liberty, or Mill’s concept of liberty
            • How people’s capabilities and freedoms can be balanced when individuals have
              conflicting desires
            • Whether freedom is more important than economic stability
            • The advantage the capabilities approach has over other approaches when it comes to
              taking differences between individuals, eg: gender, disability or wealth into consideration
            • Alternative accounts of justice such as those proposed in Plato’s Republic.

             [Source: CREATING CAPABILITIES: THE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT APPROACH by Martha C. Nussbaum,
            Cambridge, Mass.: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Copyright © 2011 by Martha C. Nussbaum.
                                            Used by permission. All rights reserved.]
                                                  – 22 –               M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Ortega y Gasset: The Origin of Philosophy

13.   (a)                                                                                             [10]

      (b)   Evaluate the significance of the downgrading of the gods.                                 [15]




                          Question and answer removed for copyright reasons




            Possible discussion points include (part B):
            • Is Thales really referring to traditional Greek gods?
            • Questioning Ortega’s attribution of the rise of philosophical thinking to the change of
              status of gods. Might humans have questioned everything prior to this change?
            • The appropriateness of the labelling the behaviour of the “thinker” as “excessive”
            • How far does the “thinker”, in Aristophanes’s Clouds, reflect a true image of the “thinker”?
              Is the play defending the status of the gods?
            • The degree to which the downgrading of gods establishes the nature of one god, be it
              rationality, nature or one God (a new theism)
            • The degree to which the general population is always reactionary to any change,
              particularly when associated with a system of beliefs. Consider reactions to the rise of
              Protestantism or reactions to Confucianism
            • The establishment of sophists. Were they a reaction to “true” philosophers?
            • Can the common person manage a world with infinite choices?
            • Is the use of the word philosophy an attempt to disguise or even water down the activities
              the “thinker”?
            • The nature of Being, the question of it being linked to the demise of gods.
                                   – 23 –             M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


14.   (a)
                                                                              [10]

      (b)
                                                                              [15]




            Questions and answers removed for copyright reasons
                                                    – 24 –                M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Plato: The Republic, Books IV–IX

15.   (a)   Explain the depiction of justice in the state.                                                [10]

      (b)   Evaluate the depiction of justice in the state.                                               [15]

            In Books 4 and 8, Plato raises the question of justice in the state and ways in which a state
            might become unjust, respectively. In the intervening Books, the implications of the attempt
            to establish justice in the state are explored from a variety of the implications of the answer in
            Book 4 to the main question. Candidates may use the account of justice in the state from
            Book 4 (and the counter-examples in Book 8), or they may choose to look at the discussions
            of specific matters that arise from the quest for justice, as discussed in Books 5-7. In Book 4
            Socrates says that justice in the state involves a structure of society where there is harmony,
            but not equality. The structuring requires different sections of society to perform different
            functions according to certain abilities. Society, thus, is classified into the guardians, the
            auxiliaries and the workers, with the guardians qualifying for their role through their training to
            become philosophers. For Plato these classes are delineated by how people are naturally
            determined to perform, although the training for the philosopher/guardian is exhaustive. Plato
            uses an analogy of the composition of the human to reinforce the role of the classes in
            society. Thus, justice comes from the guardians performing as they are, not through a
            democratic, goal-orientated political process. Plato goes on to discuss the role of women and
            the family in the state and then explores various similes to drive home the requirements and
            epistemological framework for achieving justice in the state. In Book 8 Socrates discusses
            how the unjust rule occurs through some kind of disharmony in the function of the state or
            the ruler, and he underlines the reasons for not wanting the state to be unjust as much as the
            good reasons for why we should have justice in the state and in our lives.

            Candidates might explore (part A):
            • The analogy between the state and the composition of the human soul
            • The tri-partite structure of the state and the human soul
            • The function argument for delineating the classes of humans in the state
            • The function argument mixing “good” with “good at” or “good for”
            • Philosophy as the route to achieving justice politically and socially
            • How knowledge can qualify an individual to rule
            • The role of women and the family in the rule of the state
            • Similes of the ship and the beast in explanation of the role of the philosopher in society
            • The counter-examples in Book 8 – where reasons for wanting justice in the state include
              benefits it can bring and disadvantages, if it is lacking.

            Possible discussion points include (part B):
            • How applicable is the analogy of the composition of the human being to the structure of
              the state?
            • How can justice be achieved without equality between consenting members of society?
            • How much does Plato assume, rather than justify, in his epistemological justification for
              knowledge as the key qualification to rule?
            • How much does Plato assume, rather than justify, in his metaphysical view, a view that
              gives rise to the world of Forms and knowledge of this world only by philosophers?
            • Does rule in any society not require representation?
            • In Book 8 Socrates gives reasons for wanting justice in the state and individual in terms of
              the happiness it confers – is this incompatible with what he argues elsewhere?
                                                   – 25 –               M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


16.   (a)   Explain Plato’s account of the Form of the good.                                             [10]

      (b)   Evaluate Plato’s account of the Form of the good.                                            [15]

            In various similes, Plato explores the nature of the good, which is at the heart of the object of
            knowledge for the training of the philosopher. Using similes including those of the sun, the
            divided line and the cave, Plato explores the nature of the Form of the good, and the
            impossibility of direct knowledge of it. Plato asserts that attaining knowledge of the good is
            vital in the education of the philosophers. In the world of the Forms, the Form of the good is
            the one shared by all other Forms giving it a primacy among all the Forms in the ideal world.
            Knowledge of this ideal world is distinct and is the only knowledge of reality available, thus
            critical for the philosopher in attaining knowledge of justice in the state. The Form of the good
            is the subject of an extended analogy in the simile of the sun, where the Form is characterized
            as being both the source and means of knowledge. In the simile of the divided line, there is a
            discussion of how the good is responsible for the ability of humans to know what is true, and
            indeed is the condition by which there can be any possession of the truth. In the simile of the
            cave the implications of this knowledge is brought out. In one passage, Plato discusses what
            the good is not and then leads to discussion of what the good is via similes – Socrates having
            accepted that he does not know what the good is directly.

            Candidates might explore (part A):
            • The good is what humans pursue
            • The good is the source of knowledge and the means by which knowledge of truth can be
              gained
            • The good is the ultimate Form given all Forms “participate” in the good by virtue of being
              the “most good” exemplar/ideal of the thing to which they give reality
            • The good is not a political concept, not pleasure, not knowledge in itself
            • The simile of the sun
            • The simile of the divided line
            • The simile of the cave.

            Possible discussion points include (part B):
            • How convincing is the world of the Forms, on which framework the good depends for its
              existence?
            • Is knowledge of the good too abstract to help a ruler of a state in the world of objects?
            • How useful is philosopher rule if the good they know is metaphysical rather than part of
              the life of the city in which they physically live and share with other people?
            • How convincing is the simile of the sun – is it a workable analogy for Plato’s concept of
              the good?
            • How convincing is the simile of the divided line, with divisions between knowledge and
              opinion being so difficult to pin down?
            • Is there a confusion between moral and functional goodness – “good at”, “good for”, “good”?
            • Are the epistemological and metaphysical assumptions of the world of the Forms too
              great?
                                                       – 26 –                   M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Peter Singer: The Life You Can Save

17.   (a)   Explain Singer’s use of thought experiments to make the case that it is
            wrong not to help.                                                                                [10]

      (b)   Evaluate Singer’s use of thought experiments to make the case that it is
            wrong not to help.                                                                                [15]

            In The Life You Can Save, Singer argues that it is wrong not to help, and in particular, that
            when we are able to give time or money to those in need, it is wrong not to do so. He sets
            out his basic argument using a series of thought experiments. The first thought experiment is
            the case of the drowning child, where for a small personal sacrifice, you can save the life of a
            child. The second is whether Bob should sacrifice his Bugatti to save the life of a child. The
            third is Unger’s case of giving a lift to a hiker who has seriously injured his leg and “is likely to
            bleed onto the seats, which you have recently and expensively restored in soft white leather”
            (Chapter 2). Singer says that “the examples above reveal our intuitive belief that we ought to
            help others in need, at least when we can see them and when we are the only person in a
            position to save them” (Chapter 2). Singer uses these cases to ground his basic argument for
            the conclusion that “if you do not donate to aid agencies, you are doing something wrong”
            (Chapter 2).

            Candidates might explore (part A):
            • Whether the three cases provide reliable information about our intuitions that not helping
              is wrong
            • Singer’s claim that the cases help to establish his basic argument
            • The relationship between the thought experiments and the logical basic argument
            • How the three cases relate to poverty and donating to aid agencies
            • Similarities and differences between the three cases
            • The idea that thought experiments tell us about our intuitions
            • Singer’s view that “the case for helping others is stronger if it does not rest solely on our
              intuitions” (Chapter 2).

            Possible discussion points include (part B):
            • Whether the thought experiments are relevant to the sort of conclusions Singer argues for
            • The idea that the simplified nature of thought experiments disregards important
              considerations
            • The view that this simplification of moral dilemmas is helpful in reaching conclusions about
              how we ought to act, as opposed to the view that they are too abstract to give real-life
              guidance
            • Whether thought experiments have any value beyond identifying people’s intuitions
            • Whether intuitions ought to guide moral decision making.

                          [Source: © Peter Singer, The Life You Can Save. The updated 2019 edition can be
                           downloaded as an ebook for free at: https://www.thelifeyoucansave.org/the-book.]
                                                      – 27 –                   M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


18.   (a)   Explain Singer’s considerations about how you can tell which charities save
            lives best.                                                                                      [10]

      (b)   Evaluate Singer’s considerations about how you can tell which charities save
            lives best.                                                                                      [15]

            Singer explores two questions in Chapter 6: “How much does it cost to save a life?” and “how
            can we tell which charities do it best?”. He provides a lengthy discussion of some of the
            worries people have about donating to charities with regard to whether their donations will be
            used effectively. He then sets out some cases where aid has been used to save lives in a
            cost-effective manner. These include, amongst other examples, the use of Oxfam money to
            fund a workers’ association for rag pickers in India, and Catherine and Reginald Hamlin’s
            work to set up a fistula hospital in Ethiopia. Singer also discusses more abstract ways of
            assessing the effectiveness of charities and aid organizations. He talks about Karnofsky and
            Hassenfield’s non-profit, GiveWell which is “dedicated to improving the transparency and
            effectiveness of charities”. Overall, these discussions contribute to Singer’s argument that we
            can “save the lives of people living in extreme poverty” and that we can make decisions
            about which organizations to donate to in order best to achieve this aim.

            Candidates might explore (part A):
            • How Singer thinks we can assess the effectiveness of charities by looking at their overall
              effectiveness, as illustrated by GiveWell
            • How Singer thinks we can assess the effectiveness of individual campaigns, as illustrated
              by examples such as the building a well in a village, using microfinancing, and the
              Hamlins’s fistula hospital
            • Why Singer thinks that saving lives is a useful measure of effectiveness, as illustrated by
              his discussion of the effect of providing mosquito nets
            • Whether Singer thinks that problems with aid organizations and charities undermine his
              argument that we ought to donate to charity
            • The importance of checking the efficacy of people donating to charity
            • The relationship between the basic argument and the more concrete recommendations
              about donating.

            Possible discussion points include (part B):
            • Whether Singer’s view that where possible we should save lives is easily applied to
              donating to charities and aid organizations
            • Whether the problems with charities mean that Singer is wrong about being able to use
              money effectively to save lives
            • Evaluations of the effectiveness of the different charities discussed in Chapter 6
            • Other considerations which ought to be taken into account when deciding how to help
              others, such as considerations of human dignity (Nussbaum), human rights approaches
              (UNDHR), or equality and social justice (Rawls)
            • The extent to which it is the responsibility of individuals to donate and to police how well
              their donations are being used
            • The role of the state in providing aid to other nations, and within their own nation
            • How far Singer’s utilitarianism is an appropriate ethical framework for evaluating the
              effectiveness of charities.

                         [Source: © Peter Singer, The Life You Can Save. The updated 2019 edition can be
                          downloaded as an ebook for free at: https://www.thelifeyoucansave.org/the-book.]
                                                     – 28 –                 M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Charles Taylor: The Ethics of Authenticity

19.   (a)   Explain the idea of horizons of significance.                                                     [10]

      (b)   Evaluate the idea of horizons of significance.                                                    [15]

            The question asks for an explanation and evaluation of the idea of horizons of significance.
            Taylor states that what might be called “a loss of meaning or the fading of moral horizons”
            (Chapter 1) is one of the three modern malaises. In this sense horizon means a background
            of intelligibility against which things take on importance. Taylor’s notion of horizon inherits a
            rich phenomenological and hermeneutical tradition according to which each epoch or cultural
            unity defines a life-horizon by which people orient their life; such a horizon places life, life-
            concerns, life-experience, and thought-formation in a certain proportion. Particularly it
            situates our life as beings in time. Accordingly, Taylor thinks that we interpret ourselves, we
            see ourselves as beings with a past that can be remembered, reconstructed, and
            reinterpreted. Similarly, we project ourselves, our purposes and wants into the future against
            something which is given to us. Horizons of significance are the result of human interaction
            and history. This is centrally related to the significant general feature of human life; its
            fundamentally dialogical character: “We become full human agents, capable of
            understanding ourselves, and hence of defining an identity, through our acquisition of rich
            human languages of expression” (Chapter 4). The discussion of Taylor’s central idea might
            include the comparison and contrast with other views, eg: arguments coming from
            materialistic approaches.

              [Source: THE ETHICS OF AUTHENTICITY by Charles Taylor, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
                 Copyright © 1991 by Charles Taylor and the Canadian Broadcasting Company. Used by permission.
                                                       All rights reserved.]

            Candidates might explore (part A):
            • “Language” is taken in a broad sense, covering not only the words we speak but also
              other modes of expression whereby we define ourselves, including the “languages” of art,
              of gesture, of love, and the like
            • We are inducted into these in exchange with others. No one acquires the languages
              needed for self-definition on their own. We are introduced to them through exchanges with
              others who matter to us what Mead called “significant others”
            • The genesis of the human mind is in this sense not “monological”, not something each
              accomplishes on his or her own, but dialogical
            • Horizons are given and in them something different from us is given to us. Even the sense
              that the significance of my life comes from its being chosen depends on the understanding
              that independent of my will there is something noble, courageous, and hence significant in
              giving shape to my own life
            • The ideal of self-choice supposes that there are other issues of significance beyond self-
              choice. This ideal couldn’t stand alone, because it requires a horizon of issues of
              importance, which help define inescapable horizons.
                                      – 29 –                M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Possible discussion points include (part B):
• The relationship between senses of the self and moral visions, between identity and the
  good. When we act, we need some orientation regarding the good: orientation toward the
  good is a central feature of human action
• The relation between horizons of significance and authenticity; authenticity requires
  openness to horizons of significance, for otherwise the creation loses the background that
  can save it from insignificance
• Nihilism as a form of negation of all horizons of significance. Although Nietzsche used the
  term “nihilism” in a different sense, to designate something he rejected, he is the major
  figure
• Aspects of this line of thinking found expression in some strands of modernism (the image
  of the “poète maudit”, Baudelaire), and in postmodernism (Derrida and Foucault). They
  carry their Nietzschean challenge to our ordinary categories to the point even of
  “deconstructing” the ideal of authenticity, and the very notion of the self
• The kind of self-defeating move frequently being carried out in our subjectivist civilisation:
  suppressing or denying the horizons against which things take on significance for us
• The slide to subjectivism: it exalts and entrenches anthropocentrism; by abolishing all
  horizons of significance, threatens us with a loss of meaning
• Any comprehensive “final” horizon would be only a temporary stage, because the
  possibility of new experiences cannot ever be ruled out
• Moral sources can be disclosed only with the help of cultural webs of meaning, in relation
  to Wittgenstein’s notion of “forms of life”
• Different cultures and different historical ages have different horizons of significance
• Understanding other cultures and the possible fusions of horizons (Gadamer)
• Recognizing differences (eg: sexual orientations) and acting accordingly requires shared
  horizons of significance.
                                                     – 30 –                 M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


20.   (a)   Explain how the search for authentic self-fulfilment can become self-defeating
            when it is attached to individualism.                                                             [10]

      (b)   Evaluate the idea that the search for authentic self-fulfilment can become
            self-defeating when it is attached to individualism.                                              [15]
            The question asks for an explanation and evaluation of this claim which brings into play
            central aspects of the ethics of authenticity in relation to two possible faces of personal
            achievement: self-fulfilment and self-deception. Taylor distinguishes among three different
            strands of experience (individualism, instrumental reason, and subjectivism) intending to
            show how each of these contains both destructive and creative possibilities. These
            destructive possibilities are a central concern of Taylor’s: the malaises of modernity. These
            are features of our contemporary culture and society that people experience as a loss or a
            decline. According to Taylor sometimes people feel that some important decline has
            occurred during the last years or decades since the Second World War. Other times “the loss
            is felt over a much longer historical period: the whole modern era from the 17th century is
            frequently seen as the time frame of decline” (Chapter 1). Authenticity as a moral ideal
            involves three controversial beliefs: a) “authenticity is a valid ideal” (Chapter 2); b) one can
            “argue in reason about ideals and about the conformity of practices to these ideals” (Chapter
            2); and c) “these arguments can make a difference.” (Chapter 2). In Taylor’s argument what
            is really at stake is a fair judgment on modernity, an assessment, a fine discrimination of both
            its nobility and ethical appeal, on the one hand, and its self-destructiveness, and self-
            flattening and demeaning tendencies, on the other.
              [Source: THE ETHICS OF AUTHENTICITY by Charles Taylor, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
                 Copyright © 1991 by Charles Taylor and the Canadian Broadcasting Company. Used by permission.
                                                       All rights reserved.]
            Candidates might explore (part A):
            • Authentic life is an ethical goal and peculiar to modern culture, stemming from
              individualism. Individualism comes from Descartes affirming the primacy of the person as
              self-responsible to find the truth. This morality is also anchored in romanticism. It is a
              voice within or the intimate contact with oneself. Sources of authenticity are also
              Rousseau, Kant and Marx
            • Our individuality is grounded in sociality. We only become capable of understanding
              ourselves and defining our identity through dialogue. We are dialogical creatures and
              cannot develop into individuals without interaction with others. Through dialogue we are
              able to exchange our ideas with others and construct our values and belief
            • The connection of individualism with the primacy of instrumental reason as a malaise of
              modernity. Instrumental reason means the kind of rationality we draw on when calculating
              the most economical application of means to a given end. Maximum efficiency is the best
              cost-output. Ratio is its measure of success
            • Deception of a subjective, narcissistic self-fulfilment which disregards the demands of our
              ties with others or the demands from something different beyond the self
            • Things take on importance against a background of intelligibility: a horizon. If we are to
              define ourselves significantly, we cannot suppress or deny the horizons against which
              things take on significance for us. This is the kind of self-defeating move frequently being
              carried in our subjectivist civilization.
            Possible discussion points include (part B):
            • With modernity the individual is seen as having lost something important along with the
              larger social and cosmic horizons of action
            • The current vision seems to be that lives are all equal. Taylor believes this causes people
              to become self-absorbed, and can bring about a loss of meaning in their lives
            • Taylor opposes moral dimensions to economic and social phenomena. Is it realistic?
            • Although Taylor states that moral authenticity is fundamentally dialogical in character, his
              view on authenticity, which is a main way to overcome instrumental reason, is still
              individualistic
            • The ethics of authenticity in discussion: other philosophical, cultural and social views,
              eg: non-western perspectives, feminist approaches.
                                                    – 31 –               M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Lao Tzu: Tao Te Ching

21.   (a)   Explain how the sage rules without taking action.                                             [10]

      (b)   Evaluate how the sage rules without taking action.                                            [15]

            Wu wei is often translated literally, “non-being unnatural action” and at the heart of ruling, the
            sage is faced with a paradox, exemplified in the Tao. The ideal rule is non-interventionist as
            upholding political ideals in keeping with the Tao. Those who know the Tao know that it is the
            way of unknowing. There is an image of the state as a sacred vessel – a thing not to be
            tampered with. The image implies that the ruler should not interfere with the way the state is
            run, but, rather, work with the state to ensure the Way is established in the life of the state.
            All striving is counter-productive, indeed futile and in the face of this, the sage should restrain
            from doing unnatural actions and instead prefer spontaneous actions that do not come from
            deliberation or straining to achieve. The task for the sage is to shape actions according to the
            true essence of things both in the public and private spheres, looking at what is the most
            important element of any circumstances to master them in the right way. Action must, then,
            be shaped according to the true essence of things in their circumstances as learnt by the
            sage. The uncarved block serves as a symbol for the sage. It is a state untouched by
            humans, representing the original disposition of humankind and the ruler must keep people
            in this state, free from desires, led by the ruler’s own lack of desire. There is the image of
            water – nothing in this world being softer or weaker, but nothing better at attacking things that
            are strong and firm. Water benefits things without straining and serves as an example of a
            thing close to the Tao, which must be encouraged by the sage. The ruler puts himself last
            and his people first and is a shadowy presence among subjects who should be kept in a
            child-like state. The evaluation will look at the analogies set up about the way the sage
            applies the Tao to the state and will consider the picture of wu wei as the template for
            political rule.

            Candidates might explore (part A):
            • Wu wei as the principle of political rule
            • The sage as a shadowy presence among his people
            • Discovering the true essence of things – how is this done?
            • The image of the state as a sacred vessel
            • The image of water for the sage to learn from
            • The uncarved block.

            Possible discussion points include (part B):
            • The frugal, simple way of life encouraged by the Tao
            • The idea of non-action in political rule – is this convincing?
            • Rulers not seeking power – is this convincing? See a comparison with Plato
            • Is striving necessarily not to be encouraged in ruling?
            • The passive picture of life in the state being ruled – is this undemocratic and
              authoritarian?
            • The consequences of keeping subjects in a child-like state
            • The sage as “a shadowy presence” – unaccountable to the people?
            • Is there no role for desire or passion in politics?
                                                   – 32 –               M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


22.   (a)   Explain the difficulty involved in speaking about the Tao.                                  [10]

      (b)   Evaluate the difficulty involved in speaking about the Tao.                                 [15]

            A critical difficulty for understanding the Tao is the problems encountered in speaking about
            it. It is impossible for the Tao to be named, as this requires differentiation and the Tao serves
            as a template for the difficulty of naming anything in the world. Indeed, in a strict sense it is
            impossible to say anything about the Tao. Instead you must use indirect ways of speaking
            about the Tao and this can involve seeming paradoxes, such as “formless yet complete”. The
            ultimate reality of the Tao goes beyond the world of ordinary experience, and is treated like a
            metaphysical realm, rather similar to the world of the Forms of Plato or the supernatural
            imagery of the divine in world religions. The Tao is not a substance or thing, and has no
            cause, space, individuality and other modes of existence found in the material world.

            Candidates might explore (part A):
            • The Tao as nameless
            • The inability to say anything direct about the Tao
            • Apparent paradoxes when speaking about the Tao
            • The ultimate, metaphysical scope of the Tao, transcending physical limitations in the
              material world
            • The limit of knowledge for people in the material world causing speaking about the Tao in
              negative terms – describing what it is not, eg: looked for but not seen; listened for but not
              heard
            • Imagery of the Tao – the uncarved block and water.

            Possible discussion points include (part B):
            • Is speaking about the Tao able to be considered rationally?
            • In what ways does the Tao submit to philosophical and public enquiry?
            • Are the images of the Tao passive and indefinite?
            • Are the indirect ways of speaking about the Tao paradoxical? (eg: the Tao described as
              “not-being”)
            • Is the handling of the relationship between the Tao and naming convincing?
            • A sense of the divine-like attributes of the Tao, if compared to world faiths, like the Logos
              in Judeo-Christianity, or the impossibility of picturing Allah in Islam
            • Speaking of the Tao in negative terms, like the Aquinas’s via negativa; speaking of what
              God is not.
                                                        – 33 –                   M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Zhuangzi: Zhuangzi

23.   (a)   Explain the significance of the Spirit Man/Sage “concentrating his spirit and
            straightaway all things are free from sickness and the harvest matures.”                                  [10]
      (b)   Evaluate the significance of the Spirit Man/Sage “concentrating his spirit and
            straightaway all things are free from sickness and the harvest matures.”                                  [15]

            The question invites an explanation of how, by concentrating their spirit, humans can be
            freed from sickness and enjoy the benefits of the harvest. This allows humans to wander
            free and not be tied to social norms. The metaphor is being used to show how, by
            concentrating their spirit and freeing themselves from the expectations and demands of
            society, humans can both see the world better and be more at peace. This wandering with
            sensitivity and responsiveness without fixed preconceptions allows for more spontaneity and
            an increasing awareness of wu wei. The desire and ability to practise wu wei gives freedom.
            It is not doing nothing but more not becoming involved with the pressures and demands of
            society; not interfering in the natural flow of events. In so doing, humans are able to “wander”
            beyond the familiar and see more in the world of nature. By concentrating their spirit,
            humans see things in a new way, with a deeper appreciation. This will allow humans to get
            closer to the Tao. This closeness brings about a greater, higher understanding and no
            longer dwells on the petty. Consequently, the separation of the complex yet petty demand of
            society (the sickness) makes us free and our deep, more sophisticated, yet simpler,
            understanding of things, is the maturing of the harvest. The harvest is the reaping of benefits
            of the Tao. The quote comes from 1.11.
                   [Source: Zhuangzi: 2009, The Essential Writings trans. B Ziporyn, New York, Hackett Publishing.]
            Candidates might explore (part A):
            • The nature of the Spirit Man/Sage and how he seeks to wander and forget everything yet
              in so doing enlarges and transforms himself
            • The nature of wu wei
            • The qualities of the Tao
            • The metaphor of the virgin girl
            • The historical context of Xu You rejecting the status of emperor
            • The act of rejecting the Empire as good, in that it rejects merit and status yet is still prone
              to the desire of identity, self, and therefore Xu You still remains far from the Tao
            • The desire to develop a “flourishing life” focused on spiritual development not worldly
              success
            • The value of a metaphorical approach in explaining how human behaviour can be
              changed.
            Possible discussion points include (part B):
            • The need for humans to be able to survive and be successful in a modern market driven
              society
            • The benefits of the “harvest maturing”, that is the benefits of being free from and not
              conforming to the social and economic pressures of society
            • Whether such separation is possible given the inherent nature of human competitiveness
            • The extent to which practising wu wei can change humans
            • The degree to which separation from society is possible in a complex increasingly urban
              environment. Whether such an approach to life is more possible in a rural setting
            • The value of spiritual transformation compared to material wealth
            • The degree to which “wandering” humans become parasitic on society
            • Differing understandings of a “flourishing life”
            • Modern notions of “mindfulness” being attempts to become more spiritual and “wandering”
            • The benefit of seeing the world differently, uncombed by conventional perceptions and
              values
            • The seeking of the Tao as valuable.
                                                        – 34 –                   M22/3/PHILO/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


24.   (a)   Explain the claim that “if virtue is preeminent, the body will be forgotten.”                          [10]

      (b)   Evaluate the claim that “if virtue is preeminent, the body will be forgotten”.                  [15]
             This question centres on an explanation of the role of people with disabilities in understanding
             the nature of virtue, and the higher qualities of those that strive to reach the Tao. In Chapter 5
            both the Horse headed Hunchback and the Hunchback Limpleg, the lipless cripple, both argue
                a convincing case to the Duke Ling of Wei. Their argument is so persuasive that the Duke
              forgets their physical condition. Their virtue has excelled. “Where virtue excels, the physical
               form is forgotten” (Chapter 5). The qualities that should be valued in people supersede the
              physical attributes of the person and focus on their mental and spiritual qualities. “Virtuosity
                  […] gives a definite shape to the fullness of harmony within” (Chapter 5). This can be
            transferred, out of the story being told, to the qualities of the Spirit Man/Sage, and potentially is
            achievable by all humans. It can be suggested that those with physical challenges can develop
                 a greater sense of inner strength and insight that can be a model for those without such
              challenges. Their virtue (de) seems greater that the norm and seems to demonstrate that all
                people should try to seek this greater level of de and so take them closer to the Tao. This
                 closeness can then enhance and increase the level of humanity. There might be some
               reference to Chapter 3 and the nature of the Commander of the Right having only one foot
            doing a better job of increasing the level of virtue in the State compared to the courtly adviser in
                Chapter 4. Explanations might also reflect comments on Confucianism; the need to seek
             beyond the external practices and appearances, to reach into an internal sense of peace and
             harmony; the rejecting of societies’ ways. Human inclinations need to be put aside, and ideas
             of right and wrong or issues being seen as black or white, should be rejected for an approach
              which is perhaps more relativistic and able to change with the circumstance. Answers might
            also move into sections of Chapter 6 mentioning the relationship of tian (nature or heaven) and
                  ren (human) and the nature of humanity and a flourishing life in harmony with nature.
                [Source: Zhuangzi: 2009, The Essential Writings trans. B Ziporyn, New York, Hackett Publishing.]
            Candidates might explore (part A):
            • The nature of virtue
            • The nature of the Tao
            • Society’s perception of the causes of human deformity through time and place. Has society
               itself become deformed?
            • Ways in which levels of humanity could be increased
            • The role of the State in developing virtue
            • A relativistic approach to issues and the questioning skepticism
            • Heaven (tian) given qualities and the abilities of humans to transcend them. Those with
               physical disabilities having a greater intuition and human insight.
            Possible discussion points include (part B):
            • The degree it which visual judgments of people effect our treatment of them
            • Ways in which society can or should develop humanity
            • Whether human flourishing is culturally biased
            • The role of the state in safeguarding and creating opportunities for those physically
              challenged
            • Ways in which seeking the Tao enhances humanity
            • Skepticism
            • The Spiritual Man (Sage) as a perfect human. The idea of perfect might be disconnected
              from physical appearance and might be more reflective of the inner state of a person
            • People’s own perceptions, feelings and judgements when encountering illustrative stories
              involving physically deformities
            • Societal and cultural changes towards people with disabilities; the nature of inclusivity and
              equal opportunity and human dignity.
