M22/3/PSYCH/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                               May 2022


                           Psychology


                         Standard level


                               Paper 1




12 pages
                                            –2–                 M22/3/PSYCH/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2022

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2022

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2022

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                              –3–                M22/3/PSYCH/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Section A markbands

 Marks                                       Level descriptor

   0     • The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

         • The response is of limited relevance to or only rephrases the question.
         • Knowledge and understanding is mostly inaccurate or not relevant to the question.
  1–3
         • The research supporting the response is mostly not relevant to the question and if
           relevant only listed.

         • The response is relevant to the question, but does not meet the command
           term requirements.
  4–6
         • Knowledge and understanding is accurate but limited.
         • The response is supported by appropriate research which is described.

         • The response is fully focused on the question and meets the command term
           requirements.
         • Knowledge and understanding is accurate and addresses the main
  7–9
           topics/problems identified in the question.
         • The response is supported by appropriate research which is described and
           explicitly linked to the question.
                                                   –4–                 M22/3/PSYCH/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


                                           Section A

Biological approach to understanding behaviour

1.   Describe neuroplasticity, with reference to one relevant study.                                  [9]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands when awarding marks.

     The command term “describe” requires candidates to give a detailed account of
     neuroplasticity with reference to one relevant study.

     Descriptions of neuroplasticity may show conceptual understanding of long-term potentiation,
     neurogenesis and/or synaptic pruning. Responses should indicate how the neural connections in
     the brain change as a result of a behaviour or cognitive process. Animal research is acceptable.

     When describing the study, the relevant area of the brain where neuroplasticity is observed should
     be identified.

     Relevant studies may include, but are not limited to:
     • Bremner et al.’s (2008) study on plasticity of the human brain in post-traumatic stress
       disorder
     • Draganski’s (2004) study of neuroplasticity and learning in jugglers
     • Luby et al.’s (2012) study of maternal support and hippocampal development
     • Maguire et al.’s (2000) study showing structural change in the hippocampi of taxi
       drivers
     • Rosenzweig, Bennett and Diamond’s (1972) study on the role of environmental factors
       on neuroplasticity.

     If a candidate describes neuroplasticity related to more than one study, credit should be
     given only to the first study.

     As the question is focused only on the physiological process of neuroplasticity, it is not
     necessary to focus on a behaviour; studies of cortical mapping are appropriate.

     If a candidate describes neuroplasticity without making reference to a relevant study, up to
     a maximum of [5] should be awarded.

     If a candidate only describes an appropriate study without describing neuroplasticity, up to a
     maximum of [4] should be awarded.
                                                  –5–                M22/3/PSYCH/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Cognitive approach to understanding behaviour

2.   Describe one model of memory, with reference to one relevant study.                            [9]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands when awarding marks.

     The command term “describe” requires candidates to give a detailed account of one model of
     memory.

     Relevant models of memory may include, but are not limited to:
     • Flashbulb memory theory
     • Levels of processing
     • Multi-store model of memory
     • Schema theory
     • Working memory model

     Relevant studies may include, but are not limited to:
     • Baddeley and Hitch’s (1974) studies on the evidence of working memory
     • Bartlett’s (1932) study of the role of schema on memory storage
     • Brown and Kulik’s (1977) study of flashbulb memory
     • Craik and Lockhart’s (1975) study of the levels of processing model
     • Peterson and Peterson (1959) on the role of rehearsal and memory consolidation
     • Murdock’s (1962) or Glanzer & Cunitz’s (1966) studies on the serial position effect
     • Studies of brain damage to support the theory: Milner’s (1966) study of HM; Warrington and
       Shallice’s (1974) study of KF.

     Although it is acceptable for candidates to include a drawing of the model, the written
     description of the model is assessed on its own merits.

     If a candidate describes more than one model of memory or more than one study, credit
     should be given only to the first model of memory or study described.

     If a candidate describes one model of memory without making reference to a relevant
     study, up to a maximum of [5] should be awarded.

     If a candidate only describes an appropriate study without describing a model of memory, up
     to a maximum of [4] should be awarded.
                                                   –6–                M22/3/PSYCH/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Sociocultural approach to understanding behaviour

3.   Describe social identity theory, with reference to one relevant study.                             [9]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands when awarding marks.

     The command term “describe” requires candidates to give a detailed account of social identity
     theory in relation to one relevant study.

     Responses should identify the key concepts of SIT which include, but are not limited to:
     • social categorization (in-group/out-group)
     • social identification
     • social comparison.

     Studies related to social identity theory may include, but are not limited to:
     • Abrams’s (1990) study on the role of social identity on levels of conformity
     • Cialdini et al.’s (1976) "Basking in Reflected Glory" study
     • Drury el al’s (2009) study of helping behaviour
     • Levine’s (2005) study of helping behaviour
     • Tajfel’s studies on social groups and identities
     • Sherif et al.’s (1961) "Robbers Cave" study

     If a candidate refers to more than one study, credit should be given only to the first study.

     If a candidate describes social identity theory without making reference to a relevant study, up to a
     maximum of [5] should be awarded.

     If a candidate only describes an appropriate study without describing social identity theory,
     up to a maximum of [4] should be awarded.
                                                  –7–                M22/3/PSYCH/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Section B assessment criteria

A — Focus on the question

To understand the requirements of the question students must identify the problem or issue
being raised by the question. Students may simply identify the problem by restating the
question or breaking down the question. Students who go beyond this by explaining the
problem are showing that they understand the issues or problems.

 Marks    Level descriptor


    0     Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.


    1     Identifies the problem/issue raised in the question.


    2     Explains the problem/issue raised in the question.


B — Knowledge and understanding

This criterion rewards students for demonstrating their knowledge and understanding of
specific areas of psychology. It is important to credit relevant knowledge and understanding
that is targeted at addressing the question and explained in sufficient detail.

 Marks                                          Level descriptor


    0    Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.


   1–2   The response demonstrates limited relevant knowledge and understanding.
         Psychological terminology is used but with errors that hamper understanding.

   3–4   The response demonstrates relevant knowledge and understanding but lacks detail.
         Psychological terminology is used but with errors that do not hamper understanding.

   5–6   The response demonstrates relevant, detailed knowledge and understanding.
         Psychological terminology is used appropriately
                                                   –8–                M22/3/PSYCH/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


C — Use of research to support answer

Psychology is evidence based so it is expected that students will use their knowledge of research to
support their argument. There is no prescription as to which or how many pieces of research are
appropriate for their response. As such it becomes important that the research selected is relevant
and useful in supporting the response. One piece of research that makes the points relevant to the
answer is better than several pieces that repeat the same point over and over.

 Marks Level descriptor


    0     Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.


   1–2    Limited relevant psychological research is used in the response. Research selected serves to
          repeat points already made.

   3–4    Relevant psychological research is used in support of the response, and is partly explained.
          Research selected partially develops the argument.

   5–6    Relevant psychological research is used in support of the response and is thoroughly
          explained. Research selected is effectively used to develop the argument.

D — Critical thinking

This criterion credits students who demonstrate an inquiring and reflective attitude to their
understanding of psychology. There are a number of areas where students may demonstrate critical
thinking about the knowledge and understanding used in their responses and the research used to
support that knowledge and understanding.

The areas of critical thinking are:
• research design and methodologies
• triangulation
• assumptions and biases
• contradictory evidence or alternative theories or explanations
• areas of uncertainty.

These areas are not hierarchical and not all areas will be relevant in a response. In addition, students
could demonstrate a very limited critique of methodologies, for example, and a well-developed
evaluation of areas of uncertainty in the same response. As a result, a holistic judgement of their
achievement in this criterion should be made when awarding marks.
                                                  –9–                 M22/3/PSYCH/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




 Marks Level descriptor


    0    Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.


   1–2   There is limited critical thinking and the response is mainly descriptive. Evaluation or
         discussion, if present, is superficial.

   3–4   The response contains critical thinking, but lacks development. Evaluation or discussion of
         most relevant areas is attempted but is not developed.

   5–6   The response consistently demonstrates well developed critical thinking. Evaluation
         and/or discussion of relevant areas is consistently well developed.

E — Clarity and organisation

This criterion credits students for presenting their response in a clear and organized manner. A good
response would require no re-reading to understand the points made or the train of thought
underpinning the argument.

 Marks Level descriptor


    0    Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.


    1    The answer demonstrates some organization and clarity, but this is not sustained throughout
         the response.

    2    The answer demonstrates organization and clarity throughout the response.
                                                 – 10 –              M22/3/PSYCH/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


                                                 Section B

4.   Evaluate one technique used to study the brain in relation to behaviour.     [22]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “evaluate” requires candidates to make an appraisal by weighing up the
     strengths and limitations of one technique used to study the brain in relation to behaviour. Although
     a discussion of both strengths and limitations is required, it does not have to be evenly balanced to
     gain high marks.

     Brain imaging techniques may include, but are not limited to: CT scans, EEG, fMRI, MRI,
     PET.

     Relevant studies may include, but are not limited to:
     • Corkin’s (1997) MRI of patient HM
     • Eisenberger et al’s (2003) study of rejection using an fMRI
     • Fisher, Aron and Brown’s (2005) study using fMRI to investigate dopamine and love.
     • Harris and Fiske’s (2006) study of response to out-groups using fMRI
     • Maguire’s (2000) study of hippocampal neuroplasticity in taxi drivers using MRI
     • Raine et al.’s (1997) study of murderers using PET
     • Sharot et al.’s (2007) study of flashbulb memories using fMRI.

     Evaluation of the selected techniques may include, but is not limited to:
     • ecological validity versus internal validity
     • generally small sample sizes
     • how brain imaging has changed the way we study the brain – eg improved ethical standards
     • invasive elements of some techniques
     • limitations of correlational research
     • researcher biases in the interpretation of brain scans

     The focus of the response should be on the evaluation of the technique used to study the brain.
     Although an understanding of how the technique works may be beneficial, it is not required for
     marks in the top band.

     If a candidate evaluates more than one technique, credit should be given only to the first technique
     evaluated.

     If the candidate addresses only strengths or only limitations, the response should be awarded up to
     a maximum of [3] for criterion D: critical thinking. All remaining criteria should be awarded marks
     according to the best fit approach.
                                                  – 11 –               M22/3/PSYCH/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


5.   Evaluate one or more studies on the influence of emotion on cognitive processes.               [22]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “evaluate” requires the candidate to make an appraisal of one or more
     research studies of the influence of emotion on cognitive processes by weighing up the strengths
     and limitations of the study/studies. The focus of the evaluation should be upon the study or
     studies, not on a general evaluation of theories of emotion and cognition. Although both strengths
     and limitations should be addressed, this does not have to be evenly balanced.

     Relevant studies may include, but are not limited to:
     • Brown and Kulik (1977), Neisser and Harsch (1992), Sharot et al. (2007), Sharot, Delgado and
       Phelps (2004), Er (2003), McGaugh and Cahill’s (1995) studies on flashbulb memory.
     • LeDoux (1996) brain pathways for processing fear stimuli.
     • Talariko and Rubin’s (2003) study that demonstrates increased confidence in memory correlated
       to emotional intensity
     • Brasel et al. (2006) the effects of emotion and perception
     • Phelps et al. (2006) the effects of emotion and attention
     • Bechara et al. (2000) the somatic marker hypothesis, decision making, gambling and the vmPFC.

     Evaluation of the selected research may include, but is not limited to:
     • ecological versus internal validity
     • the measurement of cultural influences
     • contradictory evidence or alternative explanations
     • sampling biases (eg gender, culture, age)
     • potential participant and researcher biases
     • ethical considerations.

     If the candidate addresses only strengths or only limitations, the response should be
     awarded up to a maximum of [3] for criterion D: critical thinking. All remaining criteria
     should be awarded marks according to the best fit approach.
                                                 – 12 –              M22/3/PSYCH/SP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


6.   Discuss one or more cultural influences on human cognition and/or behaviour.                       [22]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term "discuss" requires candidates to offer a considered review of one or more
     cultural influences on human cognition and/or behaviour.

     It is not necessary for candidates to make a distinction between cognition and behaviour.

     Studies investigating cultural influences on cognition and/or behaviour may include, but are not
     limited to:
     • acculturation (Lueck and Wilson, 2010; Kraeh et al., 2016; Torres et al., 2012)
     • attachment (Van Ijzendoorn and Kroonenberg, 1988; Sagi et al., 1985)
     • conformity (Bond and Smith, 1996; Berry, 1967)
     • cultural norms (Odden and Rochat, 2004; Fagot, 1974)
     • flashbulb memories (Kulkofsky et al., 2011)
     • The effects of education on memory (Cole and Scribner, 1974; Kearins, 1981).
     • Pro-social behaviour (Moghaddam et al., 1993; Levine et al., 2001)
     • Cognitive development (Li et al., 1999)

     Critical discussion may include, but is not limited to:
     • ecological versus internal validity
     • use of quasi-experimental research
     • sampling biases and the ecological fallacy
     • lab versus field experiments
     • operationalization of “culture” as a construct
     • emic versus etic approaches to studying cultural influences

     Candidates may discuss one cultural influence in order to demonstrate depth of knowledge, or may
     discuss a larger number of cultural influences in order to demonstrate breadth of knowledge. Both
     approaches are equally acceptable.
