© International Baccalaureate Organization 2022

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2022

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2022

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Social and cultural anthropology
Higher level
Paper 1

Thursday 28 April 2022 (afternoon)


2 hours


Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y Section A: read the passage and answer questions 1 and 2. Choose either question 3 or 4.
  Answer question 5.
y Section B: answer the question.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [40 marks].




                                                                                            2222 – 5801
     5 pages                                            © International Baccalaureate Organization 2022
                                                   –2–                                             2222 – 5801


                                               Section A

Read the passage.

Passage adapted from Gold, M., 2019. Liminality and the asylum process in Switzerland.
Anthropology Today, 35, pp. 16–19.

        I conducted ethnographic research in a government refugee processing centre in Zurich,
        Switzerland, which aims to integrate refugees into Swiss life. I also conducted interviews
        with employees in international NGOs (non-governmental organizations), such as the Red
        Cross and Amnesty International, and in international organizations, such as the World Health
    5   Organization. Additionally, I consulted official statistics, publications and regulations.

        Asylum seekers leave their homes in response to crisis and war, the roots of which involve
        Europe. When they tell me their stories, they stress that leaving their homes was the last thing
        they wanted. Few were prepared for the hardships involved in the asylum procedure.

        “I thought, once I got to Switzerland, I would join my fiancée in Geneva, but this has been the
   10   hardest part of the journey. I have to settle here instead. I don’t know when this process will
        end, and I have no control over my own future. I feel I have to constantly explain that I am not
        a thief,” a young Syrian man explained to me while we were chatting and having a coffee in the
        processing centre.

        Today, asylum seekers remain in legal and political limbo for many years. They remain liminal to
   15   the state. Even if they are recognized as a “refugee”, they do not automatically become a citizen.

        Liminality, as V. Turner understood it, is a space of transition in ritual from one status or stage
        of life to another. The liminal state is characterized by violence, humiliation and reconfiguration
        within a process. The ritual provides resolution of a moment of crisis in a person’s life. However,
        in the context of my fieldwork, people become caught in a prolonged state of “in-betweenness”.

   20   Through the long and difficult legal and bureaucratic procedures that turn asylum seekers into
        refugees, the nation-state reinforces its social boundaries and identity by determining its “others”.

        The procedures at the processing centre segregate and classify people: families are separated
        and those whose claims are rejected are sent back. A key concern of the process is to separate
        “victims” (refugees) from “opportunists” (economic migrants). The transformation of the asylum
   25   seeker (a potentially dangerous economic migrant) into a refugee (a humble and morally
        deserving victim) involves a reconfiguration of personhood.

        People can stay a maximum of three months in the processing centres while their legal status
        is determined. During this time, they are stripped of any form of recognition and sense of self.
        Multiple forms of degradation include the lack of recognition of people’s social class, educational
   30   level or professional degrees, and religious and ethnic belonging by grouping them together
        indistinctly. Asylum seekers are expected to be submissive and thankful for what they receive
        (shelter, language courses, support) and they must obey instructions. They are treated as a
        homogeneous mass.
                                                      –3–                                           2222 – 5801


            Life at the processing centre is focused on bureaucratic processes, during which people must
     35     prove their worth. They must endure hostile interviews and daily routines. They are assigned
            jobs at the centre (eg cleaning) or other undesirable jobs (eg clearing forests or working on
            farms) that enable them to demonstrate their moral value. If they do not fulfil their obligations,
            they risk being expelled. However, most of the day is spent waiting: for interview results, papers
            to arrive, and news.

     40     Those who are accepted as refugees go through social integration programmes, which
            they consider one of the most difficult stages, as they have to deal with their Swiss hosts in
            everyday situations and behave as submissive and humble guests. It is especially hard to get
            employment, rent an apartment and build a supportive network.

            Refugees, in their liminality, become buffers of hierarchical categorizations: European
     45     worker/non-European economic migrants, European Union/non-European Union citizens,
            Christian/Muslim.

            Host societies act upon asylum seekers by determining the boundaries of their acceptance
            into society. Through processes of humiliation and eroding differences, host nations attempt to
            reclaim the sovereignty of the nation-state based on essentialized views of community defined
     50     by ethnicity rather than by territory.


Answer question 1 and question 2.

1.        Define the term ethnocentrism and describe how it is understood and applied in the
          context of the passage.                                                                           [4]

2.        Analyse the ethnographic data presented in the passage using the concept of identity.[6]


Answer either question 3 or question 4.

3.        Compare and contrast the ways in which the key concept of change or symbolism is
          evident in this passage with how it is evident in one other ethnographic example you
          have studied. Make reference to theory in your answer.                                         [10]

OR

4.        Compare and contrast the approaches to research adopted by the anthropologist in this
          passage to the approaches to research used by one other anthropologist you have studied.
          Make reference to concepts, ethnographic material and theory in your answer.                   [10]


Answer question 5.

5.        What does it mean to live in society? Discuss with reference to at least two sources of
          ethnographic material and examples from the passage.                                           [10]




                                                                                                    Turn over
                                                              –4–                                                    2222 – 5801


                                                         Section B

Answer question 6.

6.        With reference to either stimulus A or stimulus B and your own knowledge, discuss the
          defining features of anthropological ethics.                                                                     [10]


Stimulus A

            My ethnographic perspective led me to ask, “What is the meaning of the Andean funerary
            practices for [the members of the Bolivian community in the city of Buenos Aires]?” I
            conducted a good part of my fieldwork in the cemetery.

            Thinking that my questions could be uncomfortable for my research participants in such
      5     a sensitive context, where they remembered their beloved deceased, I avoided important
            questions in order to find out the frames of reference that guided their actions. Questions
            such as “What is death?”, “What do the dead mean to the living?”, or “What is a cemetery?”
            seemed obvious or harsh to ask. But, by not asking them, and continuing to write about
            what I observed, the inherent inequality between the fieldworker and research participant
     10     became deeper, since I took my interpretations of what I observed as valid and silenced any
            differences between the people whose perspectives I was trying to know about. In addition,
            my presence taking notes and observing implied intrusion and possibly pain, even though I
            only asked a few questions.


                 [Source: Adapted from Canelo, B., 2011. ¿Es etnografía? Un análisis metodológico del trabajo propio.
          [Is it ethnography? A methodological analysis of one’s own work] Avá. Revista de Antropología, 18, pp. 97–109.]
                                                      –5–                                          2222 – 5801


Stimulus B

Ethnographic recording of a Bunun elder from Taiwan, interviewed by her son, who is working as an
assistant to the ethnographer.




                    Interview setup with informant Langus Istanda (centre); son and interviewer,
                       Nabu Istanda (right); and camera assistants (left) (Steven Martin 2004)





References:

Section A.       Marina Gold, Liminality and the asylum process in Switzerland. Anthropology Today, John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
                 © 2019 Marina Gold. Anthropology Today published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Royal
                 Anthropological Institute.

Stimulus A.	Canelo, B., 2011. ¿Es etnografía? Un análisis metodológico del trabajo propio. Avá. Revista de Antropología,
             18, pp. 97–109. Source adapted.

Stimulus B.	Martin, S. A., 2011. Laipunuk (Nei Ben Lu)–The last frontier of the Taiwan Aborigines during the Japanese
             occupation on Taiwan: ethnographic narratives of a Bunun Elder. International Journal of Asia Pacific
             Studies, 7(1), pp. 123–142. [online] Licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
             https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ Available at: http://ijaps.usm.my/wp-content/uploads/2012/06/
             StevenMartin-Laipunuk.pdf [Accessed 14 May 2020].
