Language B guide
First assessment 2020Language B guide
First assessment 2020International Baccalaureate , Baccalauréat International  and Bachillerato Internacional  
are registered trademarks of the International Baccalaureate Organization.Published February 2018
Published by
International Baccalaureate Organization
15 Route des Morillons
1218 Le Grand-Saconnex
Geneva, Switzerland
Represented by
IB Publishing Ltd, Churchillplein 6, The Hague, 2517JW The Netherlands
© International Baccalaureate Organization 2018
The International Baccalaureate Organization (known as the IB) offers four high-quality 
and challenging educational programmes for a worldwide community of schools, aiming 
to create a better, more peaceful world. This publication is one of a range of materials 
produced to support these programmes.
The IB may use a variety of sources in its work and checks information to verify accuracy 
and authenticity, particularly when using community-based knowledge sources such as Wikipedia. The IB respects the principles of intellectual property and makes strenuous efforts to identify and obtain permission before publication from rights holders of all copyright material used. The IB is grateful for permissions received for material used in this publication and will be pleased to correct any errors or omissions at the earliest 
opportunity.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior written permission of the IB, or as expressly permitted by law or by the IB’s own rules and policy. See  
www.ibo.org/copyright.
IB merchandise and publications can be purchased through the IB store at  
store.ibo.org.
Email: sales@ibo.orgDiploma Programme
Language B guideIB mission statement
The International Baccalaureate aims to develop inquiring, knowledgeable and caring young people who 
help to create a better and more peaceful world through intercultural understanding and respect.
To this end the organization works with schools, governments and international organizations to develop 
challenging programmes of international education and rigorous assessment.
These programmes encourage students across the world to become active, compassionate and lifelong 
learners who understand that other people, with their differences, can also be right.Language B guide
Contents
Introduction  1
Purpose of this document 1
The Diploma Programme 2
Nature of the subject 6
Aims 13
Assessment objectives  14
Assessment objectives in practice  15
Syllabus 17
Syllabus outline 17
Syllabus content 18
Assessment  27
Assessment in the Diploma Programme 27
Assessment outline—SL  29
Assessment outline—HL  30
External assessment 31
Internal assessment 40
Approaches to teaching and learning  57
Approaches to the teaching and learning of language B 57
Appendices  62
Glossary of command terms 62
Glossary of subject-specific terms 63
Bibliography 66Language B guide 1Introduction
Purpose of this document
This publication is intended to guide the planning, teaching and assessment of the subject in schools. 
Subject teachers are the primary audience, although it is expected that teachers will use the guide to inform students and parents about the subject.
This guide can be found on the subject page of the programme resource centre at https://resources.ibo.org, a 
password-protected IB website designed to support IB teachers. It can also be purchased from the IB store at http://store.ibo.org.
Additional resources
Additional publications such as specimen papers and markschemes, teacher support materials, subject reports and grade descriptors can also be found on the programme resource centre. Past examination papers as well as markschemes can be purchased from the IB store.
Teachers are encouraged to check the programme resource centre for additional resources created or used 
by other teachers. Teachers can provide details of useful resources, for example, websites, books, videos, journals or teaching ideas.
Acknowledgment
The IB wishes to thank the educators and associated schools for generously contributing time and resources to the production of this guide.
First assessment 2020Language B guide 2Introduction
The Diploma Programme
The Diploma Programme is a rigorous pre-university course of study designed for students in the 16 to 19 
age range. It is a broad-based two-year course that aims to encourage students to be knowledgeable and inquiring, but also caring and compassionate. There is a strong emphasis on encouraging students to develop intercultural understanding, open-mindedness, and the attitudes necessary for them to respect and evaluate a range of points of view.
The Diploma Programme model
The course is presented as six academic areas enclosing a central core (see figure 1). It encourages the concurrent study of a broad range of academic areas. Students study two modern languages (or a modern language and a classical language), a humanities or social science subject, an experimental science, mathematics and one of the creative arts. It is this comprehensive range of subjects that makes the Diploma Programme a demanding course of study designed to prepare students effectively for university entrance. In each of the academic areas students have flexibility in making their choices, which means they can choose subjects that particularly interest them and that they may wish to study further at university.
Figure 1
Diploma Programme modelThe Diploma Programme  
Language B guide 3Choosing the right combination
Students are required to choose one subject from each of the six academic areas, although they 
can, instead of an arts subject, choose two subjects from another area. Normally, three subjects (and not more than four) are taken at higher level (HL), and the others are taken at standard level (SL). The IB recommends 240 teaching hours for HL subjects and 150 hours for SL. Subjects at HL are studied in greater depth and breadth than at SL.
At both levels, many skills are developed, especially those of critical thinking and analysis. At the end of 
the course, students’ abilities are measured by means of external assessment. Many subjects contain some element of coursework assessed by teachers. 
The core of the Diploma Programme model
All Diploma Programme students participate in the three course elements that make up the core of the model. 
Theory of knowledge (TOK) is a course that is fundamentally about critical thinking and inquiry into the 
process of knowing rather than about learning a specific body of knowledge. The TOK course examines the 
nature of knowledge and how we know what we claim to know. It does this by encouraging students to 
analyse knowledge claims and explore questions about the construction of knowledge. The task of TOK is to emphasize connections between areas of shared knowledge and link them to personal knowledge in such a way that an individual becomes more aware of his or her own perspectives and how they might differ from others.
Creativity, activity, service (CAS) is at the heart of the Diploma Programme. The emphasis in CAS is on 
helping students to develop their own identities, in accordance with the ethical principles embodied in the IB mission statement and the IB learner profile. It involves students in a range of activities alongside 
their academic studies throughout the Diploma Programme. The three strands of CAS are creativity (arts, 
and other experiences that involve creative thinking), activity (physical exertion contributing to a healthy lifestyle) and service (an unpaid and voluntary exchange that has a learning benefit for the student). Possibly, more than any other component in the Diploma Programme, CAS contributes to the IB’s mission to create a better and more peaceful world through intercultural understanding and respect.
The extended essay, including the world studies extended essay, offers the opportunity for IB students to 
investigate a topic of special interest, in the form of a 4,000-word piece of independent research. The area of research undertaken is chosen from one of the students’ six Diploma Programme subjects, or in the case of the inter-disciplinary world studies essay, two subjects, and acquaints them with the independent research 
and writing skills expected at university. This leads to a major piece of formally presented, structured 
writing, in which ideas and findings are communicated in a reasoned and coherent manner, appropriate to the subject or subjects chosen. It is intended to promote high-level research and writing skills, intellectual discovery and creativity. An authentic learning experience, it provides students with an opportunity to engage in personal research on a topic of choice, under the guidance of a supervisor.The Diploma Programme  
Language B guide 4Approaches to teaching and approaches to learning
Approaches to teaching and learning across the Diploma Programme refers to deliberate strategies, 
skills and attitudes which permeate the teaching and learning environment. These approaches and tools, intrinsically linked with the learner profile attributes, enhance student learning and assist student preparation for the Diploma Programme assessment and beyond. The aims of approaches to teaching and learning in the Diploma Programme are to:
• empower teachers as teachers of learners as well as teachers of content
• empower teachers to create clearer strategies for facilitating learning experiences in which students 
are more meaningfully engaged in structured inquiry and greater critical and creative thinking
• promote both the aims of individual subjects (making them more than course aspirations) and linking 
previously isolated knowledge (concurrency of learning)
• encourage students to develop an explicit variety of skills that will equip them to continue to be actively engaged in learning after they leave school, and to help them not only obtain university admission through better grades but also prepare for success during tertiary education and beyond
• enhance further the coherence and relevance of the students’ Diploma Programme experience
• allow schools to identify the distinctive nature of an IB Diploma Programme education, with its blend of idealism and practicality.
The five approaches to learning (developing thinking skills, social skills, communication skills, self-management skills and research skills), along with the six approaches to teaching (teaching that is inquiry-based, conceptually focused, contextualized, collaborative, differentiated and informed by assessment), encompass the key values and principles that underpin IB pedagogy.
The IB mission statement and the IB learner profile
The Diploma Programme aims to develop in students the knowledge, skills and attitudes they will need to fulfill the aims of the IB, as expressed in the organization’s mission statement and the learner profile. Teaching and learning in the Diploma Programme represent the reality in daily practice of the organization’s educational philosophy.
Academic honesty
Academic honesty in the Diploma Programme is a set of values and behaviours informed by the attributes of the learner profile. In teaching, learning and assessment, academic honesty serves to promote personal integrity, engender respect for the integrity of others and their work, and ensure that all students have an equal opportunity to demonstrate the knowledge and skills they acquire during their studies.
All coursework—including work submitted for assessment—is to be authentic, based on the student’s 
individual and original ideas, with the ideas and work of others fully acknowledged. Assessment tasks that require teachers to provide guidance to students, or that require students to work collaboratively, must be completed in full compliance with the detailed guidelines provided by the IB for the relevant subjects.
For further information on academic honesty in the IB and the Diploma Programme, please consult the IB 
publications Academic honesty in the IB educational context , Academic honesty in the Diploma Programme and 
Diploma Programme: From principles into practice. 
Specific information regarding academic honesty as it pertains to external and internal assessment 
components of this Diploma Programme subject can be found in this guide.The Diploma Programme  
Language B guide 5Acknowledging the ideas or work of another person
Coordinators and teachers are reminded that candidates must acknowledge all sources used in work 
submitted for assessment. The following is intended as a clarification of this requirement.
Diploma Programme candidates submit work for assessment in a variety of media that may include audio-
visual material, text, graphs, images and/or data published in print or electronic sources. If a candidate uses the work or ideas of another person, the candidate must acknowledge the source using a standard style of referencing in a consistent manner. A candidate’s failure to acknowledge a source will be investigated by the IB as a potential breach of regulations that may result in a penalty imposed by the IB final award committee.
The IB does not prescribe which style(s) of referencing or in-text citation should be used by candidates; this 
is left to the discretion of appropriate faculty/staff in the candidate’s school. The wide range of subjects, three response languages and the diversity of referencing styles make it impractical and restrictive to insist on particular styles. In practice, certain styles may prove most commonly used, but schools are free to choose a style that is appropriate for the subject concerned and the language in which candidates’ work is 
written. Regardless of the reference style adopted by the school for a given subject, it is expected that the 
minimum information given includes: name of author, date of publication, title of source, and page numbers as applicable.
Candidates are expected to use a standard style and use it consistently so that credit is given to all sources 
used, including sources that have been paraphrased or summarized. When writing text candidates must clearly distinguish between their words and those of others by the use of quotation marks (or other method, such as indentation) followed by an appropriate citation that denotes an entry in the bibliography. If an electronic source is cited, the date of access must be indicated. Candidates are not expected to show faultless expertise in referencing, but are expected to demonstrate that all sources have been acknowledged. 
Candidates must be advised that audio-visual material, text, graphs, images and/or data published in print 
or in electronic sources that is not their own must also attribute the source. Again, an appropriate style of referencing/citation must be used.
Learning diversity and learning support requirements
Schools must ensure that equal access arrangements and reasonable adjustments are provided to candidates with learning support requirements that are in line with the IB documents:
• Candidates with assessment access requirements
• Learning diversity and inclusion in IB programmes .Language B guide 6Introduction
Nature of the subject
Language acquisition
Language acquisition consists of two modern language courses—language ab initio and language B—that 
are offered in a number of languages, and a classical languages course that is offered in Latin and Classical Greek. Owing to the nature of language study in the latter, there are specific aims for classical literature that can be found in the Classical languages guide . Language ab initio and language B are language acquisition 
courses designed to provide students with the necessary skills and intercultural understanding to enable 
them to communicate successfully in an environment where the language studied is spoken. This process 
allows the learner to go beyond the confines of the classroom, expanding their awareness of the world and fostering respect for cultural diversity.
The two modern language courses—language ab initio and language B—develop students’ linguistic 
abilities through the development of receptive, productive and interactive skills (as defined in the “Syllabus 
content” section). The classical languages course focuses on the study of the language, literature and culture 
of the classical world.
Language B SL and language B HL
Language B is a language acquisition course designed for students with some previous experience of the target language. In the language B course, students further develop their ability to communicate in the target language through the study of language, themes and texts. In doing so, they also develop conceptual understandings of how language works, as appropriate to the level of the course.
Most language B subjects are available at both SL and HL. A list of languages offered at language B SL and 
HL is released each year in the Diploma Programme Assessment procedures .
Distinction between SL and HL
At both levels of language B (SL and HL), students learn to communicate in the target language in familiar and unfamiliar contexts. They describe situations, narrate events, make comparisons, explain problems, and state and support their personal opinions on a variety of topics relating to course content. The study of two literary works originally written in the target language is required only at language B HL. The distinction between language B SL and HL can also be seen in the level of competency the student is expected to 
develop in the receptive, productive and interactive skills described below.
Language B SL
Receptive skills:  Students understand a range of written and spoken authentic personal, professional and 
mass media texts on topics of interest. They understand descriptions of events, feelings and wishes; they 
understand comparisons and recognize a straightforward, linear argument. They use context to deduce the meaning of sentences and unknown words and phrases.Nature of the subject 
Language B guide 7Productive skills:  Students write texts for a variety of purposes and make oral presentations on topics of 
interest. They write descriptive texts and personal correspondence; they make comparisons, narrate stories, 
provide detailed accounts, and express their thoughts and opinions on abstract or cultural topics. 
Interactive skills:  Students initiate and maintain the flow of conversations and discussions. They express 
and respond to opinions and feelings on a variety of topics. They use and understand clear speech on a 
variety of topics relating to course content and the culture(s) of the target language. Students use a variety of strategies to negotiate meaning and foster communication.
Language B HL
At HL, students are expected to extend the range and complexity of the language they use and understand in order to communicate. They continue to develop their knowledge of vocabulary and grammar, as well as their conceptual understanding of how language works, in order to construct, analyse and evaluate arguments on a variety of topics relating to course content and the target language culture(s).
Receptive skills:  Students understand and evaluate a wide variety of written and spoken authentic 
personal, professional and mass media texts; they understand fundamental elements of literary texts such 
as theme, plot and character. They analyse arguments, distinguishing main points from relevant supporting details and explanations. They use a variety of strategies to deduce meaning. 
Productive skills:  Students present and develop their ideas and opinions on a variety of topics, both 
orally and in writing. They construct and support arguments with explanations and examples. They speak 
and write at length, and with purpose, in order to meet a wide range of communicative needs: describing, narrating, comparing, explaining, persuading, justifying, evaluating.
Interactive skills:  Students initiate, maintain and close oral exchanges, displaying some ability to make 
adjustments in style or emphasis. They use a variety of strategies to maintain the flow of conversations 
and discussions on a variety of topics relating to course content and the culture(s) of the target language. Students are adept in negotiating meaning and fostering communication.
Language B and the core
Teachers of language acquisition courses need to plan carefully to provide opportunities for students to draw on their experiences in the core. Examples of how this might happen include:
• transferring the critical-thinking process explored in TOK to the development of well-supported 
arguments in written text types, such as a speech or report
• using personal knowledge gained from a CAS experience as a cultural comparison in an individual or 
group oral activity, or as an example in a written response
• developing ideas for CAS activities as a result of themes and topics explored in a language acquisition 
class
• developing a research question for an EE that allows the deeper exploration of a language topic of special interest to the student
• using the opportunity to write an EE in the student’s language of study as a means of personal challenge and skills development.
The following section outlines the nature of the contributions that each element of the core can make to language acquisition lessons.Nature of the subject 
Language B guide 8Language B and theory of knowledge
Theory of knowledge (TOK) is one of the three core elements of the Diploma Programme (DP). It plays a 
special role in the programme by providing an opportunity for students to reflect on the fundamental question of how they know what they know. It aims to help students become more aware of their own perspective, as well as developing an awareness of multiple perspectives. More information on TOK can be found in the Theory of knowledge guide .
Language is itself one of the specific ways of knowing that is identified in the TOK course. In addition to this explicit exploration of language, the skills and wider conceptual understandings that students develop 
in TOK can make an extremely positive contribution to their study of language acquisition. TOK develops 
higher-order thinking skills, such as analysis and evaluation, and also helps students to make connections and comparisons across their subject areas and the DP core. In this way, language acquisition both supports and is supported by TOK.
As well as using the skills developed in TOK in acquiring an additional language, students will also benefit 
from guiding questions that can connect TOK to the five themes of the language B curriculum. The following 
discussion questions are examples and are not meant to be either prescriptive or exhaustive.
• Is it possible to think without language?
• What would be lost if the whole world shared one common language?
• If people speak more than one language, is what they know different in each language?
• Do you think maths, logic or music should be classified as languages?
• In what ways can language be used to influence, persuade or manipulate people?
• Does language describe our experience of the world, or does it actively shape our experience of the 
world?
• How are metaphors used in the construction of knowledge?
• To what extent is our perspective determined by our membership of a particular culture?
• To what extent are we aware of the impact of culture on what we believe or know?
• Is there anything that is true for all cultures?
Language B and creativity, activity, service
Creativity, activity, service (CAS) experiences can be associated with each of the subject groups of the DP .
CAS and language acquisition can complement each other in a variety of ways. Students can enhance 
intercultural understanding through the active and purposeful use of their acquired language within the specific real-life contexts provided by their CAS experiences. Students may also draw on their CAS 
experiences to enrich their involvement in language acquisition both within and outside the classroom.
An important characteristic of the language acquisition courses is the conceptual understandings that 
students develop. Through the five prescribed themes around which the language acquisition courses are 
centred, students might be able to investigate, plan, act and reflect on CAS experiences and projects in a more informed and meaningful way. Similarly, CAS experiences can ignite students’ passion for addressing particular personal, local, national and global issues.
Language acquisition teachers can assist students in making links between their subjects and their CAS 
experiences, where appropriate. This will provide students with relevance in both their subject learning and 
their CAS learning through purposeful discussion and real experiences.
The challenge and enjoyment of CAS can often have a profound effect on language acquisition students, 
who might choose, for example, to engage with CAS in the following ways.Nature of the subject 
Language B guide 9• As a CAS experience, a student can extend engagement with the language acquisition theme of “sharing 
the planet” (for example, environment) by conducting a separate activity in learning the names of organic and human-made materials in the target language. The student could then walk around the school to collect human-made waste (for example, plastic) that is discarded during one day, and then display it.
• In a series of CAS experiences relating to the language acquisition theme of “social organization” (for example, social relationships, community, social engagement), a student interacts with elderly target 
language speakers, over a number of visits, to collect sayings, idioms or adages used by the older 
generations. These could then be shared in an article on the school or programme blog.
• Students can develop a CAS project linked to the language acquisition theme of “experiences” (for example, migration) in which they engage with members of a local refugee population. The students could collaborate in an investigation of how migrants balance negotiating a new culture with maintaining their cultural heritage. An outcome of this interaction could be the creation of a mural 
representing the cultural balance.
It is important to note that a CAS experience can be a single event or may be an extended series of events. 
However, CAS experiences must be distinct from, and may not be included or used in, the student’s diploma course requirements.
Additional suggestions on the links between DP subjects and CAS can be found in the Creativity, activity, 
service teacher support material .
Language B and the extended essay
Writing an extended essay (EE) in a language of acquisition provides students with an excellent opportunity to explore one aspect of their chosen language in greater depth and to increase their intercultural understanding and international-mindedness. In line with the IB’s focus on approaches to teaching and learning (ATL), the EE in a language of acquisition provides opportunities for students to develop their thinking, research and self-management skills while, at the same time, focusing on an aspect of language 
that is of particular personal interest and challenge.
Students must select one of the three distinct categories outlined below in order to develop a manageable 
research question for their EE. A simplified summary, with examples, is provided in the table below. For full details of requirements, teachers and students must refer to the Extended essay guide (first assessment 2018).
• Category 1 (“language”) offers the opportunity to engage with a particular linguistic aspect in greater detail.
• Category 2 (“culture and society”) allows the student to focus on one aspect of the target culture, linked to either a linguistic detail or a cultural artifact, and complements perfectly the learner profile for language acquisition, promoting reflection on the culture of the target language and the learner’s role in the linguistic community.
• Category 3 (“literature”) provides an opportunity for students to explore one or more works of literature in order to widen their understanding of the target language and culture from a literary angle.
Category Nature Description Example
1 Language A specific analysis of language, its use, structure, development, and so on. It is normally related to its cultural context or a specific text.“Le parler jeune ”: An analysis of 
the vocabulary and expressions common in the language of youth in France today.
2A Culture and 
societyA socio-cultural analysis of the impact of a particular issue on the form or use of the language based on an examination of language use. An analysis of the way in which the advent of internet marketing in China has had an impact on the language.Nature of the subject 
Language B guide 10Category Nature Description Example
2B Culture and 
societyA sociocultural analysis of the 
impact of a particular issue on the form or use of the language in an essay of a general cultural nature based on specific cultural artifacts.To what extent do the films Entre les murs  and La  journée de la jupe 
portray an accurate image of the French education system?
3 Literature An analysis of a literary type, based on a specific work or works of literature. All works must originally have been written in the target language.How effective is the use of the first person narrator in the German novel Crazy  by Benjamin Lebert?
Language acquisition and international-mindedness
International-mindedness is central to the IB philosophy and instrumental in aspiring to a more peaceful world. Language acquisition courses do not have as their only goal the development of language skills, but also fostering intercultural understanding and global engagement. The nature of the language acquisition process supports international-mindedness and is, in turn, supported by it. The flexibility of IB course design allows language acquisition teachers to incorporate ideas and resources that encourage students to view 
aspects of the language and culture from different (and sometimes differing) perspectives, to make non-
judgmental comparisons of language and culture, and to view language and culture in a global context.
International-mindedness also provides opportunities for students to progress in the development of IB learner profile traits. Through exposure to, examination of, and reflection on, texts from cultures other than their own, students nurture their curiosity ( inquirers ), engage with issues and ideas of global 
significance ( knowledgeable ), use critical-thinking skills ( thinkers ) and listen carefully to the perspectives 
of other individuals and groups ( communicators ). They learn to show respect for the dignity and rights of 
people everywhere ( principled ), critically appreciate the values and traditions of others ( open-minded ), show 
empathy, compassion and respect ( caring ), recognize their interdependence with other people and the world 
in which they live ( balanced ), consider the world thoughtfully ( reflective ) and explore new ideas ( risk-takers ).
Engaging with sensitive topics
All language acquisition courses will provide the opportunity to engage with a broad range of texts, stimuli and scenarios that address topics of personal, local or national and global significance. Such work may well 
raise issues that challenge learners intellectually, personally and culturally. Engagement with these topics, 
whether intentional or incidental, can be opportunities for development of IB learner profile traits. Teachers should help learners to approach such materials in a sensitive, responsible and reflective manner, bearing in mind the IB’s mission and its commitment to international-mindedness and intercultural respect within the context of the course. Consideration should also be given to the personal and social values of others. As part of the collective consideration of the school, language acquisition students must be supported in maintaining an ethical perspective during their course. Schools must make every reasonable effort to encourage students to respond appropriately (without seeking to offend), to promote respect for their peers and to consider the environment in all their actions.Nature of the subject 
Language B guide 11In selecting texts and preparing materials and tasks for language acquisition courses, teachers are reminded 
to consider the cultural environment and the make-up of the student body, in order to act as role models in demonstrating an awareness of, and sensitivity to, deeply held personal and community values.
Prior learning
Students enter language acquisition courses with varying degrees of exposure to the target language(s). It is, therefore, important that students are placed into a course that is most suited to their language development needs and that will provide them with an appropriate academic challenge. For those students entering DP language acquisition from the Middle Years Programme (MYP), table 1 in the “Language acquisition across the IB continuum” section of the MYP Language acquisition guide  provides indications that 
can be useful for appropriate placement. 
Further placement guidance can be drawn from the study Benchmarking Selected IB Diploma Programme 
Language Courses to the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages . This study suggests that 
students already at CEFR A2 or B1 in the target language can comfortably take language B SL. Students already at CEFR B1 or B2 can comfortably take language B HL.
Links to the Middle Years Programme
The MYP is designed for students aged 11 to 16 and, as an integral part of the IB continuum, can directly lead into the DP . MYP language acquisition provides students with opportunities that prepare them for a DP language acquisition course through the following shared aims.
• Developing communication skills in an additional language
• Developing insights into the features, processes and craft of language, and the concept of culture, 
encouraging students to see that there are diverse ways of living, behaving and viewing the world
• Developing intercultural understanding and global engagement, leading to international-mindedness
• Providing opportunities for learning through inquiry and the development of critical- and creative-thinking skills
• Fostering curiosity and a desire for lifelong learning
• Understanding and respecting other languages and cultures
As with the DP , the MYP holistically addresses students’ intellectual, social, emotional and physical well-being, and provides students with opportunities to develop the knowledge, attitudes and skills they need in order to manage complex ideas and issues, and take responsible action for the future. The MYP requires the study of at least two languages to support students in understanding their own cultures and those of others. 
Additionally, the MYP helps to prepare students for further education, the workplace and lifelong learning. 
These courses also provide the opportunity to develop language skills and learn about  language through 
the conceptual understandings of communication, connections , creativity  and culture . The range of 
conceptual understandings, and factual and procedural knowledge that language acquisition students encounter throughout the MYP , can be directly transferred and developed in DP language acquisition courses, as can related concepts such as audience , purpose, meaning  and context .
Learning takes place within contexts relevant to the student, whether personal, local, national, international or globally significant. This approach—using a range of learning contexts in the MYP—is directly extended through the five prescribed themes of DP language acquisition courses: identities; experiences; human ingenuity; social organization; sharing the planet.Nature of the subject 
Language B guide 12Links to the IB Career-related Programme
The IB Career-related Programme (CP) is a framework of international education that incorporates the vision 
and educational principles of the IB into a unique programme specifically developed for students who wish to engage in career-related learning. The CP’s flexible educational framework allows schools to meet the needs, backgrounds and contexts of students, and is especially relevant for language acquisition.
The core of the CP enables students to enhance their personal and interpersonal development, with an 
emphasis on experiential learning. One of the components of the CP core is language development, which ensures that all CP students have access, and are exposed, to an additional language that will enable them to use the language they have studied, encourage intercultural awareness and gain personal fulfilment. Students are encouraged to begin or extend the study of an additional language that suits their needs, background and context. A minimum of 50 hours is expected to be devoted to language development. CP students must complete a language development portfolio to the satisfaction of the school.
One of the ways in which students can undertake language development in the CP is with an extension to 
their DP language acquisition course. This could be done through a school-designed language development course, through an external provider of language development or through monitored self-directed study. It is essential that the content of the provision of language development is an extension to the DP language acquisition coursework, if both are based on the same target language. The content and outcomes of the extension course may be tailored to the career-related studies of the students, if so desired.
The CP documents Language development guide , General regulations: Career-related Programme , and 
Language development teacher support material provide further guidance regarding language acquisition 
and language development. More information about the CP can be found on the CP website, which can be accessed through the programme resource centre.Language B guide 13Introduction
Aims
Language acquisition aims
The following aims are common to both language B and language ab initio.
1. Develop international-mindedness through the study of languages, cultures, and ideas and issues of 
global significance.
2. Enable students to communicate in the language they have studied in a range of contexts and for a variety of purposes.
3. Encourage, through the study of texts and through social interaction, an awareness and appreciation of a variety of perspectives of people from diverse cultures.
4. Develop students’ understanding of the relationship between the languages and cultures with which they are familiar.
5. Develop students’ awareness of the importance of language in relation to other areas of knowledge.
6. Provide students, through language learning and the process of inquiry, with opportunities for intellectual engagement and the development of critical- and creative-thinking skills.
7. Provide students with a basis for further study, work and leisure through the use of an additional language.
8. Foster curiosity, creativity and a lifelong enjoyment of language learning.Language B guide 14Introduction
Assessment objectives
The following assessment objectives are common to both language B and language ab initio. The level 
of difficulty of the assessments, and the expectations of student performance on the tasks, are what distinguishes the three modern language acquisition courses.
1. Communicate clearly and effectively in a range of contexts and for a variety of purposes.
2. Understand and use language appropriate to a range of interpersonal and/or intercultural contexts 
and audiences.
3. Understand and use language to express and respond to a range of ideas with fluency and accuracy.
4. Identify, organize and present ideas on a range of topics.
5. Understand, analyse and reflect upon a range of written, audio, visual and audio-visual texts.Language B guide 15Introduction
Assessment objectives in practice
Assessment objective Which component 
addresses this assessment objective?How is the assessment objective addressed?
1. Communicate clearly and effectively in a range of contexts and for a variety of purposes.Paper 1—writing Students demonstrate their conceptual understanding by responding appropriately in written tasks using a variety of text types.
Internal assessment Students orally react to a stimulus (visual for SL, literary extract for HL), respond to questions and engage in a general conversation.
2. Understand and use language appropriate to a range of interpersonal and/or intercultural 
contexts and audiences.Paper 1—writing Students demonstrate their conceptual 
understanding by responding appropriately in written tasks using a variety of text types.
Paper 2—listening and readingStudents produce responses that demonstrate an understanding of written and audio texts.
Internal assessment Students interact with the teacher using a range of language structures and registers appropriate to the context and audience.
3. Understand and use language to express and respond to a range of ideas with fluency and accuracy.Paper 1—writing Students respond to written tasks using appropriate language, register and format.
Paper 2—listening and readingStudents demonstrate an understanding of written and audio texts.
Internal assessment Students interact orally with the teacher using appropriate language, register and format.
4. Identify, organize and present ideas on a range of topics.Paper 1—writing Students develop a coherent and organized response on a range of topics.
Internal assessment Students understand the topic of discussion and present an organized response, whether planned or spontaneous.Assessment objectives in practice 
Language B guide 16Assessment objective Which component 
addresses this assessment objective?How is the assessment objective addressed?
5. Understand, analyse and reflect upon a range of written, audio, visual and audio-visual texts.Paper 2—listening and readingStudents respond appropriately to authentic texts.
Internal assessment SL: Students demonstrate the ability to verbally interact in the target language in response to a visual stimulus.
HL: Students demonstrate the ability to 
verbally interact in the target language in response to a literary stimulus.Language B guide 17Syllabus
Syllabus outline
Figure 2
In the language B course, students develop the ability to communicate in the target language through the 
study of language , themes  and texts . In doing so, they also develop conceptual understandings  of how 
language works. Communication is evidenced through receptive, productive and interactive skills across a 
range of contexts and purposes that are appropriate to the level of the course.
The study of language requires careful attention to forms, structures, functions and conceptual 
understandings of language. Knowledge of vocabulary and grammar—the what  of language—is reinforced 
and extended by understanding the why  and how  of language: audience, context, purpose, meaning.
Students expand the range of their communication skills by understanding and producing a wide variety of oral and written texts for audiences, contexts and purposes associated with academic and personal interests. For the development of receptive skills, language B students must study authentic texts that explore the culture(s) of the target language. In addition, the study of two literary works is required at HL.
A key aim of the language B course is to develop international-mindedness through the study of language, culture, and ideas and issues of global significance. Explicit links to TOK strengthen the ability to communicate in the target language by increasing students’ self-awareness as inquirers in their own language learning process. As appropriate to the level of the course, communication skills are reinforced through the other categories of approaches to learning skills: thinking, research, social and self-management skills.
The recommended teaching time is 240 hours to complete HL courses and 150 hours to complete SL courses, 
as stated in the document General regulations: Diploma Programme (2016: 6, article 8.2).Language B guide 18Syllabus
Syllabus content
Themes
Prescribed themes
Five prescribed themes are common to the syllabuses of language B and language ab initio; the themes 
provide relevant contexts for study at all levels of language acquisition in the DP , and opportunities for students to communicate about matters of personal, local or national, and global interest.
The five prescribed themes are:
• identities
• experiences
• human ingenuity
• social organization
• sharing the planet.
The themes allow students to compare the target language and culture(s) to other languages and cultures 
with which they are familiar. The themes also provide opportunities for students to make connections to other disciplinary areas in the DP . Students and teachers of language B with experience of the Primary Years Programme (PYP) or the MYP will recognize that the themes are inspired by the transdisciplinary themes of the PYP and the global contexts of the MYP . In this way, the DP language B course can enhance the continuity of the educational experience of long-standing IB students, while also being suitable for students who are new to the IB.
Recommended topics
The five prescribed themes must all be addressed equally in the language B course; beyond that, teachers are free to work with the themes in a way that best helps them to organize a course plan and build upon students’ interests in the target language and its cultures, and that best helps students to meet the expectations of the syllabus with regard to language and texts.
The following lists of recommended topics for each theme are appropriate for students to achieve the 
aims and objectives of the course. The recommended topics are to be considered indicative content , not 
prescribed content, for the language B course. The themes are prescribed, but the recommended topics and possible questions for each theme are not prescribed.Syllabus content  
Language B guide 19Theme Guiding principle Optional recommended 
topicsPossible questions
Identities Explore the nature of the self and what it is to be human.• Lifestyles
• Health and well-
being
• Beliefs and values
• Subcultures
• Language and 
identity• What constitutes an identity?
• How do we express our identity?
• What ideas and images do we associate with a 
healthy lifestyle?
• How do language 
and culture contribute to form our identity?
Experiences Explore and tell the stories of the events, experiences and journeys that shape our lives.• Leisure activities
• Holidays and travel
• Life stories
• Rites of passage
• Customs and traditions
• Migration• How does travel broaden our horizons?
• How does our past 
shape our present 
and our future?
• How and why do different cultures mark important 
moments in life?
• How would 
living in another culture affect our worldview?
Human ingenuityExplore the ways in which human creativity and innovation affect our world.• Entertainment
• Artistic expressions
• Communication and media
• Technology
• Scientific innovation• How do developments in science and technology 
influence our lives?
• How do the arts help 
us understand the world?
• What can we learn about a culture through its artistic expression?
• How do the media change the way we relate to each other?Syllabus content  
Language B guide 20Theme Guiding principle Optional recommended 
topicsPossible questions
Social organizationExplore the ways in which groups of people organize themselves, or are organized, through common systems or interests.• Social relationships
• Community
• Social engagement
• Education
• The working world
• Law and order• What is the individual’s role in the community?
• What role do rules and regulations play in the formation of a society?
• What role does language play in a society?
• What opportunities and challenges does the 21st-century workplace bring?
Sharing the planetExplore the challenges and opportunities faced by individuals and communities in the modern world.• The environment
• Human rights
• Peace and conflict
• Equality
• Globalization
• Ethics
• Urban and rural environment• What environmental and social issues present challenges to the world, and how can these challenges be overcome?
• What ethical issues arise from living in the modern world, and how do we resolve them?
• What challenges and benefits does globalization bring?
• What challenges 
and benefits result 
from changes in urban and rural environments?
Texts
In theory, a text is anything from which information can be extracted, including the wide range of oral, written and visual materials present in society. For example:
• single and multiple images, with or without written text
• non-literary and literary written texts and extracts
• broadcast media texts: films, radio and television programmes, and their scripts
• oral texts: presentations, debates, interviews, speeches, recorded conversations, and their transcripts
• electronic texts that share aspects of the above areas: text messaging, web pages and blogs, social 
media and video-sharing websites.Syllabus content  
Language B guide 21For the purposes of teaching and learning in a language acquisition course, the language B and language 
ab initio syllabuses organize written, visual, audio and audio-visual texts into three broad categories: personal , professional  and mass media texts . The guiding principle for using texts in the DP language 
acquisition courses is to develop students’ receptive, productive and interactive skills in the target language by focusing their attention on the ways in which good communicators consider the audience, context and 
purpose of what they want to say or write in the process of choosing and developing an appropriate text 
type to convey a message.
Teachers should provide frequent opportunities for students to understand and use a variety of text types 
in relation to the prescribed themes and related course content. The categories are described below, and the table that follows provides examples of text types for each category. The examples shown are neither prescriptive nor exhaustive.
Personal texts
Personal texts are shared by the person creating the message and an audience who may be family members, friends or groups with a common interest; a personal text may also be directed to oneself. Personal texts tend to be characterized by attention to the everyday interests or the affective needs of individuals rather than the analysis of information. Personal texts have a variety of functions including, but not limited to, describing, narrating, entertaining, recommending and persuading. The level of formality in the register of 
these texts will vary according to the linguistic and sociocultural norms of the target language.
Professional texts
Professional texts are created for an intended audience in contexts where no personal relationship is 
assumed between the producer of the text and the recipient(s); however, the producer of the text can assume that the recipient(s) will have an interest in receiving and understanding the message. Professional texts tend to be characterized by attention to the cognitive needs of individuals, the transfer of knowledge and the logical presentation of information; these texts employ clear, factual language and a formal register. 
Professional texts have a variety of functions including, but not limited to, informing, instructing, explaining, 
analysing, convincing, interpreting and evaluating.
Mass media texts
Mass media texts are created for distribution to a large audience that is targeted because of an interest that, at least initially, lies primarily with the producer of the text, since the person or entity responsible for a mass media text has no way of knowing exactly who will take the time and interest to understand the message or who will ignore it. Mass media texts tend to be characterized by the need of the producer of the text to project authority, desirability or exclusivity, and the conscious choice of a particular medium or technology 
that is appropriate to reach the targeted audience. The level of formality in the register of these texts will 
vary according to the linguistic and sociocultural norms of the target language.Syllabus content  
Language B guide 22Personal texts Professional texts Mass media texts
Blog
DiaryEmailPersonal letterSocial media posting/chat roomBlogEmailEssayFormal letterProposal
Questionnaire
Report
Set of instructions
SurveyAdvertisement
Article (newspaper, magazine)BlogBrochureFilm
Interview
Leaflet
Literature*
News report
Opinion column/editorialPamphletPodcastPosterPublic commentary (editorial/
readers’ letters)
Radio programmeReviewSpeechTravel guideWeb page
* Teachers are reminded that the study of at least two literary texts (originally written in the target language) 
is compulsory for language B at HL, and that one of the literary texts studied during the course must serve 
as the stimulus for the individual oral assessment at HL.
Literature
Reading literature in the target language can be an enjoyable journey into cultures where the target language is spoken. Literature can exemplify one or more of the prescribed themes of the language B course, and can help students to broaden their vocabulary and use language to express opinions and explore ideas. Reading literature helps students to develop fluent reading skills as they progress from comprehension to interpretation and inference. Literature is also an especially appropriate vehicle for 
promoting the development of international-mindedness, which is a key aim of the DP language acquisition 
courses.
The use of literary works to develop students’ receptive and productive skills is encouraged at all levels of 
language acquisition in the DP; however, in terms of formal requirements of the syllabus and assessment outline, the study of two literary works originally written in the target language is a requirement at 
HL in language  B. HL students are expected to understand fundamental elements of the literary works 
studied, such as themes, plot and characters. It must be emphasized that literary criticism is not an objective Syllabus content  
Language B guide 23of the language B course; literary criticism lies within the remit of the DP studies in language and literature 
courses. In language acquisition courses, specifically language B HL, literature is intended as a stimulus for ideas to be explored, principally through oral assessment.
The term “literary works” refers to works of prose fiction, prose non-fiction, poetry and drama. When 
choosing literary works, teachers should consider carefully how to use literature in relation to one or more of the prescribed themes, and they should also bear in mind the interests and general language proficiency of their students. The term “literary text” refers to an extract from a complete literary work, for example, a scene from a play, several paragraphs from a novel or a single poem from a larger collection.
As with any resources used in the classroom, literary works should be chosen in order to allow students to 
achieve the aims and objectives of the course, be culturally relevant to the target language and linguistically accessible for language acquisition students. Literary works that feature a high degree of linguistic complexity, arcane language or an enigmatic subject matter are not appropriate in the DP language acquisition classroom context. Works in translation or “easy reader” versions of literary texts are not helpful for students to achieve the aims and objectives of the course and must be avoided.
Conceptual understanding
Concerning the importance of “significant content” that allows students to develop both disciplinary and interdisciplinary understandings, the document What is an IB education? states that “Each of the four IB programmes provides a detailed and developmentally appropriate curriculum or curriculum framework that is broad, balanced, conceptual and connected.” The explicit integration of conceptual understanding into the curriculum focuses on “powerful organizing ideas that are relevant across subject areas” (2013, 
updated June 2015, May 2017: 5).
All DP language programme subject groups promote a vision of learning in which the development of 
language skills and conceptual understandings of language are complementary to each other, so that the total learning experience of the student is as robust as possible. Thus, DP students become more accomplished communicators in the languages they study when their abilities to read, write and speak about course content are reinforced and extended by an understanding of why  and how  people use language to communicate.
In particular, the approach to developing conceptual understandings of language in the DP languages 
programme is designed using the following guiding principles.
• DP students with experience of the PYP or the MYP are provided with frequent opportunities to 
develop further their conceptual understandings of language (PYP) or their understanding of the key and related concepts in the MYP language and literature and language acquisition courses.
• DP students are encouraged to apply what they already know about other languages and cultures—
through formal study or personal experience—in order to enhance their overall learning process.
• DP students are encouraged to consider broad questions about language and culture, as appropriate 
to their course of study, in order to develop international-mindedness and increase their self-awareness as inquirers in their own learning process.
Conceptual understanding in language acquisition courses
For language acquisition courses, it is important to note that the approach presented here for developing conceptual understanding recognizes that DP students are not beginning students, even when they are beginning learners of a language or do not demonstrate a high level of language proficiency. At all levels of language acquisition, therefore, DP students are encouraged to make use of the thinking, communication and research skills they have developed over years of experience in school, and to transfer those skills to 
the target language at the pace—and within the contexts and for the purposes—that their language skills 
development will allow.Syllabus content  
Language B guide 24Certain conceptual understandings of language are fundamental to successful communication and should 
be developed in all DP language acquisition courses. Following the description of each are some stimulus questions that may encourage exploration of these conceptual understandings while calling attention to language skills. Teachers should feel free to use or adapt these questions—or create their own questions—for use in class so that they are comprehensible to students and relevant to course content. It is important 
to note that these are not questions for examination papers ; rather, they are included in the syllabus as 
a tool for teachers to use in order to encourage students to think about  language and culture as part of their 
language study in the DP and, in doing so, to become more effective and knowledgeable communicators.
• Audience:  Students understand that language should be appropriate for the person(s) with whom 
one is communicating.
Stimulus questions
 – How can the perceived needs and interests, or previous knowledge, of the recipients of a text 
influence its production?
 – How would the language used in a given text need to change if the same basic message needed to be communicated to a different audience?
• Context:  Students understand that language should be appropriate to the situation in which one is 
communicating.
Stimulus questions
 – How does the situation or setting influence the production or reception of a text?
 – How is the relationship between the producer and the recipient(s) of a text (or the relationship of 
interlocutors in a conversation) reflected in language use?
• Purpose:  Students understand that language should be appropriate to achieve a desired intention, 
goal or result when communicating.
Stimulus questions
 – When I read or listen to a text, what helps me to understand the intention of the person who 
produced the text?
 – When I need to communicate for a specific reason, how do I plan my message and language use in order to achieve my goal?
• Meaning:  Students understand that language is used in a range of ways to communicate a message.
Stimulus questions
 – How are literal and figurative (non-literal) language used by producers of texts to create desired effects?
 – What does the producer of a text do to make the message clear (or, on the contrary, to make it ambiguous) when there is no opportunity for the recipient(s) to reply to the text?
• Variation:  Students understand that differences exist within a given language, and that speakers of a 
given language are generally able to understand each other.
Stimulus questions
 – How or why does a language change over time, across geographical boundaries or from one 
social or cultural group to another?
 – What does it mean to say that aspects of a text are “lost in translation” from one language to 
another?Syllabus content  
Language B guide 25Principles of course design
The IB recognizes that, owing to differences in language teaching traditions, it might be easier for the 
teachers of particular languages to find textbooks to suit their specific language. However, should appropriate textbooks not be available, the syllabus has been designed to allow teachers the freedom to construct their own course of study and schemes of work based on a range of texts linked to one or more of the prescribed themes in the syllabus. Teachers must use authentic materials as much as possible in the 
classroom, as this is necessary in order for students to meet the expectations of the course. This includes 
exposing students to the full range of varieties of the target language, both in written and spoken form, so that students become familiar with different accents as well as significant differences in vocabulary and structures. Such language experiences will encourage students to become open-minded, reflective communicators with a heightened sense of international-mindedness.
In designing a language B course of study, teachers should pay particular attention to three important 
principles: variety , integration  and transparency .
Variety
Teachers should ensure that their students:
• develop their receptive, productive and interactive skills in the target language through a wide range 
of individual, pair and group activities in class
• practise the target language through a wide range of individual, pair and group tasks
• are introduced to the full range of text types appropriate to the level of the course
• are exposed to a range of regional and national accents.
Integration
In order to integrate all the relevant aspects of the course and to encourage autonomy, it is necessary for teachers to help their students develop strategies for dealing with unfamiliar situations and unfamiliar language. To achieve this, teachers should provide:
• an environment that promotes the use of the target language in the classroom and prepares the 
students to communicate in a variety of contexts and for a variety of purposes that are appropriate to 
the level of the course
• authentic and modified authentic materials for study that have originally been produced for everyday 
users of the target language.
Teachers should also ensure that their course provides opportunities for students to:
• move easily from one language skill to another (for example, a discussion after reading a text)
• interact in the target language through active participation in oral exchanges, by both listening and 
speaking, or responding to a text, either in writing or orally
• consider and explore links with other disciplinary areas in the DP and with the TOK course
• reinforce their communication skills by using the other categories of approaches to learning skills: thinking, research, social and self-management skills
• be involved in the selection of materials to be studied.Syllabus content  
Language B guide 26Teachers are reminded that no single part of the syllabus—language, themes, texts, conceptual 
understandings—is an end in itself, but that all parts should complement each other and must be integrated in the course design. The ability of students to communicate in the target language should be developed through the study of materials that reflect the culture(s) concerned. This consideration also applies to the selection of literary works for language B HL.
Transparency
Teachers must ensure that their students are given clear information about the aims and objectives, the syllabus requirements and the assessment criteria for the course. Students should be made aware of what is expected of them regarding classwork and homework, as well as receiving regular feedback on their progress throughout the course.Language B guide 27Assessment
Assessment in the Diploma Programme
General
Assessment is an integral part of teaching and learning. The most important aims of assessment in the DP 
are that it should support curricular goals and encourage appropriate student learning. Both external and internal assessments are used in the DP . IB examiners mark work produced for external assessment, while work produced for internal assessment is marked by teachers and externally moderated by the IB.
There are two types of assessment identified by the IB.
• An integral component of ATL, formative assessment informs both teaching and learning. It is 
concerned with providing accurate and helpful feedback to students and teachers on the kind of learning taking place and the nature of students’ strengths and weaknesses in order to help develop students’ understanding and capabilities. Formative assessment can also help to improve teaching quality, as it can provide information to monitor progress towards meeting the course aims and objectives.
• Summative assessment gives an overview of previous learning and is concerned with measuring student achievement.
The DP primarily focuses on summative assessment designed to record student achievement at, or towards, the end of the course of study. However, many of the assessment instruments can, and should, also be used formatively during the course of teaching and learning. A comprehensive assessment plan is viewed 
as being integral with teaching, learning and course organization. For further information, see the IB 
Programme standards and practices document.
The approach to assessment used by the IB is criterion-related, not norm-referenced. This approach to 
assessment judges students’ work by their performance in relation to identified levels of attainment, and not in relation to the work of other students. For further information on assessment within the DP , please refer to the publication Diploma Programme assessment: Principles and practice .
To support teachers in the planning, delivery and assessment of the DP courses, a variety of resources can 
be found on the programme resource centre. Additional publications, such as specimen papers and the 
corresponding markschemes, teacher support materials, subject reports and grade descriptors, can also be found on the programme resource centre. Past examination papers and the corresponding markschemes are made available for purchase through the IB store.
Methods of assessment
The IB uses the following methods to assess work produced by students.
Assessment criteria
Assessment criteria are used when the assessment task is open-ended. Each criterion concentrates on a particular skill that students are expected to demonstrate. An assessment objective describes what students should be able to do, and assessment criteria describe how well they should be able to do it. Using assessment criteria allows discrimination between different answers and encourages a variety of responses. Assessment in the Diploma Programme 
Language B guide 28Each criterion comprises a set of hierarchically ordered level descriptors. Each level descriptor is worth one 
or more marks. Each criterion is applied independently using a best-fit model. The maximum marks for each criterion may differ according to the criterion’s importance. The marks awarded for each criterion are added together to give the total mark for the piece of work.
Markbands
Markbands are a comprehensive statement of expected performance against which responses are judged. They represent a single holistic criterion divided into level descriptors. Each level descriptor corresponds to a range of marks to differentiate student performance. A best-fit approach is used to ascertain which particular mark to use from the possible range for each level descriptor.
Analytic markschemes
Analytic markschemes are prepared for those examination questions that expect a particular kind of response and/or a given final answer from students. They give detailed instructions to examiners on how to break down the total mark for each question for different parts of the response.
Marking notes
For some assessment components marked using assessment criteria, marking notes are provided. Marking notes give guidance on how to apply assessment criteria to the particular requirements of a question.
Inclusive assessment arrangements
Inclusive assessment arrangements are available for candidates with assessment access requirements. These arrangements enable candidates with diverse needs to access the examinations and demonstrate their knowledge and understanding of the constructs being assessed.
The IB document Candidates with assessment access requirements provides details on all the inclusive 
assessment arrangements available to candidates with learning support requirements. The IB document 
Learning diversity and inclusion in IB programmes outlines the position of the IB with regard to candidates with diverse learning needs in the IB programmes. For candidates affected by adverse circumstances, the IB documents General regulations: Diploma Programme  and Diploma Programme Assessment procedures  
provide details on access considerations.
Responsibilities of the school
Schools must ensure that equal access arrangements and reasonable adjustments are provided to candidates with learning support requirements, in line with the IB documents Candidates with assessment access requirements and Learning diversity and inclusion in IB programmes .
The documents Meeting student learning diversity in the classroom and The IB guide to inclusive education: a resource for whole school development  are available to support schools in the ongoing process of increasing 
access and engagement by removing barriers to learning.Language B guide 29Assessment
Assessment outline—SL
First assessment 2020
Assessment component Weighting
External assessment (3 hours)
Paper 1 (1 hour 15 minutes)
Productive skills—writing (30 marks)
One writing task of 250–400 words from a choice of three, each from a different 
theme, choosing a text type from among those listed in the examination instructions.75%
25%
Paper 2 (1 hour 45 minutes)Receptive skills—separate sections for listening and reading (65 marks)
Listening comprehension (45 minutes) (25 marks)Reading comprehension (1 hour) (40 marks)Comprehension exercises on three audio passages and three written texts, drawn 
from all five themes.50%
Internal assessment
This component is internally assessed by the teacher and externally moderated by the IB at the end of the course.
Individual oral assessment
A conversation with the teacher, based on a visual stimulus, followed by discussion based on an additional theme. (30 marks)25%Language B guide 30Assessment
Assessment outline—HL
First assessment 2020
Assessment component Weighting
External assessment (3 hours 30 minutes)
Paper 1 (1 hour 30 minutes)
Productive skills—writing (30 marks)
One writing task of 450–600 words from a choice of three, each from a different 
theme, choosing a text type from among those listed in the examination instructions.75%
25%
Paper 2 (2 hours)Receptive skills—separate sections for listening and reading (65 marks)
Listening comprehension (1 hour) (25 marks)Reading comprehension (1 hour) (40 marks)Comprehension exercises on three audio passages and three written texts, drawn 
from all five themes.50%
Internal assessment
This component is internally assessed by the teacher and externally moderated by the IB at the end of the course.
Individual oral assessment
A conversation with the teacher, based on an extract from one of the literary works studied in class, followed by discussion based on one or more of the themes from the syllabus. (30 marks)25%Language B guide 31Assessment
External assessment
The following methods are used to assess language acquisition students.
• Markschemes/detailed marking notes specific to each examination paper
• Assessment criteria
• Markbands
The assessment criteria are published in this guide.
For paper 1, there are three assessment criteria with markbands. Detailed marking notes are used by the 
examiners in assessing the task.
For paper 2, there are markschemes.The assessment criteria and level descriptors are related to the assessment objectives established for the 
language B course. The markschemes and detailed marking notes are specific to each examination.
Use of dictionaries and reference materialStudents are not allowed to use dictionaries and other reference materials during the examinations for paper 1 and paper 2.
External assessment details—SL
Paper 1: Productive skills—writing
Duration: 1 hour 15 minutesWeighting: 25%Paper 1 is based on the five themes: identities, experiences, human ingenuity, social organization, sharing the planet.
This examination is externally set and externally assessed. It consists of a choice from three tasks with a 
variety of audiences, contexts and purposes. Each task is based on a different theme from the syllabus. Students write a response of 250–400 words to one of the tasks, choosing a text type from among those listed in the examination instructions.
The aim of this component is to assess the ability to communicate in writing for a variety of purposes. In 
order to fulfill the requirements of this assessment component, students need to show, through their use of text type, register and style, that they understand the concepts of audience, context, purpose, meaning and variation, and can apply them to their written language.
Paper 1 assesses the degree to which students are able to:
• communicate clearly and effectively in a range of contexts and for a variety of purposes
• understand and use language appropriate to a range of interpersonal and/or intercultural contexts 
and audiencesExternal assessment  
Language B guide 32• understand and use language to express and respond to a range of ideas with fluency and accuracy
• identify, organize and present ideas on a range of topics.
Students’ factual knowledge of topics within the themes will not be tested; however, it can be used to 
support any ideas that the student wishes to communicate.
Paper 2: Receptive skills—listening and reading
Duration: 1 hour 45 minutes
Weighting: 50%Paper 2 is based on the five themes: identities, experiences, human ingenuity, social organization, sharing the planet.
This examination is externally set and externally assessed. It is divided into two separate sections: listening 
(three audio passages) and reading (three written passages) covering different topics drawn from the five themes. The students’ understanding of the six passages is assessed in this examination; it does not test the students’ knowledge of any factual content of a specific topic. All audio and written passages are in the target language and all answers must be provided in the target language.
Note:  International-mindedness is central to the IB philosophy. It is expected that students will 
have been exposed to a variety of texts, both oral and written, that demonstrate linguistic variation and regional accents. Linguistic variation and regional accents appearing in texts used for external assessment are intended to reflect this expectation while also being comprehensible to the students.
External assessment criteria—SL
Paper 1: Productive skills—writing
Assessment criteria are used to mark paper 1, which is worth 25% of the overall mark. There are three assessment criteria.External assessment  
Language B guide 33Criterion A: Language
How successfully does the candidate command written language?
• To what extent is the vocabulary appropriate and varied?
• To what extent are the grammatical structures varied?
• To what extent does the accuracy of the language contribute to effective communication?
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–3 Command of the language is limited.
Vocabulary is sometimes appropriate to the task.
Basic grammatical structures are used.
Language contains errors in basic structures. Errors interfere with communication.
4–6 Command of the language is partially effective.Vocabulary is appropriate to the task.Some basic grammatical structures are used, with some attempts to use more complex 
structures.
Language is mostly accurate for basic structures, but errors occur in more complex 
structures. Errors at times interfere with communication.
7–9 Command of the language is effective and mostly accurate.
Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied.
A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used.
Language is mostly accurate. Occasional errors in basic and in complex grammatical 
structures do not interfere with communication.
10 –12 Command of the language is mostly accurate and very effective.
Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied, including the use of idiomatic 
expressions.
A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used effectively.Language is mostly accurate. Minor errors in more complex grammatical structures do not 
interfere with communication.External assessment  
Language B guide 34Criterion B: Message
To what extent does the candidate fulfill the task?
• How relevant are the ideas to the task?
• To what extent are ideas developed?
• To what extent do the clarity and organization of ideas contribute to the successful delivery of the 
message?
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–3 The task is partially fulfilled.
Few ideas are relevant to the task.
Ideas are stated, but with no development.
Ideas are not clearly presented and do not follow a logical structure, making the message 
difficult to determine.
4–6 The task is generally fulfilled.
Some ideas are relevant to the task.Ideas are outlined, but are not fully developed.Ideas are generally clearly presented and the response is generally structured in a logical 
manner, leading to a mostly successful delivery of the message.
7–9 The task is fulfilled.
Most ideas are relevant to the task.
Ideas are developed well, with some detail and examples.
Ideas are clearly presented and the response is structured in a logical manner, supporting 
the delivery of the message.
10 –12 The task is fulfilled effectively.
Ideas are relevant to the task.Ideas are fully developed, providing details and relevant examples.Ideas are clearly presented and the response is structured in a logical and coherent 
manner that supports the delivery of the message.External assessment  
Language B guide 35Criterion C: Conceptual understanding
To what extent does the candidate demonstrate conceptual understanding?
• To what extent is the choice of text type appropriate to the task?
• To what extent are register and tone appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the task?
• To what extent does the response incorporate the conventions of the chosen text type?
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–2 Conceptual understanding is limited.
The choice of text type is generally inappropriate to the context, purpose or audience.
The register and tone are inappropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the task.
The response incorporates limited recognizable conventions of the chosen text type.
3–4 Conceptual understanding is mostly demonstrated.The choice of text type is generally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.The register and tone, while occasionally appropriate to the context, purpose and 
audience of the task, fluctuate throughout the response.
The response incorporates some conventions of the chosen text type.
5–6 Conceptual understanding is fully demonstrated.
The choice of text type is appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
The register and tone are appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the task.The response fully incorporates the conventions of the chosen text type.
Note:  A response that ignores context, purpose and audience may receive marks of 0 for criteria B 
and C, even if the response has received a high mark for criterion A.External assessment  
Language B guide 36External assessment details—HL
Paper 1: Productive skills—writing
Duration: 1 hour 30 minutes
Weighting: 25%Paper 1 is based on the five course themes: identities, experiences, human ingenuity, social organization, sharing the planet.
This examination is externally set and externally assessed. It consists of a choice from three tasks with a 
variety of audiences, contexts and purposes. Each task is based on a different theme from the syllabus. Students write a response of 450–600 words to one of the tasks, choosing a text type from among those listed in the examination instructions.
Although the general format of paper 1 at HL resembles that of paper 1 at SL, it must be stressed that the 
nature of the tasks set will require more complex language and structures, as well as demanding higher-order thinking skills such as analysis, evaluation, synthesis and interpretation. The higher word range has been provided in order to accommodate the more complex responses required at this level.
The aim of this component is to assess the ability to communicate in writing for a variety of purposes. In 
order to fulfill the requirements of this assessment component, students need to show, through their choice 
of text type, register and style, that they understand the concepts of audience, context, purpose, meaning 
and variation, and can apply them to their written language.
Paper 1 assesses the degree to which students can:• communicate clearly and effectively in a range of contexts and for a variety of purposes
• understand and use language appropriate to a range of interpersonal and/or intercultural contexts 
and audiences
• understand and use language to express and respond to a range of ideas with fluency and accuracy
• identify, organize and present ideas on a range of topics.
Students’ factual knowledge of topics within the themes will not be tested; however, it can be used to support any ideas that the student wishes to communicate.
Paper 2: Receptive skills—listening and reading
Duration: 2 hoursWeighting: 50%Paper 2 is based on the five themes: identities, experiences, human ingenuity, social organization, sharing the planet.
This examination is externally set and externally assessed. It is divided into two separate sections: listening 
(three audio passages) and reading (three written passages) covering different topics drawn from the five themes. The students’ understanding of the six passages is assessed in this examination: it does not test the students’ knowledge of any factual content of a specific topic. All audio and written passages are in the target language and all answers must be provided in the target language.
Note:  International-mindedness is central to the IB philosophy. It is expected that students will 
have been exposed to a variety of texts, both oral and written, that demonstrate linguistic variation and regional accents. Linguistic variation and regional accents appearing in texts used for external assessment are intended to reflect this expectation while also being comprehensible to the students.External assessment  
Language B guide 37External assessment criteria—HL
Paper 1: Productive skills—writing
Assessment criteria are used to mark paper 1, which is worth 25% of the overall mark. There are three 
assessment criteria.
Criterion A: Language
How successfully does the candidate command written language?
• To what extent is the vocabulary appropriate and varied?
• To what extent are the grammatical structures varied?
• To what extent does the accuracy of the language contribute to effective communication?
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–3 Command of the language is limited.
Vocabulary is sometimes appropriate to the task.
Some basic grammatical structures are used, with some attempts to use more complex 
structures.
Language contains errors in both basic and more complex structures. Errors interfere with 
communication.
4–6 Command of the language is partially effective.
Vocabulary is generally appropriate to the task and varied.A variety of basic and some more complex grammatical structures is used.Language is mostly accurate for basic structures, but errors occur in more complex 
structures. Errors at times interfere with communication.
7–9 Command of the language is effective and mostly accurate.
Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied, including the use of idiomatic 
expressions.
A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used effectively.
Language is mostly accurate. Occasional errors in basic and in complex grammatical 
structures do not interfere with communication.
10 –12 Command of the language is mostly accurate and very effective.
Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and nuanced and varied in a manner that enhances 
the message, including the purposeful use of idiomatic expressions.
A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used selectively in order to 
enhance communication.
Language is mostly accurate. Minor errors in more complex grammatical structures do not 
interfere with communication.External assessment  
Language B guide 38Criterion B: Message
To what extent does the candidate fulfill the task?
• How relevant are the ideas to the task?
• To what extent are ideas developed?
• To what extent do the clarity and organization of ideas contribute to the successful delivery of the 
message?
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–3 The task is partially fulfilled.
Few ideas are relevant to the task.
Ideas are stated, but with no development.
Ideas are not clearly presented and do not follow a logical structure, making the message 
difficult to determine.
4–6 The task is generally fulfilled.
Some ideas are relevant to the task.Ideas are outlined, but are not fully developed.Ideas are generally clearly presented and the response is generally structured in a logical 
manner, leading to a mostly successful delivery of the message.
7–9 The task is fulfilled.
Most ideas are relevant to the task.
Ideas are developed well, with some detail and examples.
Ideas are clearly presented and the response is structured in a logical manner, supporting 
the delivery of the message.
10 –12 The task is fulfilled effectively.
Ideas are relevant to the task.Ideas are fully developed, providing details and relevant examples.Ideas are clearly presented and the response is structured in a logical and coherent 
manner that supports the delivery of the message.External assessment  
Language B guide 39Criterion C: Conceptual understanding
To what extent does the candidate demonstrate conceptual understanding?
• To what extent is the choice of text type appropriate to the task?
• To what extent are register and tone appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the task?
• To what extent does the response incorporate the conventions of the chosen text type?
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–2 Conceptual understanding is limited.
The choice of text type is generally inappropriate to the context, purpose or audience.
The register and tone are inappropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the task.
The response incorporates limited recognizable conventions of the chosen text type.
3–4 Conceptual understanding is mostly demonstrated.The choice of text type is generally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.The register and tone, while occasionally appropriate to the context, purpose and 
audience of the task, fluctuate throughout the response.
The response incorporates some conventions of the chosen text type.
5–6 Conceptual understanding is fully demonstrated.
The choice of text type is appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
The register and tone are appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the task.The response fully incorporates the conventions of the chosen text type.
Note:  A response that ignores context, purpose and audience may receive marks of 0 for criteria B 
and C, even if the response has received a high mark for criterion A.Language B guide 40
Assessment
Internal assessment
Purpose of internal assessment
Internal assessment is an integral part of the course and is compulsory for both SL and HL students. It 
enables students to demonstrate the application of their skills and knowledge in a different setting. In language B, the internal assessment takes the form of the individual oral assessment. The development of skills for the individual oral assessment should be woven into normal classroom teaching, although the evidence submitted for moderation must come from an individual oral assessment, which is a separate 
activity conducted towards the end of the course.
The internal assessment requirements at SL and at HL are different.
Internal assessment is compulsory for both SL and HL students. SL students are required to make 
an individual presentation in response to a visual stimulus whereas HL students will respond to a literary extract. At both levels, students will then go on to engage in a one-to-one discussion with the teacher, firstly on the topic of the stimulus and then in general conversation across the range of themes listed in the syllabus.
Guidance and authenticity
When carrying out the individual oral assessment, students may not bring into the preparation room any additional resources such as computers, mobile phones, class notes, dictionaries (either online or paper), copies of texts, and so on. Schools must provide students with a piece of paper on which to make brief working notes (a maximum of 10 bullet points) during the preparation time. These notes are the only resource that may be brought into the interview room and are to be used for reference only. They are not to 
be read aloud and must be retained by the teacher at the end of the interview.
It is the responsibility of the teacher to ensure that students are familiar with:• the linguistic requirements of the individual oral assessment
• the procedures for the conduct of the examination
• the assessment criteria.
It is essential that SL students do not have prior knowledge of the visual stimulus to be presented, nor 
can they know in advance from which themes their choices will be drawn. HL students must not know in advance which literary extracts will be selected by the teacher for use in the individual oral assessment. For both SL and HL students, the presentation in part 1 must be wholly the work of the student and it may not be written out in full and read aloud. Authenticity may be checked by scrutiny of the notes (if any) used by the student, as well as through the follow-up questions in part 2 of the individual oral assessment.Internal assessment  
Language B guide 41Group work
Group work cannot be used as the final summative assessment submitted to the IB as the internal assessment 
individual oral. However, group work, as one aspect of a wide range of approaches to teaching and learning, may well be incorporated as one type of formative  assessment used throughout the course.
Time allocation
Internal assessment contributes 25% to the final assessment in both the SL and the HL courses. This weighting should be reflected in the time that is allocated to helping students develop the knowledge, skills and understanding required to carry out speaking tasks. The development of oral communication skills must be evenly interspersed throughout the course and should include:
• time for students to develop their oral communication skills
• time for one-to-one interaction between the teacher and each student so that the student becomes 
comfortable communicating in the target language with the teacher
• time for students to review and monitor their own progress, and for teachers to offer feedback
• time for the teacher to explain to students the requirements of the internal assessment.
Requirements and recommendations
The internal assessment is to be conducted entirely in the target language. The final internal assessment, for which marks will be submitted, must not be rehearsed as this would not reflect the student’s true ability to interact in the target language; however, the procedures and characteristics of the individual oral assessment can, and should, be practised during lessons, as should the development of verbal interaction between student and teacher.
Each student’s individual oral assessment must be audio recorded and the files must be of high quality. Each 
recording is to be retained according to the procedures set out in Diploma Programme Assessment procedures . 
Samples of the internal assessment selected for moderation must be submitted in the form of an audio file.
Using assessment criteria for internal assessment
For internal assessment, a number of assessment criteria have been identified. Each assessment criterion has level descriptors describing specific achievement levels, together with an appropriate range of marks. The level descriptors concentrate on positive achievement, although for the lower levels failure to reach certain minimum requirements may be included in the description.
Teachers must judge the internally assessed work at SL and at HL against the criteria using the level descriptors.
• The same assessment criteria are provided for SL and HL, although the level descriptors for each 
criterion in each course are designed to reflect the degree of difficulty and complexity expected for that level. Therefore, close attention should be paid to the wording of each level.
• The aim is to find, for each criterion, the descriptor that describes the student’s performance most accurately, using the best-fit model. A best-fit approach means that compensation should be made when a piece of work matches different aspects of a criterion across several different levels. The mark awarded should be the one that most fairly reflects the balance of achievement against the criterion. It is not necessary for every single aspect of a level to be met for a corresponding mark to be awarded.Internal assessment  
Language B guide 42• When assessing a student’s work, teachers should read the level descriptors for each criterion until 
they reach a descriptor that most appropriately describes the standard of the work being assessed. If a piece of work seems to fall between two descriptors, both descriptors should be read again and the one that more appropriately describes the student’s work should be chosen.
• Where there are two or more marks available within a level, teachers should award the upper marks if the student’s work demonstrates the qualities described to a great extent and the work is close to 
matching the descriptors in the level above. Teachers should award the lower marks if the student’s 
work demonstrates the qualities described to a lesser extent and the work is closer to matching the descriptor in the level below.
• Only whole numbers should be recorded; partial marks (fractions and decimals) are not acceptable.
• Teachers should not think in terms of a pass or fail boundary, but rather should concentrate on identifying the descriptor that best matches the student’s work for each assessment criterion.
• The highest level descriptors do not imply a faultless performance; they should be achievable by a 
language acquisition student. Teachers should not hesitate to use the extremes of the mark range if 
they are appropriate descriptions of the work being assessed.
• A student who is awarded a mark in a high level in relation to one criterion will not necessarily reach high levels in relation to the other criteria. Similarly, a student who is awarded a mark in a low level for 
one criterion will also not necessarily be placed in low levels for the other criteria. Teachers should not 
assume that the overall assessment of the students will produce any particular distribution of marks.
• Teachers are expected to make the assessment criteria available to students and ensure that they 
understand them.
Internal assessment details—SL
Interactive skills: Individual oral assessment
Duration: 12–15 minutes (plus 15 minutes for preparation)
Weighting: 25%The individual oral assessment is based on the course themes: identities, experiences, human ingenuity, social organization, sharing the planet.
The aim of this assessment is to measure the student’s ability to understand and produce communication in 
the target language, and to use it for successful interaction.
The individual oral assesses the degree to which the student is able to:• communicate clearly and effectively in a range of contexts and for a variety of purposes
• understand and use language appropriate to a range of interpersonal and/or intercultural contexts 
and audiences
• understand and use language to express and respond to a range of ideas with fluency and accuracy
• identify, organize and present ideas on a range of topics
• understand, analyse and reflect within the context of presentation and conversation. 
The language B SL individual oral assessment is divided into three parts, preceded by a timed period of supervised preparation.Internal assessment  
Language B guide 43Supervised preparation time The student is shown two visual stimuli, each 
relating to a different theme from the course. Each visual stimulus must be labelled in the target language with the theme to which it relates.
The student chooses one of the visual stimuli 
and prepares a presentation directly related to 
the stimulus. During this time, the student is allowed to make brief working notes.15 minutes
Part 1: Presentation The student describes the visual stimulus and relates it to the relevant theme and the target culture(s).3–4 minutes
Part 2: Follow-up discussion The teacher engages the student on the theme presented in part 1, expanding on what the student has provided in the presentation.4–5 minutes
Part 3: General discussion The teacher and student have a general discussion on at least one additional theme  
taken from the five themes around which the course is based.5–6 minutes
Preparation
The teacher selects a range of visual stimuli linked to the five themes studied during the course and labels each one in the target language according to theme. For the purposes of the SL individual oral assessment, a “visual stimulus” may be a photo, a poster, an illustration or an advertisement. Any language that naturally appears on the image should be minimal and must be in the target language. It must not provide vocabulary and structures that would give a student an unfair advantage.
An effective visual stimulus is one that:
• is clearly relevant to one of the five themes in the course
• is culturally relevant to the target language
• offers opportunities for students to demonstrate their international-mindedness
• offers sufficient visual text for students to describe a scene or situation
• allows the student to offer a personal interpretation
• enables the teacher to lead the student in a wider conversation
• is relevant and of interest to the student’s age group.
The students must not see these stimuli prior to the examination.The same five stimuli can be used for up to ten students sitting the examination. If there are more than ten 
students sitting the examination, two visual stimuli from each theme must be prepared.
The following table provides an example of how the teacher may choose to distribute the visual stimuli to 
ensure that each student receives two stimuli, each relating to a different theme. Teachers may wish to have two copies of each stimulus available in the event that examination site arrangements require a student to be in the “supervised preparation” phase at the same time as a different student is sitting parts 1–3 of the examination.Internal assessment  
Language B guide 44Up to 10 students 
5 stimuli total  
(1 from each theme)Up to 20 students 
10 stimuli total  
(2 from each theme)Up to 30 students 
10 stimuli total  
(2 from each theme)Up to 40 students 
10 stimuli total  
(2 from each theme)
Student Visual 
stimulusStudent Visual 
stimulusStudent Visual 
stimulusStudent Visual 
stimulus
1 A1 + B1 11 A2 + B2 21 A1 + B2 31 A2 + B1
2 A1 + C1 12 A2 + C2 22 A1 + C2 32 A2 + C1
3 A1 + D1 13 A2 + D2 23 A1 + D2 33 A2 + D1
etc etc etc etc etc etc etc etc
The letters above indicate the theme of the visual stimuli. For example, A1 would represent the first visual 
stimulus relating to one of the themes (for example, “sharing the planet”) and A2 would represent the second visual stimulus relating to that same theme (“sharing the planet”). Following this pattern, B1 would represent the first visual stimulus relating to a different theme (for example, “experiences”) and B2 would represent the second visual stimulus from that same theme (“experiences”).
Please note that each student sitting the examination will be shown only two stimuli from which to select. In the 
event that more than 40 students are sitting the examination, the teacher will be allowed to re-sort these same ten visual stimuli into new pairings, but must ensure that the stimuli used in each pair do not relate to the same theme.
Conduct of the individual oral assessment
The timing of the 15-minute preparation period begins when the student is presented with clean copies of each of the two stimuli (from two different themes) from which to choose the one stimulus they would like to use for the individual oral assessment. After choosing the stimulus, the student has the remainder of the 15 minutes to prepare the presentation. During this preparation time, the student may write brief working notes (a maximum of 10 bullet points). These notes may be used for reference only and must not be read aloud 
as a prepared speech.
During the preparation time, the student must be supervised. The student may not have access to course 
materials, class notes, dictionaries (in any form), computers, mobile phones or other IT equipment. The student must be given a blank sheet of paper on which to make up to 10  notes in bullet-point form. The 
visual stimulus and any notes that have been made in the 15  minutes of preparation time for the individual 
oral assessment are to be collected and retained by the teacher.
Presentation
As schools are required to keep coursework submissions anonymous, students are asked to avoid using their 
names or any other identifying information in their presentations. During the presentation, the student should:
• provide a brief description of the visual stimulus
• relate the visual stimulus to the relevant theme from the course
• express his or her opinions on the ideas implied in the visual stimulus.
The presentation must be spontaneous and relate specifically to the content of the visual stimulus provided; 
pre-learned presentations on generic aspects of a course theme that do not directly focus on the ideas in the visual stimulus provided will not score high marks.
In order to reassure students and help them focus on the requirements of the individual oral assessment, the 
teacher should signal the changes between the respective parts through the use of an appropriate phrase.Internal assessment  
Language B guide 45The presentation should last 3–4 minutes, during which time the teacher should avoid interrupting 
the student, unless it is clear that guidance is needed. At four minutes, if the student has not drawn the presentation to a close, the teacher is expected to interrupt the presentation and make the transition to the second part of the individual oral assessment, using a phrase such as: “I’m sorry to interrupt, but we need to move on now”. This exact phrase does not need to be used, but it is good practice for teachers to prepare 
their students before the day of the examination so that a necessary interruption in order to adhere to 
timings does not unduly disturb the student.
Follow-up discussion based on the visual stimulus
Following the student’s presentation, the teacher initiates a discussion by asking questions about the theme represented by the visual stimulus. These questions should:
• seek clarification or extension of observations made by the student in the presentation
• invite the student to interpret and evaluate ideas presented by the visual stimulus and the teacher
• encourage connections and comparisons with the student’s other cultural experiences
• provide the student with opportunities to demonstrate his or her understanding and appreciation of 
the target language culture(s)
• encourage the student to engage in authentic conversation to the best of his or her ability.
This section of the individual oral assessment should last 4–5 minutes and should offer the student the 
opportunity to demonstrate the ability to engage in authentic discussion on a topic. The teacher should 
ask open-ended questions in order to offer the student the opportunity for authentic engagement, thus facilitating an assessment of the student’s interactive skills.
General discussion
The teacher should signal that they are moving to the final section of the individual oral assessment in order to prepare the student for the change of theme. The teacher may use a phrase such as “Let’s move on to the final section of the exam. First of all, I’d like to talk with you about [theme]”. This section lasts 5–6 minutes and should:
• introduce at least one  additional theme
• seek clarification or extension of observations made by the student in relation to the additional 
theme(s) broached
• invite the student to interpret and evaluate ideas that arise in the general discussion
• encourage connections and comparisons with the student’s other cultural experiences
• provide the student with opportunities to demonstrate their understanding and appreciation of the target language culture(s)
• encourage the student to engage in authentic conversation to the best of his or her ability
• allow an assessment of the student’s interactive skills.
Administration of the individual oral assessment
• The individual oral assessment for language B SL should last a minimum of 12 minutes and a maximum of 15 minutes. Examiners will be instructed to stop listening after 15 minutes. The individual oral assessment must be scheduled during the final year of the course.
• Students must be given adequate notice of when the individual oral assessment is to take place. It may take place in or out of the classroom, but care should be taken to ensure that students are not disturbed by external distractions such as school bells and announcements, people entering the 
room, or any audible or visual distractions from outside the room.Internal assessment  
Language B guide 46• Students must not take mobile phones and other IT equipment into the examination room.
• Audio recordings of the individual oral assessment will be required for external moderation. However, 
the samples selected for moderation will not be identified until the teacher’s marks are entered into IBIS; therefore, it is vital that all students are recorded and that the recordings are of a high quality.
• Under no circumstances should a recording be stopped or modified in any way.
• Timings for the individual oral assessment are approximate, but should be adhered to as much as possible without disturbing the student. It is imperative that all three sections are adequately addressed.
• The teacher is encouraged to interact with the student to facilitate an authentic discussion, but must avoid dominating the exchange.
The teacher’s role in conducting and assessing the individual oral assessment
It is the teacher’s responsibility to:
• be aware that the purpose of the individual oral assessment is to assess the student’s ability to 
produce, understand and interact using spoken language
• ensure that the correct number and range of visual stimuli are prepared for the individual oral assessment and that an accurate record is kept of the allocation
• have a very clear understanding of the format of the individual oral assessment as well as the assessment criteria
• ensure that the questions asked are adapted to the student’s ability and are designed to give the 
student every opportunity to show the full extent of the student’s language skills
• rephrase a question or statement, if a student is having difficulty understanding, in order to support 
the student and maintain the flow of the conversation
• avoid correcting the student or dominating the conversation
• ensure that students are allowed sufficient time to respond to questions.
Internal assessment criteria—SL
Productive and interactive skills: Individual oral assessment
Criterion A: Language
How successfully does the candidate command spoken language?
• To what extent is the vocabulary appropriate and varied?
• To what extent are the grammatical structures varied?
• To what extent does the accuracy of the language contribute to effective communication?
• To what extent do pronunciation and intonation affect communication?Internal assessment  
Language B guide 47Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–3 Command of the language is limited.
Vocabulary is sometimes appropriate to the task.
Basic grammatical structures are used.
Language contains errors in basic structures. Errors interfere with communication.Pronunciation and intonation are influenced by other language(s). Mispronunciations are 
recurrent and interfere with communication.
4–6 Command of the language is partially effective.
Vocabulary is appropriate to the task.Some basic grammatical structures are used, with some attempts to use more complex 
structures.
Language is mostly accurate in basic structures, but errors occur in more complex 
structures. Errors at times interfere with communication.
Pronunciation and intonation are influenced by other language(s), but mispronunciations 
do not often interfere with communication.
7–9 Command of the language is effective and mostly accurate.
Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied.A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used.Language is mostly accurate. Occasional errors in basic and in complex grammatical 
structures do not interfere with communication.
Pronunciation and intonation are easy to understand.
10 –12 Command of the language is mostly accurate and very effective.Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied, including the use of idiomatic 
expressions.
A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used effectively.Language is mostly accurate. Minor errors in more complex grammatical structures do not 
interfere with communication.
Pronunciation and intonation are easy to understand and help to convey meaning.Internal assessment  
Language B guide 48Criterion B1: Message—visual stimulus
How relevant are the ideas to the selected stimulus?
• How well does the candidate engage with the stimulus in the presentation?
• How well are the ideas linked to the target culture(s)?
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–2 The presentation is mostly irrelevant to the stimulus.
The presentation is limited to descriptions of the stimulus, or part of it. These descriptions 
may be incomplete.
The presentation is not clearly linked to the target culture(s).
3–4 The presentation is mostly relevant to the stimulus.
With a focus on explicit details, the candidate provides descriptions and basic personal 
interpretations relating to the stimulus.
The presentation is mostly linked to the target culture(s).
5–6 The presentation is consistently relevant to the stimulus and draws on explicit and 
implicit details.
The presentation provides both descriptions and personal interpretations relating to the 
stimulus.
The presentation makes clear links to the target culture(s).
Criterion B2: Message—conversation
How relevant are the ideas in the conversation?
• How appropriately and thoroughly does the candidate respond to the questions in the conversation?
• To what depth are the questions answered?
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–2 The candidate consistently struggles to address the questions.
Some responses are appropriate and are rarely developed.Responses are limited in scope and depth.
3–4 The candidate’s responses are mostly relevant to the questions.Most responses are appropriate and some are developed.Responses are mostly broad in scope and depth.
5–6 The candidate’s responses are consistently relevant to the questions and show 
some development.
Responses are consistently appropriate and developed.Responses are broad in scope and depth, including personal interpretations and/or 
attempts to engage the interlocutor.Internal assessment  
Language B guide 49Criterion C: Interactive skills—communication
To what extent does the candidate understand and interact?
• How well can the candidate express ideas?
• How well can the candidate maintain a conversation?
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–2 Comprehension and interaction are limited.
The candidate provides limited responses in the target language.
Participation is limited. Most questions must be repeated and/or rephrased.
3–4 Comprehension and interaction are mostly sustained.
The candidate provides responses in the target language and mostly demonstrates 
comprehension.
Participation is mostly sustained.
5–6 Comprehension and interaction are consistently sustained.
The candidate provides responses in the target language and demonstrates 
comprehension.
Participation is sustained with some independent contributions.Internal assessment  
Language B guide 50Internal assessment details—HL
Interactive skills: Individual oral assessment
Duration: 12–15 minutes (plus 20 minutes for preparation)
Weighting: 25%The individual oral assessment is based on an extract of up to approximately 300 words taken from one of the literary works studied in class as part of the language B HL course.
The aim of this assessment is to measure the student’s ability to understand and produce communication in 
the target language, and to use it for successful interaction.
The individual oral assesses the degree to which the student is able to:• communicate clearly and effectively in a range of contexts and for a variety of purposes
• understand and use language appropriate to a range of interpersonal and intercultural contexts
• understand and use language to express and respond to a range of ideas with fluency and accuracy
• identify, organize and present ideas on a range of topics
• understand, analyse and reflect within the context of presentation and conversation.
The language B HL individual oral assessment is divided into three parts, preceded by a timed period of 
supervised preparation.
Supervised preparation time The student is shown two extracts of up to approximately 300 words each: one from each of the two literary works studied during the course.
The student chooses one of the extracts 
and prepares a presentation focused on the content of the extract. During this time, the student is allowed to make brief working notes.20 minutes
Part 1: Presentation The student presents the extract. The student may place the extract in relation to the literary work, but must spend the majority of the presentation discussing the events, ideas and messages in the extract itself.3–4 minutes
Part 2: Follow-up discussion The teacher engages with the student on the content of the extract that the student has presented, expanding on observations that the student has provided in the presentation.4–5 minutes
Part 3: General discussion The teacher and student have a general discussion using one or more of the five themes of the syllabus as a starting point.5–6 minutesInternal assessment  
Language B guide 51Preparation
The teacher selects a range of extracts of up to approximately 300 words each, taken from both  of the 
literary works studied in class. The extracts need to be copied onto plain paper and labelled to indicate 
which literary work is the source for each (title and author). Students must not simply be shown the relevant page(s) in a copy of the literary work as the student may wish to mark up the extract in order to be better able to discuss the content. In order to support the student, the extract needs to allow the student to use 
a wide range of grammatical structures and provide opportunities to stimulate discussion following the 
presentation.
An effective literary extract is one that:
• is easy to identify from one of the literary works studied in class
• offers opportunities for the student to demonstrate intercultural understanding
• allows the student to engage with the scene or situation in the extract
• allows the student to offer a personal interpretation of the extract
• enables the student to actively engage with the teacher in a conversation about the extract
• enables the teacher to ask questions that are unique to each student.
The number of different extracts to be selected for the individual oral assessment will depend on the 
number of students in the class, but this need not exceed six extracts in total (three from each literary work). 
The table below is an example of how the teacher may choose to distribute the literary extracts to ensure 
that each student receives two extracts, one from each of the two literary works studied during the course.
Up to 4 students 
4 extracts total  
(2 from each work)5 or more students  
6 extracts total  
(3 from each work)
Student Extracts Student Extracts
1 A1 + B1 1 A1 + B1
2 A1 + B2 2 A1 + B2
3 A2 + B1 3 A1 + B3
4 A2 + B2 4 A2 + B1
5 A2 + B2
6 A2 + B3
etc etc
The letters A and B above indicate from which literary work the extract was chosen. For example, A1 would represent the first extract from the first literary work and B1 would represent the first extract from the second literary work. Following this pattern, A2 would represent the second extract from the first literary 
work, and B2 would represent the second extract from the second literary work.
Please note that each student sitting the examination will be shown only two extracts from which to select.Internal assessment  
Language B guide 52Conduct of the individual oral assessment
The student must not know in advance which extracts will be used in the individual oral assessment. The 
timing of the 20-minute preparation period begins when the student is presented with clean copies of the two extracts (one from each of the two literary works studied) from which to choose one. After choosing 
the extract, the student has the remainder of the 20 minutes in which to prepare a presentation on the extract, focusing principally on the events, characters, ideas and messages within the allocated extract.
During the preparation time, the student must be supervised. The student may not have access to course 
materials, class notes, copies of the literary works studied, dictionaries (in any form), mobile phones, computers or any other IT equipment. The student must be given a blank sheet of paper on which to make up to 10 notes in bullet-point form. These notes may be used for reference only and must not be read aloud as a prepared speech as part of the exam. Any notes that have been made in the 20 minutes of preparation for the individual oral assessment, as well as the copy of the extract, are to be collected in by the teacher at 
the end of each student’s interview.
Presentation
As schools are required to keep coursework submissions anonymous, students are asked to avoid using their names or any other identifying information in their presentations. During the presentation, the student should:
• summarise the extract
• briefly relate the extract to the literary work as a whole
• express his or her opinions on the characters, events, ideas and themes presented in the extract.
The presentation must relate specifically to the content of the extract provided. Pre-rehearsed presentations 
on generic aspects of a literary work or presentations in the style of a “book review” that do not directly focus on the content of the extract provided are not the objective of this exercise.
The presentation should last 3–4 minutes, during which time the teacher should avoid interrupting 
the student, unless it is clear that guidance is needed. At four minutes, if the student has not drawn the presentation to a close, the teacher is expected to interrupt the presentation and make the transition to the second part of the individual oral assessment, using a phrase such as: “I’m sorry to interrupt, but we need to move on now.” This exact phrase does not need to be used, but it is good practice for teachers to prepare 
their students before the day of the examination so that a necessary interruption in order to adhere to 
timings does not unduly disturb the student.
Follow-up discussion based on the literary extract
Following the student’s presentation, the teacher initiates a discussion by asking questions about various aspects of the literary extract. These questions should:
• seek clarification or extension of observations made by the student in the presentation
• invite the student to interpret and evaluate ideas presented by the extract or the teacher
• encourage connections and comparisons with the student’s other cultural experiences, as appropriate
• provide the student with opportunities to demonstrate understanding and appreciation of the target 
language culture(s)
• encourage the student to engage in authentic conversation to the best of his or her ability.
This section of the individual oral assessment should last 4–5 minutes and should offer the student the opportunity to demonstrate the ability to engage in authentic discussion on a topic. The teacher should ask open-ended questions in order to offer the student the opportunity for authentic engagement, thus facilitating an assessment of the student’s interactive skills.Internal assessment  
Language B guide 53General discussion
The teacher should signal that they are moving to the final section of the individual oral assessment in order to prepare the student for the change to a general discussion . This section lasts 5–6 minutes and should:
• use one or more of the course themes as a starting point
• seek clarification or extension of observations made by the student in relation to the additional theme(s) broached
• invite the student to interpret and evaluate ideas that arise in the general discussion
• encourage connections and comparisons with the student’s other cultural experiences
• provide the student with opportunities to demonstrate their understanding and appreciation of the 
target language culture(s)
• encourage the student to engage in authentic conversation to the best of his or her ability
• allow an assessment of the student’s interactive skills.
Administration of the individual oral assessment
• The individual oral assessment for language B HL should last a minimum of 12 minutes and a maximum 
of 15 minutes. Examiners will be instructed to stop listening after 15 minutes. The individual oral 
assessment must be scheduled during the final year of the course.
• Students must be given adequate notice of when the individual oral assessment is to take place. It 
may take place in or out of the classroom, but care should be taken to ensure that students are not disturbed by external distractions such as school bells and announcements, people entering the 
room, or any audible or visual distractions from outside the room.
• Students must not take mobile phones and other IT equipment into the examination room.
• Audio recordings of the individual oral assessment will be required for external moderation. However, the samples selected for moderation will not be identified until the teacher’s marks are entered into 
IBIS; therefore, it is vital that all students are recorded and that the recordings are of a high quality.
• Under no circumstances should a recording be stopped or modified in any way.
• Timings for the individual oral assessment are approximate, but should be adhered to as much as possible without disturbing the student. It is imperative that all three sections are adequately addressed.
• The teacher is encouraged to interact with the student to facilitate an authentic discussion, but must avoid dominating the exchange.
The teacher’s role in conducting and assessing the individual oral assessment
It is the teacher’s responsibility to:
• be aware that the purpose of the individual oral assessment is to assess the student’s ability to 
understand and speak the language
• ensure that the correct number and range of literary extracts are prepared for the individual oral 
assessment and that an accurate record is kept of the allocation
• have a very clear understanding of the format of the individual oral assessment as well as the 
assessment criteria
• ensure that the questions asked are adapted to the student’s ability and are designed to give the student every opportunity to show the full extent of the student’s language skills
• rephrase a question or statement, if a student is having difficulty understanding, in order to support the student and maintain the flow of the conversation
• avoid correcting the student or dominating the conversation
• ensure that students are allowed sufficient time to respond to questions.Internal assessment  
Language B guide 54Internal assessment criteria—HL
Productive and interactive skills: Individual oral assessment
Criterion A: Language
How successfully does the candidate command spoken language?
• To what extent is the vocabulary appropriate and varied?
• To what extent are the grammatical structures varied?
• To what extent does the accuracy of the language contribute to effective communication?
• To what extent do pronunciation and intonation affect communication?
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–3 Command of the language is limited.
Vocabulary is sometimes appropriate to the task.
Some basic grammatical structures are used, with some attempts to use more complex 
structures.
Language contains errors in both basic and more complex structures. Errors interfere with 
communication.
Pronunciation and intonation are generally clear but sometimes interfere with 
communication.
4–6 Command of the language is partially effective.
Vocabulary is generally appropriate to the task, and varied.A variety of basic and some more complex grammatical structures is used.Language is mostly accurate for basic structures, but errors occur in more complex 
structures. Errors at times interfere with communication.
Pronunciation and intonation are generally clear.
7–9 Command of the language is effective and mostly accurate.Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied, including the use of idiomatic 
expressions.
A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used effectively.Language is mostly accurate. Occasional errors in basic and in complex grammatical 
structures do not interfere with communication.
Pronunciation and intonation are mostly clear and do not interfere with communication.Internal assessment  
Language B guide 55Marks Level descriptor
10 –12 Command of the language is mostly accurate and very effective.
Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and nuanced and varied in a manner that enhances 
the message, including the purposeful use of idiomatic expressions.
A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used selectively in order to 
enhance communication.
Language is mostly accurate. Minor errors in more complex grammatical structures do not 
interfere with communication.
Pronunciation and intonation are very clear and enhance communication.
Criterion B1: Message—literary extract
How relevant are the ideas to the literary extract?
• How well does the candidate engage with the literary extract in the presentation?
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–2 The presentation is mostly irrelevant to the literary extract.
The candidate makes superficial use of the extract. Observations and opinions are 
generalized, simplistic and mostly unsupported.
3–4 The presentation is mostly relevant to the literary extract.
The candidate makes competent use of the literary extract. Some observations and 
opinions are developed and supported with reference to the extract.
5–6 The presentation is consistently relevant to the literary extract and is convincing.
The candidate makes effective use of the extract. Observations and opinions are 
effectively developed and supported with reference to the extract.Internal assessment  
Language B guide 56Criterion B2: Message—conversation
How relevant are the ideas in the conversation?
• How appropriately and thoroughly does the candidate respond to the questions in the conversation?
• To what depth are the questions answered?
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–2 The candidate consistently struggles to address the questions.
Some responses are appropriate and are rarely developed.
Responses are limited in scope and depth.
3–4 The candidate’s responses are mostly relevant to the questions.
Most responses are appropriate and some are developed.
Responses are mostly broad in scope and depth.
5–6 The candidate’s responses are consistently relevant to the questions and show 
some development.
Responses are consistently appropriate and developed.Responses are broad in scope and depth, including personal interpretations and/or 
attempts to engage the interlocutor.
Criterion C: Interactive skills—communication
To what extent does the candidate understand and interact?
• How well can the candidate express ideas?
• How well can the candidate maintain a conversation?
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–2 Comprehension and interaction are limited.
The candidate provides limited responses in the target language.Participation is limited. Most questions must be repeated and/or rephrased.
3–4 Comprehension and interaction are mostly sustained.The candidate provides responses in the target language and mostly demonstrates 
comprehension.
Participation is mostly sustained.
5–6 Comprehension and interaction are consistently sustained.The candidate provides responses in the target language and demonstrates 
comprehension.
Participation is sustained with some independent contributions.Language B guide 57Approaches to teaching and learning
Approaches to the teaching and learning of language B
Through approaches to learning in language acquisition courses, students develop skills that have relevance 
across all areas that help them “learn how to learn”. Approaches to learning can be taught, improved with practice and developed incrementally, through implementing a number of approaches to teaching.
Approaches to learning provide a common framework for students to reflect on, and articulate, how they 
are learning. They prepare students for success in their studies and life beyond school. To this end, language learning should be supported in ways that are consistent with the IB learner profile and the pedagogical principles that underpin the IB programmes: the promotion of critical- and creative-thinking skills, learning how to learn, and promoting international-mindedness.
When designing their courses, teachers need to embrace the approaches to teaching in order for them to 
help students identify and develop learning skills in their language acquisition course.
Approaches to teaching
Teaching based on inquiry
One of the pedagogical principles that underpin all IB programmes is that of teaching based on inquiry. Being inquirers is one of the attributes of the IB learner profile, where the process is seen as involving the development of students’ natural curiosity, together with the skills needed to enable them to become autonomous lifelong language learners. In language acquisition classes, students should be encouraged to find out meaning and message for themselves, as far as is possible within the parameters of their language 
learning experiences.
One form of inquiry-based approach is that of experiential learning. “Experiential education refers to 
learning activities that engage the learner directly in the phenomena being studied” (Cantor 1997). It is a type of inquiry that can occur within a normal classroom environment through the use of a wide range of linguistic sources, cultural artifacts and visitors, as well as outside the classroom through visits, virtual or actual exchange programmes.
Another form of inquiry-based learning is problem-based learning (PBL). In PBL, students analyse and 
propose solutions to a real-world problem that is usually presented to them in an unstructured, and often 
open-ended, manner. This kind of task lends itself to small-group collaboration in order to address the themes in the language programme (such as “sharing the planet”) and also provides ample opportunities for bringing a conceptual focus to students’ learning experiences.
Teaching focused on conceptual understanding
Concepts are broad, powerful organizing ideas that have relevance both within and across subject areas. A set of five conceptual themes (identities, experiences, human ingenuity, social organization and sharing the planet) have been used to shape the language acquisition syllabuses in order to help students build the capacity to engage with complex ideas. Discussion of the “big ideas” behind these five concepts can help students get to the heart of why they are exploring a particular language unit or option. There is also a strong link between teaching through concepts and moving students to higher-order thinking; for example, it allows students to move from concrete to abstract thinking, and facilitates transfer of learning to new contexts, thereby supporting concurrency of learning.Approaches to the teaching and learning of language B 
Language B guide 58Teaching developed in local and global contexts
Contextualized learning places an emphasis on students processing new information by connecting it 
to their own first language and culture experience, and to the world around them. In addition to helping students see connections between languages and cultures, and helping to ground abstract concepts in real-life situations, there is also an important link between the contextualization of learning in global contexts and the development of international-mindedness. International-mindedness should have a significant 
focus in language acquisition classes by allowing students opportunities to explore course concepts, such 
as sharing the planet, experiences and human ingenuity, as well as providing students with opportunities to consider the nature of target-language countries and regions.
Teaching focused on effective teamwork and collaboration
This principle applies to promoting teamwork and collaboration among students, but it also refers to the collaborative relationship between the teacher and students. Collaborative learning activities include activities such as group projects, debates, role plays and other activities with shared goals. Therefore, there are extremely close links between social skills, such as negotiation and collaborative learning. A key aspect of fostering a collaborative relationship between teachers and students is the promotion of effective 
dialogue and feedback on what students have and have not understood during their lessons.
Teaching differentiated to meet the needs of all learners
Differentiation is about accommodating the different ways in which students learn, and about teachers 
designing learning experiences that allow students with a range of needs to meet their learning objectives. These include affirming identities, valuing prior knowledge, scaffolding learning and extending learning. Given the varied language experiences, first language knowledge and backgrounds of students when they start a language acquisition programme, it is vital for teachers to identify the different learning needs of 
individual students within a cohort and provide differentiated learning experiences for all students.
Teaching informed by assessment (formative and summative)
Assessment plays a crucial role in supporting learning, as well as in measuring learning. Formative 
assessment encompasses “all those activities undertaken by teachers, and/or by their students, which provide information to be used as feedback to modify the teaching and learning activities in which they are engaged” (Black and Wiliam 1998: 7). Formative assessment is, therefore, a tool or process that teachers can use to improve student learning; it is about assessment for  learning, rather than simply assessment 
of learning. In the language acquisition classroom, there should be opportunities for both teacher-led 
formative and summative assessment as well as peer assessment and opportunities for students to reflect on their own learning and performance on assessment instruments in order to develop their language skills.
Approaches to learning
Thinking skills
Through language acquisition, students develop a body of thinking skills that may include, but are not limited to, metacognition, reflection, critical thinking, creative thinking and transfer. The development of higher-order thinking skills, rather than the simple memorization of content, is integral to the language learning process. This may be achieved through approaches to teaching, such as the use of collaborative, enquiry-based tasks to provide students with the opportunity to explore language and structures relating 
to a given theme. Learners are better equipped for their future roles as global citizens when given the 
opportunity to analyse, synthesize and evaluate language topics from their own and different perspectives.Approaches to the teaching and learning of language B 
Language B guide 59Research skills
In language acquisition, research allows students to use authentic sources to explore questions from different 
cultural perspectives and to expand their linguistic and intercultural knowledge in any direction that presents a particular interest for them. Research skills may include critical thinking, problem solving, analysis and sharing of ideas (which could involve selecting a topic of interest in order to explore one of the language acquisition course’s five themes or concepts), finding, validating and evaluating sources, as well as paraphrasing and citing 
in an academically honest way. Students also need to present their work, and reflect on their experience, in a 
way that demonstrates a positive attitude to learning. One of the many ways in which students can develop their research skills is through the completion of an extended essay in the target language.
Communication skills
Communication is at the heart of language acquisition. Effective communicative interactions using the spoken and written forms of a language entail: interpretation and negotiation of meaning; coherent exchange of ideas; and the ability to inform, describe, narrate, explain, persuade and argue to a variety of audiences and in different contexts. Not only does effective communication allow students to develop their linguistic skills and self-confidence, it also promotes intercultural understanding through the examination 
of the interrelationship between language and culture, and promotes international-mindedness through an 
increased awareness of the use of the target language in a variety of countries and regions.
Social skills
To function effectively in the language acquisition classroom, students need to be adept at both peer-related and adult-related social communication and behaviour. These skills are closely related to communication skills and also to attributes of the IB learner profile, such as being open-minded, for example, through students showing appreciation for the culture(s) of the target language. A particularly important skill within the category of social skills is collaboration, which can be a catalyst to higher-order thinking and should, therefore, be at the 
forefront of teachers’ minds when they are planning units of work for language acquisition classes.
Self-management skills
Students should set their own goals and reflect on their progress as they grow and improve their linguistic 
and cultural competence. They should demonstrate initiative, perseverance and a strong willingness to learn independently. An example could be students going beyond classroom requirements and using the language in real-life situations, or seeking out native speakers in the local community with whom to practise their language skills.
Approaches to teaching are:Example
based on inquiry Students are given a set of resources (online, on paper, artifacts, and so on) along with a challenge to complete. They will need to look for possible solutions to the challenge by exploring the resources provided.
focused on conceptual understandingClass discussion of the ways in which “purpose” shapes our communication in the target language (selection of appropriate vocabulary and structures, use of idiom, use of rhetorical devices, and so on). This could be done by taking an authentic piece of writing in the target language and analysing it in order 
to identify the purpose for which it was written. How do we know this? What 
devices help us to understand the purpose? How clear is the purpose?
A follow-on task could be the creation of work samples, in which students 
write for a specific purpose. Peer review of students’ work can produce good discussion to evaluate the success of the writing for a specific purpose.Approaches to the teaching and learning of language B 
Language B guide 60Approaches to teaching 
are:Example
developed in local and global contextsThe class takes a topic from one of the themes and considers the application of one of the conceptual understandings in different regions and countries where the target language is spoken. For example, under “identities”, the Spanish class could explore the different approaches to naming, addressing and treating various family members in both Castilian and other variations of Spanish, and selecting ways in which the students 
can refer to their own family members (for example, in a non-Spanish-
speaking environment).
focused on effective teamwork and 
collaborationClass debate on the pros and cons of recycling. Teams need to develop 
arguments, share them across the team, collaborate with the teacher to 
develop fluency in order to communicate well during the debate and 
interact with their own team and the opposition during the debate itself.
differentiated to meet 
the needs of all learnersAn inquiry task in which different students are provided with resources commensurate with their language skills, but that will ultimately still allow 
each individual student to contribute some ideas to the finished task.
informed by assessment (formative and summative)An interactive oral activity in which students assess themselves and their partners (peers) on the degree to which the use of the target language and active participation contributed to the successful fulfilment of the activity (detracted, contributed, enhanced). For formative assessment purposes, the students also provide a reflection and strategy for improvement based on both the peer and self-assessment.
Approaches to learning Example
Thinking skills Having completed a piece of written work, students are given some guiding questions and time for reflection on what they have written in the target language. Students can be asked to identify what they feel they have done well, whether there are any examples of language that they feel show 
they have moved beyond their previous achievements, and plan how they 
can expand on this success. In addition, students can take time to reflect on the mistakes they have made, and can seek to understand why a structure was wrong in order to reach a point where they use such structures correctly in the future.
Research skills Themes such as “human ingenuity” particularly lend themselves to research skills. For example, it is valuable for students to be able to give examples when speaking about the ways in which technology has changed our lives. By doing an internet search using a target language search engine, more authentic language can be obtained. A common form of research, and one that students should be encouraged to use daily, is to look up their own vocabulary, verify language structures, and so on. Approaches to the teaching and learning of language B 
Language B guide 61Approaches to learning Example
Communication skills Skills development for the individual oral assessment is substantially 
focused on communication skills. Teachers need to allocate time in the class schedule to helping students build confidence in one-to-one conversation. This can be accomplished through establishing verbal protocols, using linguistic strategies for the maintenance of communication and encouraging the students’ active participation as interlocutors. 
Social skills A CAS activity that links to the language and culture a student is learning is a good way to develop social skills; in particular, it may provide the student with the opportunity to experience the way in which language, culture and nationality can create subtle differences in social skills. Attitudes, outlooks, prejudices and stereotyping are all topics that can be explored with 
language acquisition students in the process of developing more mature 
social skills.
Self-management skills The class might develop a timeline or planning strategy for the completion 
of written tasks, establish routines for submitting completed work, and 
establish protocols for peer review of classwork and formative assessment tasks. Another very significant self-management skill focuses on the ability to self-check work, manage errors and develop strategies for improvement. While most students will already have some aspects of these skills, all students can benefit from more structured consideration of appropriate strategies for improving their ability to meet deadlines and manage their own learning.Language B guide 62Appendices
Glossary of command terms
Command terms for language acquisition
Students should be familiar with the following key terms and phrases used in examination questions, which 
are to be understood as described below. Although these terms will be used frequently in examination questions, other terms may be used to direct students to present an argument in a specific way.
Command term Assessment 
objectiveDefinition
Analyse 5 Break down in order to bring out the essential elements or structure.
Demonstrate 1, 2, 3, 5 Make clear by reasoning or evidence, illustrating with examples or practical application.
Describe 1, 2, 3 Give a detailed account.
Discuss 3, 4, 5 Offer a considered and balanced review that includes a range of arguments, factors or hypotheses. Opinions or 
conclusions should be presented clearly and supported by 
appropriate evidence.
Evaluate 5 Make an appraisal by weighing up the strengths and limitations.
Examine 5 Consider an argument or concept in a way that uncovers the assumptions and interrelationships of the issue.
Explain 2, 3, 4, 5 Give a detailed account including reasons or causes.
Identify 2, 3, 5 Provide an answer from a number of possibilities.
Outline 3, 4 Give a brief account or summary.
Present 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 Offer for display, observation, examination or consideration.
State 3, 4 Give a specific name, value or other brief answer without explanation or calculation.Language B guide 63Appendices
Glossary of subject-specific terms
Glossary term Glossary definition
Cultural artifact For the purposes of the extended essay, the following text clarifies 
category 2: Culture and society (b), “essays of a general cultural nature based on specific cultural artifacts”.
Cultural artifacts include anything concrete or tangible that helps to give 
insight into the target culture and language. Some examples are given below.
Written documents• Adverts
• Articles
• Books (other than literary)
• Cartoons
• Historical documents or records
• Laws or policies
• Leaflets, brochures or manifestos
• Magazines
• News headlines
• Newspapers
Spoken documents
• Interviews
• Radio or television programmes
• Screenplays
• Song lyrics
Visual documents
• Architecture (buildings, monuments, and so on)
• Films
• Stamps
• Works of fine art
Cultural icons• Brands (as a manifestation of culture)
• Fashion items and accessories (as a manifestation of culture)
• Food items, dishes (as a manifestation of culture)
The following do not  qualify as “cultural artifacts”.
• (Minority) ethnic groups
• Historical events
• Institutions (school systems, political parties, and so on)Glossary of subject-specific terms 
Language B guide 64Glossary term Glossary definition
• Media trends
• Political events (elections, referendums)
• Social issues (unemployment, immigration, racism, school violence, 
the role of women in a particular country, and so on)
• Social movements (for example, riots)
• Sports
• Styles of music
• Towns or regions (“travel guide” extended essays)
• Traditions
Authentic text An authentic text may be an audio, visual, audio-visual or written text. It has three definitions.
1. It may come from an original target language source, such as a public 
transport announcement or a television interview, and may be used in its unaltered state provided the speed, language and ambient noise do not prevent a language acquisition student from accessing the material.
2. It may be an original text that has been modified (footnoted, some changes to vocabulary, slowed down, and so on) to assist students with access to the content.
3. Alternatively, an authentic item may be one that has been created in the target language but is based on an authentic scenario, particularly for beginning language learners and specifically for the purposes of language acquisition instruction and assessment.
Fluency In language acquisition syllabuses and assessment outlines, the term 
“fluency” does not mean “to speak like a native speaker”, nor should it be 
taken as a measure of the accuracy of a student’s language. Schmidt (1992) found that L2 (target language) fluency was “primarily a temporal phenomenon” (that is, not a vague notion of proficiency, but the way speech is processed and articulated in real time). In the context of the language B course, “fluency” refers to how well a student can join up language and structures in order to convey their ideas within the parameters of the language learned . Pauses, rephrasing and repetition can all contribute 
to fluency rather than detracting from it.
Literary text An extract from a complete literary work, for example, a scene from a play, several paragraphs from a novel or a single poem from a larger collection.
Literary work Complete works of prose fiction, prose non-fiction, poetry and drama, originally written in the target language. Simplified or abridged versions of literary works are not considered to fulfill the requirement of the definition “literary work” for the purpose of this guide.
Visual stimulus For the purpose of the language B SL individual oral assessment, a “visual stimulus” may be a photo, a poster, an illustration or an advertisement.Glossary of subject-specific terms 
Language B guide 65Glossary term Glossary definition
Visual text Visual texts are texts that are created using images such as posters, book 
covers, illustrations and photos. At their simplest, a visual text is a single image that conveys ideas and information. It may also contain added language to enrich the message.
For the purpose of the language B SL individual oral assessment, a visual 
stimulus containing plenty of visual text is an image that has ample detail and action, and is a rich source of material for the student to talk about.Language B guide 66Appendices
Bibliography
This bibliography lists the principal works used to inform the curriculum review. It is not an exhaustive list 
and does not include all the literature available; judicious selection was made in order to better advise and guide teachers. This bibliography is not a list of recommended textbooks.
Aghagolzadeh, F and Tajabadi, F. 2012. “A Debate on Literature as a Teaching Material in FLT”. Journal on 
Language Teaching and Research . Vol 3(1). Pp 205–210.
Alderson, J. 2000. Assessing Reading . Cambridge, UK. Cambridge University Press.
American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages. 2010. Assigning CEFR Ratings to ACTFL Assessments . 
Alexandria, VA, USA. ACTFL.
Bagherkazemi, M and Alemi, M. 2010. “Literature in the EFL/ESL Classroom: Consensus and Controversy”. 
Linguistic and Literary Broad Research and Innovation . Vol 1(1). Pp 1–12.
Black, P and Wiliam, D. 1998. “Assessment and Classroom Learning”. Assessment in Education: Principles, Policy and Practice . Vol 5, number 1. Pp 7–73.
Bottino, O. 1999. “Literature and Language Teaching”. In Actas do 4 Encontro Nacional do Ensino das linguas vivas no ensino superior em Portugal. Porto, Universidade do Porto. Faculdade de Letras, Instituto de Estudos Franceses. Pp. 211–214.
Brown, J and Hudson, T. Criterion-referenced Language Testing . Cambridge, UK. Cambridge University Press.
Brown, J and Hudson, T. 1998. “The Alternatives in Language Assessment”. TESOL Quarterly . Vol 32(4). Pp 653–675.
Buck, G. 2001. Assessing Listening . Cambridge, UK. Cambridge University Press.
Canale, M and Swain, M. 1980. “Theoretical bases of communicative approaches to second language 
teaching and testing”. Applied Linguistics . Vol 1. Pp 1–47.
Cantor, J. 1997. “Experiential Learning in Higher Education: Linking Classroom and Community”. ASHE-ERIC Higher Education Report, 7 . Washington DC, USA. The George Washington University, Graduate School of 
Education and Human Development.
Council of Europe. 2001. Common European Framework of Reference for Languages: Learning, Teaching, 
Assessment.  Cambridge, UK. Cambridge University Press.
Cushing Weigle, S. 2002. Assessing Writing . Cambridge, UK. Cambridge University Press.
Dubash, C and Anwar, M. 2011. “The Integration of Literature in Second Language Acquisition and Learning”. British Journal of Arts and Social Sciences . Vol 1(1). Pp 35–40.
Duncan, S and Paran, A. 2017. “The effectiveness of literature on acquisition of language skills and 
intercultural understanding in the high school context: A research report for the International Baccalaureate 
Organization”. London, UK. UCL Institute of Education, University College London.
Elliott de Riverol, J. 1991. “Literature in the Teaching of English as a Foreign Language”. Revista Alicantina de 
Estudios Ingleses . Vol 4. Pp 65–69.
Ellis, R. 2005. “Principles of instructed language learning”. Asian EFL Journal . Vol 7(3). Pp 9–24.Bibliography  
Language B guide 67Filipi, A. 2012. “ Do questions written in the target language make foreign language listening comprehension tests 
more difficult? ” Language Testing . Vol 29(4). Pp 511–532.
Hall, G. 2005. Literature in Language Education . New York, NY, USA. Palgrave Macmillan.
Hanauer, D. 2001. “Focus-on-Cultural Understanding: Literary Reading in the Second Language Classroom”. 
CAUCE . Vol 24. Pp 389–404.
Hişmanoğlu, M. 2005. “Teaching English through Literature”. Journal of Language and Linguistic Studies . 
Vol 1(1). Pp 53–66.
Hong Chen, R. 2009. “Pedagogical Approaches to Foreign Language Education: A discussion of poetic forms 
and culture”. SFU Educational Review . Vol 1. Pp 49–57.
Instituto Cervantes. 2006. Plan curricular del Instituto Cervantes . Madrid, Spain. Biblioteca nueva.
International Baccalaureate Organization. 2013 (updated June 2015, May 2017). What is an IB education?  
Cardiff, UK.
Iwashita, N, Brown, A, McNamara, T and O’Hagan, S. 2008. ”Assessed levels of second language speaking 
proficiency: How distinct?” Applied Linguistics . Vol 29(1). Pp 24–49.
Jahangard, A. 2013. Task-Induced Involvement in L2 Vocabulary Learning: A Case of Listening Comprehension. Journal of English Language Teaching and Learning . Vol 5(12) Pp 43–62.
Jendi, A. 2005. “Approaches to assessing English oral communication in UAE high schools”. In Davidson, P ,  
Coombe, C and Jones, W, (eds.). Assessment in the Arab world . Pp 173–190. Dubai: TESOL Arabia.
Jones, C and Carter, R. 2010. “Literature and Language Awareness: Using Literature to Achieve CEFR 
Outcomes”. Journal of Second Language Teaching and Research . Vol 1(1). Pp 69–82.
Khalifa, H and Weir, C. 2009. Examining Reading: Research and Practice in Assessing Second Language Reading . 
Cambridge, UK. Cambridge University Press.
Khatib, M and Nourzadeh, S. 2011. “Some Recommendations for Integrating Literature into EFL/ESL 
Classrooms”. International Journal of English Linguistics . Vol 1(2). Pp 258–263.
Khatib, M and Rahimi, A. 2012. “Literature and Language Teaching”. Journal of Academic and Applied Studies . 
Vol 2(6). Pp 32–38.
Kim, Y. 2010. “Implementing Literature-based Language Instruction in a Korean High School English 
Classroom”. English Teaching . Vol 65(1). Pp 87–112.
Lee, C. 2010. “An Exploratory Study of the Interlanguage Pragmatic Comprehension of Young Learners of 
English”. Pragmatics . Vol 20(3). Pp 343–373.
Lee, H, Huang, M and Hung, W. 2010. “The Development and Validation of a Listening Practice Strategy 
Questionnaire. English Teaching & Learning . Vol 34(3). Pp 1–50.
Liddicoat, A and Scarino, A. 2010. “Eliciting the Intercultural in Foreign Language Education at School”. 
In Paran, A and Sercu, L. Testing the Untestable in Language Education. (New Perspectives on Language and 
Education) . Multilingual Matters. Bristol, UK. Chapter 4. Pp 52–73.
Lightbown, P and Spada, N. 2006. How Languages are Learned . Oxford, UK. Oxford University Press.
Llach, P . 2007. “Teaching Language through Literature: The Wasteland in the ESL Classroom”. Odisea . Vol 8. 
Pp 7–17.
Luoma, S. 2000. Assessing Speaking . Cambridge, UK. Cambridge University Press.Bibliography  
Language B guide 68Maftoon, P , Lavasani, M and Shahini, A. 2011. “Broadening the listening materials in second/foreign language 
context”. Modern Journal of Language Teaching Methods . Vol 1(3). Pp 110–121.
Miquel, L. 2005. “La subcompetencia sociocultural”. In Santos Gargallo, I and Sànchez Lobato, J. Vademécum para la formación de profesores . Madrid, Spain. SGEL. Pp 511–532.
O’Bryan, A and Hegelheimer, V. 2009. “Using a mixed methods approach to explore strategies, metacognitive awareness and the effects of task design on listening development”. Canadian Journal of Applied Linguistics . 
Vol 12(1). Pp 9–38.
Oh, S. 2011. “Effects of Three English Accents on Korean High School Students’ Listening Comprehension 
and Attitude”. English Teaching . Vol 66(1). Pp 39–63.
Paran, A. 2008. “The role of literature in instructed foreign language learning and teaching: An evidence-based survey”. Language Teaching . Vol 41(4). Pp 465–496.
Paran, A. 2010. “Between Scylla and Charybdis: The Dilemmas of Testing Language and Literature”. In Paran, A and Sercu, L. Testing the Untestable in Language Education. (New Perspectives on Language and Education) . Multilingual Matters. Bristol, UK. Chapter 8. Pp 143–164.
Paran, A. 2012. “Language skills: questions for teaching and learning”. ELT Journal . Vol 66(4). Pp 450–458.
Powers, D. 2010. “The Case for a Comprehensive, Four-Skills Assessment of English-Language Proficiency”. TOEIC Compendium . Vol 14. Pp 1–12.
Premawardhena, N. 2007. “Integrating Literature into Foreign Language Teaching: A Sri Lankan perspective”. Novitas-ROYAL . Vol 1(2). Pp 92–97.
Purpura, J. 2004. Assessing Grammar . Cambridge, UK. Cambridge University Press.
Read, J. 2000. Assessing Vocabulary . Cambridge, UK. Cambridge University Press.
Reyes Torres, A. 2012. “Literature in the foreign language syllabus: Engaging the student through active learning”. Tejuelo . Vol 15. Pp 9–16.
Richards, J. 2005. “Second Thoughts on Teaching Listening”. RELC . Vol 36(1). Pp 85–92.
Sanchez, H. 2009. “Building up literary reading responses in foreign language classrooms”. ELTED . Vol 12. 
Pp 1–13.
Scarino, A and Liddicoat, A. 2009. Teaching and Learning Languages. A Guide . Melbourne, Australia. 
Melbourne Curriculum Corporation of Australia.
Schmidt, R. 1992. “Psychological Mechanisms Underlying Second Language Fluency”. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition . Vol 14(4). Pp 357–385.
Sell, J. 2005. “Why Teach Literature in the Foreign Language Classroom?” Encuentro . Vol 15. Pp 86–93.
Shaw, S and Weir, C. 2007. Examining Reading . Cambridge, UK. Cambridge University Press.
The English Association. 2013. Ofqual Consultation on the Removal of Speaking and Listening from GCSE English and GCSE English Language . Leicester, UK. University of Leicester.
The National Recognition Information Centre for the United Kingdom. 2016. Benchmarking Selected IB Diploma Programme Language Courses to the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages . UK. 
UK NARIC.
Vandergrift, L. 2006. “Second Language Listening: Listening Ability or Language Proficiency?” The Modern 
Language Journal . Vol 90. Pp 6–18.Bibliography  
Language B guide 69Vandergrift, L. 2007. “Recent developments in second and foreign language listening comprehension 
research”. Language Teaching . Vol 40(3). Pp 191–210.
Vandergrift, L and Goh, C. 2012. Teaching and Learning Second Language Listening: Metacognition in Action . 
New York, NY, USA. Routledge.
Wagner, E. 2003. “Testing Second Language Listening Ability”. Retrieved from https://journals.cdrs.columbia.
edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/12/2015/05/3.4-Wagner-2003.pdf. Accessed 24 April 2017.
Wagner, E and Toth, P . 2004. “A Construct Validation Study of the Extended Listening Sections of the ECPE 
and MELAB”. Spaan Fellow Working Papers in Second or Foreign Language Assessment . Vol 2. Pp 1–25.
Wagner, E and Toth, P . 2014. “Teaching and Testing L2 Spanish Listening Using Scripted vs. Unscripted Texts”. Foreign Language Annals . Vol 47(3). Pp 404–422.
Welbourn, M. 2009. “Approaching authentic texts in the second language classroom: Some factors to consider”. Master’s thesis. Malmö, Sweden. Malmö University.