2225 – 6012M




               Markscheme

                 May 2025


                  Biology


               Standard level


                  Paper 2


16 pages
                                                                          –2–                                                                  2225 – 6012M


© International Baccalaureate Organization 2025

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or mechanical means, including information
storage and retrieval systems, without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits use of any
selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study
services, preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app developers, whether
fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-
publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2025

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou
mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite préalable de l’IB. De plus, la
licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris,
sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de
préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction
pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2025

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o
mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del IB. Además, la
licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo
que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios
preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para docentes
mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-
school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.
                                                                              –3–                                                                  2225 – 6012M


Subject Details: Biology SL Paper 2 Markscheme

Candidates are required to answer all questions in Section A and one out of two questions in Section B. Maximum total = 50 marks.

1.    A markscheme often has more marking points than the total allows. This is intentional.

2.    Each marking point has a separate line and the end is shown by means of a semicolon (;).

3.    An alternative answer or wording is indicated in the markscheme by a slash (/). Either wording can be accepted.

4.    An alternative answer is indicated by “OR”. Either answer can be accepted.

5.    An alternative markscheme is indicated under heading ALTERNATIVE 1 etc. Either alternative can be accepted.

6.    Words in brackets ( ) in the markscheme are not necessary to gain the mark.

7.    Words that are underlined are essential for the mark.

8.    The order of marking points does not have to be as in the markscheme, unless stated otherwise.

9.    If the candidate’s answer has the same “meaning” or can be clearly interpreted as being of equivalent significance, detail and validity as that in
      the markscheme then award the mark. Where this point is considered to be particularly relevant in a question it is emphasized by OWTTE
      (or words to that effect).

10.   Remember that many candidates are writing in a second language. Effective communication is more important than grammatical accuracy.

11.   Occasionally, a part of a question may require an answer that is required for subsequent marking points. If an error is made in the first marking point then
      it should be penalized. However, if the incorrect answer is used correctly in subsequent marking points then follow through marks should be awarded.
      When marking indicate this by adding ECF (error carried forward) on the script.

12.   Do not penalize candidates for errors in units or significant figures, unless it is specifically referred to in the markscheme.
                                                                             –4–                                                                  2225 – 6012M


                                                                        Section B
Extended response questions - quality of construction

        Extended response questions for SLP2 carry a mark total of [16]. Of these marks, [15] are awarded for content and [1] for the quality of
         the answer.

        [1] for quality is to be awarded when:
              the candidate’s answers are clear enough to be understood without re-reading.
              the candidate has answered the question succinctly with little or no repetition or irrelevant material.

        It is important to judge this on the overall answer, taking into account the answers to all parts of the question. Although, the part with the
         largest number of marks is likely to provide the most evidence.

        Candidates that score very highly on the content marks need not necessarily automatically gain [1] for quality (and vice versa).
                                                                                        –5–                                              2225 – 6012M


                                                                                   Section A

 Question                                                       Answers                                                          Notes          Total
1.   a      20(%);                                                                                                 accept 19 - 22%               1

1.   b      a. germination starts between 6-8 days;
            b. reaches between 90-95% germination;




                                                                                                                                                 2




                Used with permission of Oxford University Press - Journals, from Journal of Experimental Botany,
                   Society for Experimental Biology (Great Britain), Federation of European Societies of Plant
                Physiology, Vol. 59, Issue 8, 2008. Permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.
                                                                      –6–                                   2225 – 6012M


 Question                                          Answers                                          Notes          Total

1.   c      Similarities:
            a. both showed an increase in germination
                OR
                at 3 days the seeds incubated for 18 hours have the same percentage germination
                as the control
                OR
                both seeds incubated for 18 hours, and the control seeds did not germinate during
                the first 2 days;
            Differences:                                                                                            2
            b. a higher percentage of seeds germinated when incubated 18 hours than the
                control seeds
                OR
                percentage of germinated seeds incubated for 18 hours shows a steeper increase
                than the control seeds (between 3 and 5 days)
                OR
                seeds incubated for 18 hours level off but percentage of germinated seeds in
                control continues to increase gradually;
                                                                       –7–                                     2225 – 6012M


 Question                                           Answers                                            Notes          Total

1.   d      longer (more than 6) hours incubation (with cyanide) causes a delay in days to begin
            germination
            OR
            there is a lag in germination rate at the beginning of each cyanide line (with 6 or more
            hours) that is not present in the control line / OWTTE;




                                                                                                                       1
                                                                   –8–                                                             2225 – 6012M


Question                                         Answers                                                       Notes                      Total

1.   e     a. from the graph, 6 hours produced the fastest germination;
           b. no incubation times between 6 and 18/3 and 6 hours were tested (so cannot say
              what the optimum incubation time is)
                                                                                                                                           2
              OR
              the hypothesis is not supported because seeds incubated with different hours
              eventually reach 100%/close to 100% germination;
1.   f     0.5 nl h-1 g-1;                                                                    Units required
                                                                                              Accept answers between 0.4 and 0.5           1


1.   g     135;
                                                                                              Accept answers from 131 and 137.             1

1.   h     Similarity
           a. both D and ND (seed embryos) produced more ethylene with incubation in
              cyanide;

           Difference
           b. ND (seed embryos) produced more total ethylene than D                                                                        2
               OR
               D (seed embryos) show a bigger proportional increase than ND seeds
               OR
               D has a bigger spread of data;
                                                                       –9–                                                       2225 – 6012M


 Question                                          Answers                                                               Notes          Total
2    a      mutation
            OR                                                                                                                           1
            sexual reproduction/meiosis/random fertilization/crossing over/independent assortment;

2.   b      a. change in environment may cause which characteristics are
               advantageous/disadvantageous
               OR
               selection pressures change;
            b. natural selection favours organisms that are best adapted to survive in the (changed)
                                                                                                                                         2
               environment                                                                           Accept vice versa
                                                                                                                                        max
               OR
               organisms that possess the favourable genes/are best adapted to the environment
               will survive to / reproduce/pass their traits on;
            c. an example of a trait and how it may become more advantageous/disadvantageous
               for a specific change in environment;
2.   c      a. keystone species have a disproportionate/significant/high/large effect on the
               structure of an ecosystem / OWTTE;
            b. loss of biodiversity/diversity of species will occur;                                                                     2
            c. change of population size/numbers of other species may occur;                                                            max
            d. change/disruption in food webs/chains would occur;
            e. example of loss and its effect;
                                                                      – 10 –                                              2225 – 6012M


 Question                                                Answers                                                  Notes           Total
3.   a      the neuron is insulated since it shows Schwann cells/myelin sheath can be seen;
                                                                                                                                   1


3.   b      a.   DNA/chromosomes;
            b.   ribosomes;                                                                                                        2
            c.   plasma/cell membrane/phospholipid bilayer;                                                                       max
            d.   cytoplasm/cytosol;
3.   c      a. action potential/nerve impulse reaches the end of the presynaptic neuron;
            b. impulse/action potential/depolarization of the (presynaptic) membrane causes calcium (ions)/Ca2+
               uptake/diffusion into the neuron;
                                                                                                                                   3
            c. (calcium ions) cause vesicles to move to the (presynaptic) membrane;
                                                                                                                                  max
            d. vesicles contain neurotransmitter;
            e. neurotransmitter released into the synaptic gap/cleft by exocytosis/when vesicle fuses with
               membrane;
                                                                      – 11 –                                                             2225 – 6012M


 Question                                          Answers                                                              Notes                     Total
4.   a      hydrolysis/catabolic reaction;                                                                                                         1

4.   b      a. branching of capillaries gives a large total surface area for exchange
               OR
               capillaries are numerous so every cell is close enough to allow rapid exchange of
               material/monosaccharides
                                                                                                                                                   2
               OR
                                                                                                                                                  max
               capillaries beds are dense increasing surface area for exchange;
            b. thin/one cell thick walls facilitate diffusion/exchange of materials/monosaccharides;
            c. fenestrations/larger openings/pores between capillary cells (for more rapid movement)
               for exchange of material/monosaccharides;

4.   c      a. movement of material/fructose from an area of high concentration to low/with the
               concentration gradient;                                                                 c. Do not accepts carrier protein, pumps
                                                                                                                                                   2
            b. does not require (ATP) energy/is passive;                                               or any protein that requires ATP to
                                                                                                                                                  max
            c. requires channel/integral proteins;                                                     function
            d. channel proteins make membrane selectively permeable;
                                                                      – 12 –                                                           2225 – 6012M


 Question                                        Answers                                                             Notes                      Total
5.   a      nucleotide(s);                                                                                                                       1

5.   b      a.   DNA is double stranded, and RNA is single stranded;
                                                                                                  Both contrasting statements about the point
            b.   DNA contains the sugar deoxyribose and RNA contains ribose;                                                                     2
                                                                                                  being considered need be given to obtain
            c.   DNA contains thymine and RNA contains uracil;                                                                                  max
                                                                                                  one mark
            d.   DNA is a long molecule and RNA is much shorter;
5.   c      a. phenotype is the appearance of a genotype;
            b. a genotype may be homozygous/TT, tt or heterozygous/Tt / OWTTE;
            c. dominant alleles mask/hide the presence of the recessive allele
               OR
               dominant alleles show their effects / are expressed with the presence of one single
                                                                                                      Answers may be shown in an annotated       3
               dominant allele (in a genotype) / Tt and TT both show dominant trait/phenotype;
                                                                                                      Punnett Grid                              max
            d. genotype tt / homozygous recessive shows recessive trait/phenotype
               OR
               absence of a dominant allele shows recessive trait/phenotype;
            e. if the recessive allele is sex linked, only one allele is present in males and will be
               expressed;
                                                                           – 13 –                                                         2225 – 6012M


                                                                       Section B
Clarity of communication: [1]
The candidate’s answers are clear enough to be understood without re-reading. The candidate has answered the question succinctly with little or no
repetition or irrelevant material.

 Question                                                Answers                                                         Notes                       Total
6.   a       a. cohesion is caused by the polarity of water
                OR
                water molecules have a negative and positive end;
             b. water molecules are attracted to each other
                OR
                water molecules are linked by hydrogen bonds;
             c. (cohesion) enables water to move along stems/xylem
                 OR
                 enables a continuous column of water in transpiration/transpiration pull;
             d. surface tension provides a habitat for some organisms                                                                                 4
                 OR                                                                                                                                  max
                 some insects can walk on water surface because of surface tension/other verified example
                  OR
                  cohesion is related to buoyancy allowing organisms (like ringed seal) to float;
             e. helps animals regulate body temperature (through evaporative cooling);
             f. (cohesion causes high specific heat) so maintains a stable temperature in aquatic
                 environments
                  OR
                 water is liquid at a wide range of temperatures supporting many aquatic habitats;


6.   b       a.   transpiration is the evaporation of water from the stomata/openings of the plant leaf;    Accept vice versa for these
             b.   increase in humidity will decrease water loss/transpiration;                              statements
             c.   increase in temperature will increase water loss/transpiration;                                                                     4
             d.   increase in wind/ air movement will increase water loss/transpiration;                                                             max
             e.    increase in light intensity will increase water loss/transpiration;
             f.    lack of water in soil causes stomates to close/transpiration to decrease;
                                                                      – 14 –                                    2225 – 6012M


 Question                                           Answers                                             Notes          Total
6.   c      a. osmosis is water moving through a partially/semi permeable membrane/cell
               membrane/aquaporins;
            b. osmosis is a form of simple diffusion
               OR
               water travels down the (water) concentration gradient
               OR
               osmosis is passive;
            c. the solute concentration determines the direction of net movement of water;
            d. plant cells in hypotonic solutions will take in water;
            e. they will swell/are turgid/develop turgor pressure (in hypotonic solutions);
                                                                                                                        7
            f. cell wall prevents the plant cells from bursting due to water pressure (in hypotonic
                                                                                                                       max
               solutions);
            g. plant cells in hypertonic solutions will lose water;
            h. they will shrink/get smaller/flaccid (in hypertonic solutions);
            i. the cell membrane will pull away from the cell wall/plasmolysis (in hypertonic
               solutions);
            j. isotonic solutions are the same concentration as inside the plant cells/cytoplasm/cell
               sap;
            k. plant cells will have no net change (in isotonic solutions)/water moves equally in and
               out of the cell/dynamic equilibrium;
                                                                       – 15 –                                                          2225 – 6012M


 Question                                           Answers                                                            Notes                  Total
7.   a      a.   carbon can form 4 bonds;
            b.   carbon forms covalent bonds;
            c.   carbon can form single or double/triple bonds;                                                                                4
            d.   carbon can form bonds with other carbon atoms / with other (non-metallic) elements;                                          max
            e.   carbon can form branched / unbranched chains;
            f.   carbon can form single / multiple rings;

7.   b      a. (short term) storage of carbon/CO2 in the atmosphere/aquatic environments as CO2;
            b. photosynthesis/carbon fixation: carbon/CO2 is absorbed;                                 Accept answers shown as an annotated
            c. feeding: carbon is passed through food chains in organic molecules;                     carbon cycle.
            d. (cellular) respiration returns carbon/CO2 to the environment;
            e. (long term) storage of carbon in fossil fuels/ limestone/ forests;
            f. decomposition returns carbon/CO2 to the atmosphere                                                                              4
               OR                                                                                                                             max
               decomposers/saprotrophs return carbon to the soil;
            g. carbon dioxide is put into the environment by burning/combustion
               OR
               carbon dioxide is put into atmosphere by volcanic activity;
            h. used by coral/mollusca/specific organism as calcium carbonate to build shells;
                                                                    – 16 –                                2225 – 6012M


 Question                                       Answers                                           Notes          Total
7.   c      a. greenhouse effect describes that greenhouse gases trap long-wave radiation from
               the Earth’s surface and absorbs it keeping the Earth warm
               OR
               increase in greenhouse gases trapped in atmosphere increases Earth’s
               temperature;
            b. burning of fossil fuels/peat/coal/natural gas by humans has released more CO2
               into the atmosphere causing temperature rise on Earth;
            c. raising livestock for feed has added methane/greenhouse gas to the atmosphere
               causing more heat to be trapped on Earth;
            d. industrial processes / fertilizer production has increased the concentration of
               nitrous oxides/greenhouse gases in the atmosphere;
            e. deforestation has increased the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere/reduced an
               important sink for CO2;
            f. increased temperatures have caused melting of land ice leading to changes to
               polar habitats/decreasing species ability to survive                                               7
               OR                                                                                                max
               melting of ice/snow causes reduction in albedo, so there is more insolation
               absorbed at Earth’s surface;
            g. warmer surface water prevents upwelling of nutrients/decreases ocean
               productivity;
            h. coral reef habitat destruction due to changes in water pH / temperature;
            i. warmer temperatures/decreased snowfall has led to droughts and loss of
               life/habitats;
            j. rates of decomposition of peat/organic matter increases greenhouse gases;
            k. ocean/sea level rise from melting ice/thermal expansion of oceans has impacted
               coastal regions/loss of land;
            l. changing weather patterns due to global warming has caused loss of life and
               infrastructure;
            m. poleward migrations/migrations to more suitable places due to climate changes at
               lower latitudes;
