2225 – 6609M




               Markscheme


                 May 2025


    Environmental systems and societies


               Standard level


                  Paper 2




18 pages
                                            –2–                                         2225 – 6609M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2025

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2025

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2025

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                   –3–                                      2225 – 6609M


Subject details: Environmental systems and societies SLP2
Markscheme
Mark allocation

Candidates are required to answer:
• ALL questions in Section A [25] and TWO questions in Section B [40].
• The maximum total = [65].


1.   Environmental systems and societies uses marking points and markbands to determine the
     achievement of candidates

     When using marking points (All of this paper except Section B, part (c) questions):
       i.    A markscheme often has more marking points than the total allows. This is intentional
      ii.    Each marking point has a separate line and the end is shown by means of a semi-colon (;)
      iii.   Where a mark is awarded, a tick/check () must be placed in the text at the precise point
             where it becomes clear that the candidate deserves the mark. One tick to be shown for each
             mark awarded
     iv.     The order of marking points does not have to be as in the markscheme, unless stated
             otherwise.

     When using markbands (Only for Section B, part (c) questions):
       i.    Read the response and determine which band the response fits into
      ii.    Then re-read the response to determine where the response fits within the band
      iii.   Annotate the response to indicate your reasoning behind the awarding of the mark
             Do not use ticks at this point
     iv.     Decide on a mark for the response
      v.     At the end of the response place the required number of ticks to enable RM Assessor to
             input the correct number of marks for the response.


2.   An alternative answer or wording is indicated in the markscheme by a slash (/). Either wording can
     be accepted.

3.   Words in brackets ( ) in the markscheme are not necessary to gain the mark.

4.   Words that are underlined are essential for the mark.

5.   If the candidate’s answer has the same “meaning” or can be clearly interpreted as being of
     equivalent significance, detail and validity as that in the markscheme then award the mark.
     Where this point is considered to be particularly relevant in a question it is emphasized by
     OWTTE (or words to that effect).
                                                   –4–                                         2225 – 6609M


6.   Remember that many candidates are writing in a second language. Effective communication is
     more important than grammatical accuracy.

7.   Occasionally, a part of a question may require an answer that is required for subsequent
     marking points. If an error is made in the first marking point then it should be penalized. However, if
     the incorrect answer is used correctly in subsequent marking points then follow through marks
     should be awarded. When marking, indicate this by adding ECF (error carried forward) on the
     script.

8.   Do not penalize candidates for errors in units or significant figures, unless it is specifically referred
     to in the markscheme.
                                                     –5–                                        2225 – 6609M


                                                 Section A
1.   (a)   Identify the category with the lowest global harvest weight from aquaculture in
           Figure 1.                                                                                     [1]

           Marine fish;

     (b)   (i)     Using Figure 1, calculate the projected increase in the harvest of freshwater
                   fish between 2019 and 2050.                                                           [1]

                   (105 million – 58 million) 47 000 000 / 47 million (T) (accept 44 – 50 million T);

     Note to examiners: Do not accept % value. Units (T) are not required for credit in this
     question.

           (ii)    Outline one reason for the increase referred to in (b)(i).                            [1]

           a. Rising world population causes increased demand for food;
           b. Greater demand for high protein foods;
           c. Improved technology and techniques for catching/aquaculture of freshwater fish;
           d. Greater desire/interest in some countries for locally caught/harvested foods;
           e. Depleted stocks of wild fisheries;


     (c)   Describe two possible reasons for the difference in global aquaculture harvest
           between marine fish and molluscs in Figure 1.                                                 [2]

           a.     Molluscs are easier to farm than marine fish / marine fish are more easily
                  captured in wild’;
           b.     some molluscs are small and less mobile, and so require less area to culture;
           c.     Molluscs and their resources/conditions are easier to control than marine fish;
           d.     Different species of molluscs can be raised in both freshwater and marine
                  aquaculture environments;
           e.     Some molluscs reach maturity for harvesting faster than marine fish / high
                  turnover rate leads to larger harvest;
           f.     Market price (per unit weight) is higher for molluscs making aquaculture a
                  profitable choice;

     Note to examiners: Award credit for converse of MPs b-f (as in MPa).
                                            –6–                                       2225 – 6609M


(d)   Evaluate the use of aquaculture in meeting the projected harvest of global seafood,
      as shown in Figure 1.                                                                    [4]

      Pros [3max]:
      a. Seafood demand is expected to rise significantly by 2050, so it can provide
          new/more sources of food;
      b. Aquaculture harvest would reduce stress on wild fisheries/farming land;
      c. Provides economic opportunities for coastal nations, particularly developing
          nations;
      d. Waste and nutrients can be cycled, making it more sustainable / usually
          reduces food miles;
      e. More than one species can be harvested in Integrated multi-trophic aquaculture
          (IMTA);
      f. Many forms of seafood have a high protein value;
      g. Aquaculture, usually, is more efficient (economically, ecologically) than capture;

      Cons [3max]:
      a. May lead to loss of habitat in certain ecosystems;
      b. Greater localized aquatic pollution (antibiotics, medicines, nutrient pollution,
         etc.);
      c. Spread of diseases and escaped species (some involving genetically modified
         organisms);
      d. Ethical concerns towards mass fish farming or genetically modified organisms
         (GMOs);
      e. It is not economically viable to farm large marine species like tuna with
         aquaculture;
      f. May raise local water conflicts;
      g. Difficult to certify for sustainability/social responsibility;
      h. Current frameworks suit better, in most case, large-scale industrial aquaculture
         (rather than small-scale farmers);
      i. Current share of marine fish coming from aquaculture suggests it is unpopular;
      j. Aquaculture has high set-up/maintenance costs / requires a lot of resources i.e.
         fish feed/antibiotics;


Note to examiners: Credit any valid advantage or disadvantage. Do not credit simplistic
arguments, like more costly, more sustainable, more efficient, etc.

Credit other valid responses
                                                  –7–                                         2225 – 6609M


2.   (a)   Identify the altitude with the highest concentration of ozone shown in Figure 2(a).         [1]

           22–24 km;

     Note to examiners: Do not credit if units are omitted.



     (b)   With reference to Figure 2(a), describe reasons why a decreased concentration of
           ozone between 20 and 30 kilometers would have impacts on the earth’s surface.               [2]

           a.   Ozone in the stratosphere absorbs ultraviolet radiation from the sun / Less
                ozone means more ultraviolet radiation reaching the earth’s surface;
           b.   Ultraviolet radiation is harmful for living tissues / increasing the incidence of
                cataracts / mutation during cell division / skin cancer/melanoma;
           c.   Increased ultraviolet radiation may reduce biological productivity and damage
                photosynthetic organisms including phytoplankton;

     Note to examiners: Do not credit responses that mistakenly identify global
     warming/climate change as an impact.


     (c)   State one possible impact of increased ground-level ozone concentration on human
           health.                                                                                     [1]

           Damages lungs/lung tissue / irritates respiratory tissue/bronchitis/emphysema / eye
           irritation / lung cancer / cardiovascular issues;

     Note to examiners: Do not credit conditions relating to UV radiation or global warming i.e.
     cataracts, skin cancer etc.



     (d)   Outline two possible reasons for the change in ozone exposure for Brazil shown in
           Figure 2(b).                                                                                [2]
           a. Increased release/production of NOx/VOC/ozone from industry/transport/fossil
               fuel use (due to population increase/raised standard of living);
           b. Increased number of livestock releasing more methane (a VOC);
           c. Growing industrial sector but lower environmental standards;
           d. Climate change influencing increased use of air conditioners/energy releasing
               heat in urban areas;
           e. Higher standards of living leading to increased energy use/consumption;
           f. Climate change led to decreased precipitation/wind speed to wash the air clean
               (of ozone);
                                                 –8–                                        2225 – 6609M


     (e)   Outline two possible ways countries can reduce their ozone exposure, as shown in
           Figure 2(b).                                                                              [2]

           a.   Increased investment into renewable technology/energy sources;
           b.   Stricter laws/taxes for vehicle/industry emissions of NOx & VOCs / Set/enforce
                stricter ozone air concentration standards;
           c.   Public policy initiative (e.g. don’t drive days/vehicle bans/improved public
                transportation/promote biking etc.);
           d.   Technological improvements (e.g. catalytic convertors/scrubbers/electric
                vehicles);
           e.   Improve energy efficiency in buildings/appliances;
           f.   Promote sustainable agricultural practices that do not emit methane (a VOC);
           g.   Promote sustainable behaviour, like carpooling, reduced use of solvents/paints;
           h.   Planting trees/greening in cities reduces ozone levels;


3.   (a)   Identify the household waste category with the highest carbon impact from
           production in Figure 3.                                                                   [1]

           Clothing;

     (b)   Describe one possible reason why paper waste has higher overall carbon impacts
           than metal waste in Figure 3.                                                             [1]

           a.   Metal waste is recycled at a much greater level than paper/cardboard waste /
                metal waste is recycled while paper/cardboard is not / recycling of metal
                reduces overall carbon impact;
           b.   More paper/cardboard waste is put into landfill than metal waste / landfill
                increases the overall carbon impact;
           c.   Decomposition of paper releases carbon but metal waste does not (only its
                production);

     (c)   Outline two disadvantages of using landfill to dispose of food waste, as shown
           in Figure 3.                                                                              [2]

           a.   Takes up room that could be used for non-biodegradable waste/other uses of
                land;
           b.   Reduces potential to be composted/upcycled/repurposed;
           c.   Landfill leachates polluting soil/rivers/groundwater resources;
           d.   Potential for vermin/disease;
           e.   Landfill gases can cause explosions/landfills release methane/carbon dioxide
                contributing to global warming;
           f.   Landfill impacts aesthetics of landscape/creates bad odours that decrease local
                property value;
           g.   Landfills will increase ecological footprint;

     (d)   Outline two disadvantages with recycling clothing as an approach to decreasing
           carbon impacts, as shown in Figure 3.                                                     [2]

           a.   Some clothes cannot be recycled;
           b.   time/labour intensive as components (such as zips/buttons) need to be removed
                / different fibres need to be separated which is time/labour intensive;
           c.   Fashion may encourage non-recyclable clothing;
           d.   Recycling of clothing may be less profitable than other areas of recycling;
           e.   Some clothing can be reused, which is more efficient than recycling;
           f.   Recycling may involve use of non-renewable energy/fossil fuel use/CO2
                production;
                                             –9–                                       2225 – 6609M



(e)   Suggest two pollution management strategies that could be used to decrease the
      carbon impacts from paper waste in Scotland.                                              [2]

      a.   Greater local investment into recycling/composting programs;
      b.   Education/publicity campaigns highlighting issue of paper waste/promoting
           recycled paper/recycling paper;
      c.   Incentives to reduce paper mail towards electronic mail;
      d.   Legislation/incentives to reduce packaging in industries;

      e.   Legislation to increase the proportion of recycled material in the manufacture of
           paper and cardboard;
      f.   Increase price of paper/add paper tax to reduce consumption;
      g.   Reforestation/afforestation to sequester/absorb more carbon;

Note to examiners: Do not credit response that simply states ”recycling” or responses
that address deforestation.
                                                 – 10 –                                  2225 – 6609M


                                              Section B
4.   (a)   Identify four characteristic features of the tundra biome                                [4]

           Tundra biome has:
           a. Low species diversity;
           b. Low primary productivity/photosynthesis;
           c. Low mean temperatures;
           d. Frozen precipitation;
           e. Permafrost/frozen soils;
           f. Small alpine plants, lichens;
           g. Short food chains;
           h. Slow decomposition rate;
           i. Migratory/hibernating animals;
           j. Limited sunlight due to latitude;

     (b)   Explain how a community of carnivores contributes to the stability of the whole
           ecosystem.                                                                               [7]
           a.    Carnivores contribute to negative feedback within an ecosystem by…;
           b.    …feeding on the community of herbivores / passing on biomass/being consumed by
                 top carnivore communities…;
           c.    …leading to a reduction in the number of herbivores/carnivores…;
           d.    …which will lead to a reduction in the number of carnivores/top carnivores, etc.…;
           e.    …thus regulating the population size of herbivores/top carnivores;;
           f. Through defaecation they will release dead organic matter;
           g. This will provide food/support for a decomposer community;
           h. Their eventual death would also provide food for decomposers;
           i. Carnivores may compete with one another regulating their own populations;
           j. Carnivores may leave some prey biomass uneaten that feeds scavengers;
           k. Carnivores may be at the top of multiple food chains/act as keystone species
               thus providing cohesion to whole system;
           l. Carnivores will tend to prey more on the most abundant herbivore species
               allowing a wider diversity of herbivores to coexist;
                                           – 11 –                                     2225 – 6609M


(c)   To what extent is an anthropocentric value system more appropriate than other
      value systems in addressing issues of sustainability?                                    [9]

      Answers may demonstrate:
      • understanding concepts & terminology of anthropocentrism/
         ecocentrism/technocentrism; social/economic/environmental sustainability;
         environmental law & legislation; Carbon & water taxes; UNEP; CITES; Montreal
         protocol; COP conferences; Fishing regulations; quotas; renewable resources;
         sustainable yield; circular economy; etc.
      • breadth in addressing and linking range of anthropocentric values/strategies
         with different aspects of sustainability.
      • examples of anthropocentric values, strategies, international bodies and
         aspects of sustainable living/development etc.
      • balanced analysis evaluating extent to which an anthropocentric value system
         is more or less beneficial in addressing sustainability than other value systems .
      • a conclusion that is consistent with, and supported by analysis and
         examples given e.g. While anthropocentrism may share with ecocentrism a
         central concern for sustainability it has the added concern to enforce its values
         through legislation and agreements rather than relying on the widespread
         altruism of human societies.

      Please see markbands on page 18.
                                                 – 12 –                                      2225 – 6609M


5.   (a)   Outline four ways in which atmospheric nitrogen and nitrogen oxides may influence
           natural ecosystems.                                                                        [4]

           a.   Nitrogen may be converted to nitrates by nitrogen fixing bacteria;
           b.   The nitrogen can then be used by plants;
           c.   Nitrogen thus becomes a constituent of all proteins in the ecosystem;
           d.   Lightning may convert nitrogen to nitrates that feed plants;
           e.   Nitrogen oxides may combine with water to form acid rain that damages
                ecosystems;
           f.   Nitrous oxide is a greenhouse gas that will lead to higher temperatures in
                ecosystems;
           g.   Nitrogen oxides lead to the formation of tropospheric ozone that damages
                plants;
           h.   Nitrogen oxides lead to the formation of photochemical smog that inhibits
                photosynthesis;

     Note to examiners: Credit can be given for applying above MPs to terrestrial or aquatic
     systems.

     (b)   Describe methods that could be used to assess the impact of an industrial effluent
           on the biotic index of a river.                                                            [7]

           a.   Identify sites at intervals upstream and downstream from point of effluence;
           b.   Take sufficient samples to be statistically significant;
           c.   Lay down a quadrat on river bed;
           d.   Hold net downstream of quadrat;
           e.   Kick/disturb substrate in quadrat;
           f.   Empty net contents into tray;
           g.   Identify different species using identification key or similar;
           h.   Estimate abundance of tolerant and sensitive species;
           i.   Return all invertebrates to sample site;
           j.   Use data to calculate Biotic Index;
           k.   Compare biotic indices upstream and downstream of effluence;

     Note to examiners: Do not credit methods for direct measurement of pollution, BOD or
     Simpsons index – Q specifically addresses biotic index.
                                           – 13 –                                   2225 – 6609M


(c)   With reference to named examples, evaluate the role of ecotourism as part of the
      conservation strategy for species and habitats.                                        [9]

      Answers may demonstrate:
      •   understanding concepts & terminology of conservation; biodiversity;
          ecotourism; national parks; wild life sanctuaries; local
          business/employment/hospitality; environmental impacts; ownership;
          legislation; funding; flagship species etc.;
      •   breadth in addressing and linking range of ecotourism sites/endeavours with
          conservation objectives and their degree of success.
      •   examples of ecotourism associated with conservation projects etc.
      •   balanced analysis evaluating extent to which ecotourism contributes
          positively and negatively to the aims of conservation.
      •   a conclusion that is consistent with, and supported by analysis and
          examples given e.g. While the attraction of large numbers of people will
          inevitably bring some stress to natural systems, economics is such that the
          conservation of large areas of habitat has a significant cost that can only be
          met through ecotourism.

      Please see markbands on page 18.
                                                 – 14 –                                   2225 – 6609M


6.   (a)   Outline four disadvantages of wind as a renewable source of energy.                     [4]

           a.   Relies on sufficient and consistent supplies of wind;
           b.   May provide a hazard to birds in flight;
           c.   May be destroy aesthetic appeal of landscape;
           d.   May be constructed from non-recyclable materials;
           e.   May have limited lifespan;
           f.   May have high installation costs;
           g.   May cause noise pollution;
           h.   Because of noise, amenity etc, sites of wind farms need to be some distance
                from urban areas;
           i.   May decrease property values in vicinity;
           j.   Associated batteries may have environmental impact through mining/disposal;



     (b)   Evaluate two strategies for preventing overfishing.                                     [7]

           a. e.g. Restrict fishing to given seasons;
           Pros:
           b. Reduces total quantity of fish harvest;
           c. Avoids disturbance of fish during reproductive season;
           d. Prevents capture of immature fish yet to grow;
           Cons:
           e. Requires policing/fines etc.;
           f. Restricts constant availability/flow of supply;
           g. Climate change may lead to changed seasons;

           h. e.g. Restrict fishing intake i.e. net size/number of boats/quotas;
           Pros:
           i. Reduces total quantity of harvest;
           j. Fixing mesh size can eliminate harvest of immature fish;
           k. Restrictions can share out total harvest/avoid monopoly;
           Cons:
           l. Requires policing/fines etc.;
           m. Reduces profit margins for fishers;
           n. Appropriate quotas are difficult to determine;
           o. Monitoring fish harvests can be difficult/inaccurate;


     Note to examiners: Note award 4 max per strategy (3 max if only pros or only cons are
     mentioned). Allow credit along similar lines for other strategies e.g. switching to
     aquaculture / imposing fishing zones/marine protected areas / restricting mesh size etc.
                                          – 15 –                                  2225 – 6609M


(c)   To what extent can technology address the impacts of overpopulation?                 [9]

      Answers may demonstrate:
      • understanding concepts & terminology of contraception; pollution; waste
         management; food production; water stress; carbon capture technology;
         renewable energy sources; catalytic converters; scrubbers; GMOS; vertical
         farming; aquaponics; desalination; water treatment; green architecture; etc.
      • breadth in addressing and linking a range of impacts of overpopulation
         including impacts on pollution; food & water supply; waste management;
         urbanisation with technological solutions.
      • examples of overpopulation impacts in the areas of pollution; food & water
         supply; waste management etc.
      • balanced analysis evaluating extent to which technology can be effective or
         ineffective in addressing issues of overpopulation.
      • a conclusion that is consistent with, and supported by analysis and
         examples given e.g. Technology goes a long way to address the impacts of
         overpopulation but these impacts are probably most severe in countries that do
         not have the financial and technological resources to apply it.

      Please see markbands on page 18.
                                                 – 16 –                                    2225 – 6609M


7.   (a)   Outline the similarities and differences between crude birth rate and doubling time.     [4]

           a.   Crude birth rate (CBR) is the average number of births per 1000 individuals in a
                population;
           b.   Doubling time (DT) is the time it would take for a population to double in size;
           c.   DT is estimated as 70 divided by the natural increase rate (as a %);
           d.   Both are based on mean values;
           e.   Both give some indication of potential for growth;
           f.   CBR focuses on number of offspring/DT focuses on growth of whole population;
           g.   Doubling time is an estimation whereas CBR is an accurate calculation;
           h.   DT takes into account death rates whereas CBR does not;

     Note to examiners: Award 3 max if only similarities or only differences re given

     (b)   Evaluate the use of reservoirs and drought-resistant crops as a means of
           sustainably managing water supply.                                                       [7]

           Reservoirs (4 max):
           Pros: (3 max)
           a. Dampens seasonal oscillations of available rainfall;
           b. Provides a diversity of habitat;
           c. Can be utilised for leisure activity/water sports;
           d. Low maintenance;
           Cons:(3 max)
           e. High set-up costs;
           f. Water may still need treatment for human consumption;
           g. Breeding ground for disease vectors (e.g. mosquitoes);
           h. Can lose a lot of water through evaporation;
           i. Construction may destroy habitats/require relocation of settlements;

           Drought-resistant crops (4 max):
           Pros: (3max)
           j. Reduces agricultural demand for water supply;
           k. Enables higher crop productivity;
           l. Allows agriculture in previously unproductive lands;
           Cons: (3 max)
           m. Relatively expensive crops;
           n. Low genetic diversity (if GMOs);
           o. Limited range of such crops available;
                                           – 17 –                                  2225 – 6609M


(c)   Feedback is a concept relevant to many systems. Justify its usefulness in
      understanding the sustainability of named systems.                                    [9]

      Answers may demonstrate:
      • understanding concepts & terminology of positive and negative feedback;
         population dynamics; positive feedback in accelerated early growth; negative
         feedback in stabilised carrying capacity; predator prey relationships; global
         warming/cloud formation/melting of glaciers; etc.
      • breadth in addressing and linking a range of ‘feedback’ mechanisms to their
         role in sustainability for a range of systems.
      • examples of different feedbacks occurring in a range of named systems.
      • balanced analysis evaluating extent to which the concept of a ‘feedback’ does
         or does not contribute to our understanding of how sustainability is achieved in
         systems.
      • a conclusion that is consistent with, and supported by analysis and
         examples given e.g. Negative feedback obviously leads to a stable equilibrium
         which is the basis for sustainability but positive feedback leads toward
         accelerated change which in principle will be unsustainable, but may
         nevertheless contribute to sustainability, for example, in leading to the rapid
         restoration of a collapsed population.

      Please see markbands on page 18.
                                                  – 18 –                                         2225 – 6609M


Section B, part (c) markbands

       Marks                                         Level descriptor

                 The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below and is not
         0       relevant to the question.

                 The response contains:
                 • minimal evidence of knowledge and understanding of ESS issues or concepts
                 • fragmented knowledge statements poorly linked to the context of the question
        1–3      • some appropriate use of ESS terminology
                 • no examples where required, or examples with insufficient explanation/relevance
                 • superficial analysis that amounts to no more than a list of facts/ideas
                 • judgments/conclusions that are vague or not supported by evidence/argument.

                 The response contains:
                 • some evidence of sound knowledge and understanding of ESS issues and concepts
                 • knowledge statements effectively linked to the context of the question
        4–6      • largely appropriate use of ESS terminology
                 • some use of relevant examples where required, but with limited explanation
                 • clear analysis that shows a degree of balance
                 • some clear judgments/conclusions, supported by limited evidence/arguments.
                 The response contains:
                 • substantial evidence of sound knowledge and understanding of ESS issues and
                    concepts
                 • a wide breadth of knowledge statements effectively linked with each other, and
                    to the context of the question
        7–9      • consistently appropriate and precise use of ESS terminology
                 • effective use of pertinent, well-explained examples, where required, showing
                    some originality
                 • thorough, well-balanced, insightful analysis
                 • explicit judgments/conclusions that are well-supported by evidence/arguments and
                    that include some critical reflection.
