2225 – 6606M




               Markscheme


                 May 2025


    Environmental systems and societies


               Standard level


                  Paper 2




17 pages
                                            –2–                                         2225 – 6606M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2025

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2025

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2025

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                   –3–                                      2225 – 6606M


Subject details: Environmental systems and societies SLP2
Markscheme
Mark allocation

Candidates are required to answer:
• ALL questions in Section A [25] and TWO questions in Section B [40].
• The maximum total = [65].


1.   Environmental systems and societies uses marking points and markbands to determine the
     achievement of candidates

     When using marking points (All of this paper except Section B, part (c) questions):
       i.    A markscheme often has more marking points than the total allows. This is intentional
      ii.    Each marking point has a separate line and the end is shown by means of a semi-colon (;)
      iii.   Where a mark is awarded, a tick/check () must be placed in the text at the precise point
             where it becomes clear that the candidate deserves the mark. One tick to be shown for each
             mark awarded
     iv.     The order of marking points does not have to be as in the markscheme, unless stated
             otherwise.

     When using markbands (Only for Section B, part (c) questions):
       i.    Read the response and determine which band the response fits into
      ii.    Then re-read the response to determine where the response fits within the band
      iii.   Annotate the response to indicate your reasoning behind the awarding of the mark
             Do not use ticks at this point
     iv.     Decide on a mark for the response
      v.     At the end of the response place the required number of ticks to enable RM Assessor to
             input the correct number of marks for the response.


2.   An alternative answer or wording is indicated in the markscheme by a slash (/). Either wording can
     be accepted.

3.   Words in brackets ( ) in the markscheme are not necessary to gain the mark.

4.   Words that are underlined are essential for the mark.

5.   If the candidate’s answer has the same “meaning” or can be clearly interpreted as being of
     equivalent significance, detail and validity as that in the markscheme then award the mark.
     Where this point is considered to be particularly relevant in a question it is emphasized by
     OWTTE (or words to that effect).
                                                   –4–                                         2225 – 6606M


6.   Remember that many candidates are writing in a second language. Effective communication is
     more important than grammatical accuracy.

7.   Occasionally, a part of a question may require an answer that is required for subsequent
     marking points. If an error is made in the first marking point then it should be penalized. However, if
     the incorrect answer is used correctly in subsequent marking points then follow through marks
     should be awarded. When marking, indicate this by adding ECF (error carried forward) on the
     script.

8.   Do not penalize candidates for errors in units or significant figures, unless it is specifically referred
     to in the markscheme.
                                                    –5–                                         2225 – 6606M


                                                Section A
1.   (a)   Identify the category with the lowest proportion of seafood market value in Figure 1.         [1]

           Algae;

     (b)   (i)    Using Figure 1, calculate the projected increase in the harvest of molluscs
                  between 2019 and 2050.                                                                 [1]

                  (42 million – 20 million) 22 000 000 / 22 million (T) (accept 19 – 25 million T);

     Note to examiners: units NOT required this question. Do not accept % value.



     (b)   (ii)   Outline one reason for the increase referred to in 1.(b)(i).                           [1]

                  a.   Rising world population causes increased demand for food...;
                  b.   ...increased demand for high protein foods;
                  c.   Improved technology/techniques/management for breeding and
                       harvesting molluscs;
                  d.   Greater affluence in some countries as molluscs are often a high-
                       value/preferred, speciality food;
                  e.   Mollusc farming is relatively less environmentally burdening / molluscs are
                       filter feeders so work well in integrated aquaculture facilities/can clean
                       water;

     (c)   Describe two possible reasons for the difference between marine fish capture
           harvest and aquaculture harvest in Figure 1.                                                  [2]

           Marine fish capture is much higher because:
           a. Many marine fish can be migratory/have specific niche requirements, so difficult
               to raise on farms;
           b. Industrial capture methods may be cheaper/ large investments needed for
               setting up aquaculture farms.;
           c. Lack of technology/infrastructure not in place for aquaculture;
           d. Large size of many marine fish makes farming them difficult and expensive;
           e. Demand for wild caught species because of perceived quality/taste/traditions/
               environmental reasons, etc.;
                                            –6–                                       2225 – 6606M


(d)   Evaluate the use of aquaculture in meeting the projected harvest of global seafood,
      as shown in Figure 1.                                                                    [4]

      Pros [3max]:
      a. Seafood demand is expected to rise significantly by 2050, so it can provide
          new/more sources of food;
      b. Aquaculture harvest would reduce stress on wild fisheries/farming land;
      c. Provides economic opportunities for coastal nations, particularly developing
          nations;
      d. Waste and nutrients can be cycled, making it more sustainable / usually
          reduces food miles;
      e. More than one species can be harvested in Integrated multi-trophic aquaculture
          (IMTA);
      f. Many forms of seafood have a high protein value;
      g. Aquaculture, usually, is more efficient (economically, ecologically) than capture;

      Cons [3max]:
      a. May lead to loss of habitat in certain ecosystems;
      b. Greater localized aquatic pollution (antibiotics, medicines, nutrient pollution,
         etc.);
      c. Spread of diseases and escaped species (some involving genetically modified
         organisms);
      d. Ethical concerns towards mass fish farming or genetically modified organisms
         (GMOs);
      e. It is not economically viable to farm large marine species like tuna with
         aquaculture;
      f. May raise local water conflicts;
      g. Difficult to certify for sustainability/social responsibility;
      h. Current frameworks suit better, in most case, large-scale industrial aquaculture
         (rather than small-scale farmers);
      i. Current share of marine fish coming from aquaculture suggests it is unpopular;
      j. Aquaculture has high set-up/maintenance costs / requires a lot of resources i.e.
         fish feed/antibiotics;


Note to examiner: Credit any valid advantage or disadvantage. Do not credit simplistic
arguments, like more costly, more sustainable, more efficient, etc.

Credit other valid responses
                                                  –7–                                       2225 – 6606M


2.   (a)   Identify the altitude with the highest concentration of ozone shown in Figure 2(a).       [1]

           22–24 km;

     Note to examiners: Do not credit if units are omitted.

     (b)   With reference to Figure 2(a), describe how a decreased concentration of ozone
           between 20 and 30 kilometers can impact living organisms.                                 [2]

           a.   Ozone in the stratosphere absorbs ultraviolet radiation from the sun / Less
                ozone means more ultraviolet radiation reaching the earth’s surface;
           b.   Increased UV radiation results in increased incidence of cataracts/mutation
                during cell division/skin cancer/melanoma;
           c.   Increased UV radiation can damage plant leaf tissues/algae impairing
                photosynthesis;
           d.   This can result in reduced overall productivity in the ecosystem/available up the
                food chain;

     (c)   State one possible impact of increased ground-level ozone concentration on human
           health.                                                                                   [1]

           Damages lungs/lung tissue / irritates respiratory tissue/bronchitis/emphysema / eye
           irritation / lung cancer / cardiovascular issues;

     Note to examiners: Do not credit conditions relating to UV radiation or global warming i.e.
     cataracts, skin cancer etc.

     (d)   Outline two possible reasons for the change in ozone exposure for Ethiopia shown
           in Figure 2(b).                                                                           [2]

           a.   Increased population leading to increased air pollution/burning of fossil fuels;
           b.   Growing urbanization/industrial sector increasing/trapping air pollution/burning
                of fossil fuels;
           c.   Relaxed environmental standards leading to reduced mitigation efforts;
           d.   Higher standards of living/increased car use/leading to increased energy
                use/consumption;
           e.   Possible defects in data collection;
           f.   Climate change increasing days of sunlight (increased UV for formation) /
                climate change decreasing precipitation that would normally clean the air;
                                                  –8–                                         2225 – 6606M


     (e)   Outline two possible ways countries can reduce their ozone exposure, as shown in
           Figure 2(b).                                                                                [2]

           a.   Increased investment into renewable technology/energy sources;
           b.   Stricter laws/taxes for vehicle/industry emissions of NOx & VOCs / Set/enforce
                stricter ozone air concentration standards;
           c.   Public policy initiative (e.g. don’t drive days/vehicle bans/improved public
                transportation/promote biking etc.);
           d.   Technological improvements (e.g. catalytic convertors/scrubbers/electric
                vehicles);
           e.   Improve energy efficiency in buildings/appliances;
           f.   Promote sustainable agricultural practices that do not emit methane (a VOC);
           g.   Promote sustainable behaviour, like carpooling, reduced use of solvents/paints;
           h.   Planting trees/greening in cities reduces ozone levels;


3.   (a)   Identify the household waste category with the highest carbon impact from
           incineration in Figure 3.                                                                   [1]

           Plastic;


     (b)   Describe one possible reason why metal waste has lower overall carbon impacts
           than paper/cardboard waste in Figure 3.                                                     [1]

           a.   Metal waste is recycled at a much greater level than paper/cardboard waste /
                metal waste is recycled while paper/cardboard is not / recycling of metal
                reduces overall carbon impact;
           b.   More paper/cardboard waste is put into landfill than metal waste / landfill
                increases the overall carbon impact;


     c)    Outline two disadvantages of using incineration to dispose of plastic, as shown in
           Figure 3.                                                                                   [2]

           a.   Potential release of air pollution/harmful
                chemicals/carcinogens/toxins/particulate matter into the air;
           b.   Release of greenhouse gases, accelerating climate change;
           c.   Reduces potential of plastics to be recycled;
           d.   Non-biodegradable/toxic ash will be buried in landfills, impacting the
                environment in the long-term;
           e.   The facilities are costly to set up/operate / require technology/expertise;

     Note to examiners: do not credit “pollution” alone.
                                            –9–                                       2225 – 6606M


d)    Outline two disadvantages with recycling plastic waste as an approach to
      decreasing carbon impacts, as shown in Figure 3.                                         [2]

      a.   Many plastics cannot be recycled;
      b.   Difficult to separate different types of plastic;
      c.   Recycling has other environmental problems which can outweigh carbon
           impacts (e.g. water pollution, etc.);
      d.   Plastic waste is a minor/relatively small contributor to carbon impacts compared
           to other waste categories;
      e.   Many plastics can be reused, which is more efficient than recycling;
      f.   Costly/energy intensive/still produces GHG to recycle plastic;



(e)   Suggest two pollution management strategies that could be used to decrease the
      carbon impacts from clothing waste in Scotland.                                          [2]


      a.   Laws legislation on types of fabrics used to increase natural/compostable
           material/sustainable production/limits on consumption;
      b.   Subsidies/tax incentives for local shops/compostable clothing/recycling/donating
           used clothes;
      c.   Awareness campaigns to increase donating/recycling/sustainable
           fabrics/upcycling;
      d.   Improve/implement infrastructure to make donating/reusing/recycling easier;
      e.   Afforestation/carbon capture strategies to absorb atmospheric CO2;


Note to examiners: Only credit strategies, and not simply “recycling/donating/reusing
clothes”.
                                                 – 10 –                                      2225 – 6606M


                                              Section B
4.   (a)   Identify four differences between a climax community and a pioneer community.              [4]

           Climax community has:
           a. Greater species diversity/biodiversity;
           b. Greater habitat diversity / more niches;
           c. Longer food chains / more branched food webs;
           d. Greater nutrient cycling / larger decomposer community;
           e. Deeper/more developed soil;
           f. Greater GPP/biomass/storages of energy;
           g. Greater community respiration;
           h. More K selected species;
           i. (Often) woody shrubs/trees/larger animals whereas pioneer might be more
               characterised by lichens/mosses etc.
           j. Greater resilience (due to the increased complexity);

     Note to examiners: Accept converse statements.

     (b)   Explain how a community of herbivores contributes to the stability of the whole
           ecosystem.                                                                                 [7]


           a.   Herbivores will feed on producers/plants;
           b.   This will cause a reduction in number/regulate population size of producers…;
           c.   …which will lead to reduction in herbivores;

           d.   Herbivores would also pass on biomass/energy to a carnivore community;
           e.   Their numbers would decrease due to predation…;
           f.   …which will lead to decrease in carnivores and so on;
           g.   …thereby regulating the consumer community;
           h.   These would be examples of negative feedback;

           i. Through defaecation/shedding/death they will support decomposer community /
              provide nutrients for plants;
           j. Herbivores may increase distribution of plants through dispersal of seeds;
           k. Herbivores may compete with one another regulating their populations;
           l. Increases biodiversity/genetic diversity and therefore resilience so less prone to
              tipping point;
           m. Some herbivores (e.g. elephants/bison) maintain savannahs/grasslands by
              knocking down/grazing on trees;
                                             – 11 –                                     2225 – 6606M


(c)   To what extent is an ecocentric value system more appropriate than other value
      systems in addressing issues of sustainability?                                            [9]

      Answers may demonstrate:
      • understanding concepts & terminology of
         ecocentrism/anthropocentrism/technocentrism; social/economic/environmental
         sustainability; biorights; intrinsic value; renewable resources; sustainable yield;
         recycling; circular economy; low technology; local governance; food miles;
         vegetarianism/veganism; subsistence living; etc
      • breadth in addressing and linking range of ecocentric values/strategies with
         different aspects of sustainability.
      • examples of ecocentric values and strategies and aspects of sustainable
         living/development etc
      • balanced analysis evaluating extent to which an ecocentric value system is
         more or less beneficial in addressing sustainability than other value systems .
      • a conclusion that is consistent with, and supported by analysis and
         examples given e.g. With the high regard in which it holds nature and the
         environment it is inevitable that ecocentric values and strategies for living are
         bound to be non-destructive and sustainable.

Please see markbands on page 17.
                                                  – 12 –                                      2225 – 6606M


5.   (a)   Outline four transfers of carbon that will influence its atmospheric storage.               [4]

           Carbon may reduce atmospheric storage through:
           a. Dissolving in oceans;
           b. Uptake from plants for photosynthesis;

           Carbon my increase atmospheric storage through:
           c. Release from living organisms from respiration;
           d. Release from burning/incineration/combustion of fossil fuels;
           e. Release from decomposers from decomposition;
           f. Forest fires;
           g. Released from livestock/ruminants;

     Note to examiners: There must be an indication of the carbon movement to or from the
     atmosphere.

     (b)   Describe methods that could be used to measure a change in species diversity of
           invertebrates along a river.                                                                [7]

           a.   Sample at regular intervals along river;
           b.   Take sufficient samples to be statistically significant / repeat at each sampling
                site;
           c.   Lay down a quadrat on river bed;
           d.   Hold net downstream of quadrat;
           e.   Kick/disturb substrate in quadrat;
           f.   Identify each species using identification key;
           g.   Estimate/record abundance of each species;
           h    Return invertebrates to sample site;
           i    Use data to calculate Simpson’s diversity Index;
           j.   Standardize sampling such as the same number of kicks/duration of
                collection/time of day/year;


     (c)   With reference to named examples, to what extent is local involvement in
           conservation more valuable than international involvement                                   [9]

           Answers may demonstrate:
           • understanding concepts & terminology of conservation; biodiversity; IUCN
              Red list; CITES; Man and Biosphere programme/reserves; RSPB; WWF;
              GOs/NGOs; local wilding projects; national parks; ownership; legislation;
              funding; ecotourism etc;
           • breadth in addressing and linking range of international and local bodies or
              indigenous groups with conservation projects and their degree of success.
           • examples of international and local environmental organisations/projects etc
           • balanced analysis evaluating extent to which international engagement is
              more or less beneficial to conservation than local.
           • a conclusion that is consistent with, and supported by analysis and
              examples given e.g. While international involvement often brings with it
              valuable economic and technological resources, having local communities
              actively invested in the project can be invaluable to its success.

     Please see markbands on page 17.
                                                 – 13 –                                     2225 – 6606M


6.   (a)   Outline the similarities and differences between the terms “crude birth rate” and
           “total fertility rate”.                                                                   [4]

           Up to two marks for definitions:

           a.   Crude birth rate (CBR) is the average number of births per 1000 individuals;
           b.   Total fertility rate (TFR) is the average number of children each woman has
                over her lifetime;

           Similarities:
           c. Both refer to number of births;
           d. Both refer to mean values;
           e. Both give some indication of potential for population growth/ reproductive
               patterns;

           Differences:
           f. TFR focuses on births per woman whereas CBR focuses on births in whole
                population;
           g. TFR has an element of time, because it is over a woman’s lifetime, whereas
                CBR is a snapshot;
           h. TFR accounts for age distribution (of women) whereas CBR does not;


     (b)   Evaluate two strategies for preventing the formation of photochemical smog.               [7]

           a. e.g. Reduce fossil fuel use/switch to renewable energy sources;
           Pros:
           b. Addresses the source of the problem;
           c. Prevents many other environmental impacts/pollutants (eg. enhanced
               greenhouse effect/climate change/acid rain);
           d. No finite limit to renewable energy resource;

           Cons:
           e. Involves developing new infrastructure/technology/expertise;
           f. May be difficult to persuade people to change their lifestyles;
           g. New technology may be expensive in short term;
           h Environmental costs of producing/storing waste from batteries/turbines/solar
              panels/hydroelectric dams;

           i. e.g. Use of scrubbers/catalytic converters:
           Pros:
           j. Catalytic converters remove NOx/VOCs/hybdocarbons/CO from emissions /
               scrubbers remove SO2/also prevent acid rain;
           k. Allows continued use of fossil fuels;
           l. Established effective/readily available technology;

           Cons:
           m. Doesn’t eliminate all greenhouse gases/CO2;
           n. Technology has limited lifespan;
           o. Still using a non-renewable resource/does not address the source of the
              problem;
           p. Can be expensive for individuals/are often stolen from vehicles for metals;

     Note to examiners: Note award 4 max per strategy (3 max if only pros or only cons are
     mentioned). Only credit two strategies, but consider the two highest scoring strategies.
     Allow credit along similar lines for other strategies
                                             – 14 –                                      2225 – 6606M


(c)   To what extent are natural limiting factors likely to stabilise human population
      growth?                                                                                     [9]

      Answers may demonstrate:
      • understanding concepts & terminology of natural factors such as disease,
         pandemics, natural disasters, resource depletion; carrying capacity; Boserup
         and Malthus models; limiting factors of food production; water supply; pollution;
         waste management; carbon capture technology; renewable energy sources;
         catalytic converters; scrubbers; GMOS; vertical farming; aquaponics;
         desalination; water treatment; green architecture; etc
      • breadth in addressing and linking a range of limiting factors such as disease;
         food & water supply; available land for housing; other density-dependent
         factors; natural disasters; climate/weather conditions; pollution; waste
         management; urbanisation; with their likelihood of stabilising human population
         growth.
      • examples of limiting factors in the areas of pollution; food & water supply;
         diseases; land availability; waste management and the ways in which they may
         be overcome etc
      • balanced analysis evaluating extent to which natural limiting factors can be
         effective or ineffective in stabilising human population growth.
      • a conclusion that is consistent with, and supported by analysis and
         examples given e.g. To a great extent the Boserup model has been supported
         in that technological development has neutralised many potential natural limiting
         factors but, rationally, in a system of finite resources there must be an outer limit
         beyond which we cannot go.

Please see markbands on page 17.
                                                  – 15 –                                      2225 – 6606M


7.   (a)   Outline four disadvantages of hydropower as a source of renewable energy.                   [4]

           a.   Dams may involve flooding to create reservoirs/destruction of terrestrial
                ecosystems;
           b.   May reduce downstream supplies of water;
           c.   May utilise non-renewable resources in construction;
           d.   May interfere with natural migration of aquatic species / turbines may kill fish
                species;
           e.   May involve high costs for construction/maintenence;
           f.   May increase build up of silt and become non-functional/decrease
                sedimentation downstream interfering with nutrient cycling;
           g.   May force migration of local population;
           h.   May provide a reservoir for water-borne diseases/vectors;
           i.   May break/breach and cause flooding downstream;
           j.   Flooded vegetation/decomposition can release methane/GHG;
           k.   Dependent on rainfall/can dry up during droughts;


     (b)   Evaluate rainwater harvesting and desalination as a means of sustainably managing
           water supply.                                                                               [7]

           Rainwater harvesting (4 max):
           Pros:
           a. Low cost supply of water;
           b. Low environmental impact/low technology;
           c. Renewable supply / reduces use of potable water;
           Cons:
           d. Quantity very limited for agricultural purposes;
           e. Weather/climate dependent;
           f. May contain atmospheric pollutants / isn’t generally potable;

     Note to examiners: Award 3 max if only pros or only cons are addressed

           Desalination (4 max):
           Pros:
           g. Vast supply of sea water available;
           h. Produces potable water;
           i. Independent of climate/precipitation;
           j. Provides water security/independence;
           Cons:
           k. High cost supply:
           l. Limited to coastal location;
           m. Disposal of leftover salt;
           n. Requires excessive energy supply;
           o. Produces significant noise pollution;

     Note to examiners: Award 3 max if only pros or only cons are addressed
                                            – 16 –                                    2225 – 6606M


(c)   A ‘cycle’ is a concept relevant to many systems. Justify its usefulness in
      understanding the sustainability of named systems.                                       [9]

      Answers may demonstrate:
      • understanding concepts & terminology of cycles; carbon/nitrogen/water
         cycles; organic & inorganic storages linked by death/decomposition and
         photosynthesis; convection cells causing atmospheric circulation etc,
         convection cells in lithosphere causing tectonic movement; oceanic conveyor
         belt; nutrient upwelling; recycling; circular economy etc
      • breadth in addressing and linking a range of ‘cycles’ to their role in
         sustainability for a range of systems.
      • examples of different cycles occurring in a range of named systems.
      • balanced analysis evaluating extent to which the concept of a ‘cycle’ does or
         does not contribute to our understanding of how sustainability is achieved in
         systems.
      • a conclusion that is consistent with, and supported by analysis and
         examples given e.g. A cycle inevitably demonstrates how material or energy
         flowing out of one storage will eventually return to that storage as an input, and
         this will lead to long term stability which is at the root of sustainability.

Please see markbands on page 17.
                                                  – 17 –                                         2225 – 6606M


Section B, part (c) markbands

       Marks                                         Level descriptor

                 The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below and is not
         0       relevant to the question.

                 The response contains:
                 • minimal evidence of knowledge and understanding of ESS issues or concepts
                 • fragmented knowledge statements poorly linked to the context of the question
        1–3      • some appropriate use of ESS terminology
                 • no examples where required, or examples with insufficient explanation/relevance
                 • superficial analysis that amounts to no more than a list of facts/ideas
                 • judgments/conclusions that are vague or not supported by evidence/argument.

                 The response contains:
                 • some evidence of sound knowledge and understanding of ESS issues and concepts
                 • knowledge statements effectively linked to the context of the question
        4–6      • largely appropriate use of ESS terminology
                 • some use of relevant examples where required, but with limited explanation
                 • clear analysis that shows a degree of balance
                 • some clear judgments/conclusions, supported by limited evidence/arguments.
                 The response contains:
                 • substantial evidence of sound knowledge and understanding of ESS issues and
                    concepts
                 • a wide breadth of knowledge statements effectively linked with each other, and
                    to the context of the question
        7–9      • consistently appropriate and precise use of ESS terminology
                 • effective use of pertinent, well-explained examples, where required, showing
                    some originality
                 • thorough, well-balanced, insightful analysis
                 • explicit judgments/conclusions that are well-supported by evidence/arguments and
                    that include some critical reflection.
