M15/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                    May / Mai / Mayo 2015


                  English / Anglais / Inglés B


                         Higher level
                       Niveau supérieur
                        Nivel superior


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2




9 pages/páginas
                                 –2–              M15/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and must
not be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.



Ces remarques pour la notation sont confidentielles. Leur usage
est réservé exclusivement aux examinateurs participant à
cette session.

Ces remarques sont la propriété de l’Organisation du Baccalauréat
International. Toute reproduction ou distribution à de tierces
personnes sans l’autorisation préalable du centre de l’évaluation
de l’IB est interdite.



Estas notas para la corrección son confidenciales y para el uso
exclusivo de los examinadores en esta convocatoria de exámenes.

Son propiedad del Bachillerato Internacional y no se pueden
reproducir ni distribuir a ninguna otra persona sin la autorización
previa del centro de evaluación del IB.
                                                  –3–                 M15/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


These marking notes give additional information for marking paper 2. When marking both sections, keep
in mind that neither subject specific knowledge nor candidates’ personal opinions, as such, should be
assessed, although Criterion B marks may be influenced by how successfully knowledge or opinions are
handled in the message.

These notes are intended to define the top mark of the scale in this examination. The phrase,
“a good answer”, is intended to refer to scripts which are likely to be placed in the 9 to 10 band
(5 for criterion C) of descriptors. Scripts should be marked proportionately lower to the degree to which
they fail to meet these requirements.

In each case, good answers will meet most, though not necessarily all, of the following requirements.

Word count

At HL, students are required to write a minimum of 250 words in Section A and 150 words in Section B.
Failure to write the minimum number of words will result in a [1] penalty under criterion A. There is no
penalty for exceeding 400 words in Section A or 250 words in Section B: the whole text should be taken
into consideration in the award of marks.

Criterion A – Language

A good answer will have very few language gaps, if any, and slips or flaws very rarely affect meaning.


  Language
  Not all errors have the same importance, and examiners should bear this in mind. Some errors
  affect the communication of meaning significantly, and others do not. Also, some errors indicate a
  fundamental lack of command of the language, while others may simply indicate a moment of
  forgetfulness.
  SLIPS – mistakes at all levels of difficulty, but erratic and occasional – eg the candidate normally
  forms past tenses well, but occasionally forgets “-ed”
  FLAWS – errors occur more regularly, particularly in certain structures – eg past tenses are
  formed correctly quite often, but are not really reliable, and there may be basic confusions
  (eg past simple versus present perfect)
  GAPS – some structures are rarely correct, or simply don’t appear – eg the past tenses are
  needed, but do not appear.
                                                  –4–                M15/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                              Section A
1.   Cultural diversity

     You watched a film in which the main characters did not have a common language but still
     managed to work collaboratively. Write an article for your school magazine describing how the
     characters communicated with each other and reflecting on how necessary it is to share a
     language.

     A good answer:

     Criterion B – Message
      will describe the way(s) in which the characters communicated
      will reflect on the necessity of sharing a language (eg a lingua franca, or even non-verbal
        communication)
      will address, ie in more than a couple of sentences, both parts of the question (describe and
        reflect); if the script fails to address both parts, it may achieve the 5–6 band only if the ideas
        that are developed are “coherent” with supporting details that are “mostly appropriate”
      will provide supporting details drawn from the film, which may be invented by the candidate
      will use paragraphing and cohesive devices which structure the development of ideas effectively.

     Criterion C – Format
      will adopt a semi-formal register
      will use a lively magazine style
      will have a relevant headline/title
      will have an engaging introduction and conclusion.
                                                  –5–                 M15/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   Customs and traditions

     To celebrate different traditions, your town council is holding a costume party in which all those
     who attend must wear traditional costumes. Write an email to a friend describing what your
     chosen costume is and why you have chosen it.

     A good answer:

     Criterion B – Message
      will describe the selected costume
      will explain clearly why the costume was chosen (traditional or ethnic significance, cultural
        importance, link to specific national celebrations, etc)
      will address, ie in more than a couple of sentences, both parts of the question (describe and
        explain); if the script fails to address both parts, it may achieve the 5–6 band only if the ideas
        that are developed are “coherent” with supporting details that are “mostly appropriate”
      will use paragraphing and cohesive devices which structure the development of ideas effectively.

     Criterion C – Format
      will adopt an informal register
      will adopt a lively, engaging style, perhaps with some “youth-speak”, eg “I’m good”, “Can’t wait”
      will maintain a clear sense of address to a specific person
      will have opening and closing salutations.

     N.B. Some limited use of textese (eg “4” for “four/for” and “u” for “you”) and/or emoticons is
     permissible.
                                                 –6–                M15/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   Health

     Young people in your town are increasingly too reliant on dietary supplements (such as energy
     boosters, bodybuilding supplements or weight loss supplements). To raise awareness about the
     issue, your principal asked you to give a talk to your schoolmates in which you discuss the severity
     of the issue and suggest how it can be overcome.

     A good answer:

     Criterion B – Message
      will discuss how severe reliance on dietary supplements is and perhaps provide examples
      will suggest the way(s) in which reliance on dietary supplements can be overcome
      will address, ie in more than a couple of sentences, both aspects of the question: the severity of
        the issue and way(s) to overcome it. If the script fails to cover one of the requirements, it may
        achieve the 5–6 band only if the ideas that are developed are reasonably “coherent” with
        supporting details that are “mostly appropriate”
      will have a clear overall structure, demonstrating a progression of ideas
      will use paragraphing and cohesive devices which structure the development of ideas effectively.

     Criterion C – Format
      will adopt a semi-formal to informal register, but with an appropriately serious tone
      will use speech rhetoric eg rhetorical questions, repetition
      will address the audience and keep contact with them throughout (eg use of “we” and “you” etc)
      will set out to catch the audience’s attention at the beginning, and leave a clear impression at
        the end.
                                                   –7–                 M15/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   Leisure

     Your school board plans to introduce an alternative educational programme that emphasizes
     learning through entertainment and would like to incorporate students’ suggestions into the new
     programme. Write a proposal in which you explain what your suggestions for the new programme
     are and how students will benefit from them.

     A good answer:

      Criterion B – Message
       will describe clearly the suggested programme, which evidently supports and emphasizes
         learning through entertainment (interpreted broadly to mean any programme that ‘interests and
         involves’ students)
       will state the benefits of applying the suggested programme
       will address, ie in more than a couple of sentences, both the description and the benefits; if the
         script fails to cover one of the requirements, it may achieve the 5–6 band only if the ideas that
         are developed are reasonably “coherent” with supporting details that are “mostly appropriate”
       will use paragraphing and cohesive devices which structure the development of ideas
         effectively
      may interpret ‘entertainment’ either as entertaining classroom activities, or as arts or leisure
         activities.


     Criterion C – Format
      will adopt a formal register
      will use features such as headings, short clear paragraphs, sections identified by
        numbers/letters/bullets, insetting, even if in the framework of a formal letter or email
      will direct the proposal to the specified audience
      will persuade through an enthusiastic tone.
                                                  –8–                M15/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


5.   Science and technology

     You recently read an article in which the author claimed that natural sciences (such as chemistry,
     biology or physics) are not as beneficial as social sciences (such as economics or history) in the
     21st century. Write a blog entry in which you discuss the claim and give reasons for your opinion.

     A good answer:

     Criterion B – Message
      will make the writer’s overall opinion very clear
      will compare the relative benefits of both natural and social sciences
      will address, ie in more than a couple of sentences, both ‘discuss’ and ‘give reasons’; if the
        script fails to cover one of the requirements, it may achieve the 5–6 band only if the ideas that
        are developed are reasonably “coherent” with supporting details that are “mostly appropriate”
      will provide support for the argument(s), where appropriate
      will use paragraphing and cohesive devices which structure the development of ideas
        effectively.

     Criterion C – Format
      will adopt a semi-formal to informal register
      will have an engaging title
      will use first person narration
      will show awareness of the reader, eg through direct address, a lively and interesting style, an
        invitation for comments.
                                                    –9–                 M15/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                                Section B
6.   Personal response

     Some people believe that happiness lies in being accepted by those around us while others insist
     that happiness is achieved only when we learn to accept ourselves.

     A good answer:

     Criterion B – Argument
      will address the main issue in the stimulus text: whether happiness is directly related to other
        people’s approval and acceptance or to our ability to accept ourselves irrespective of what
        others think or expect (it may also be a combination of both); scripts which do not address this
        issue should be marked down under “relevance”
      will not merely address the idea of ‘happiness’ in general terms; scripts which do so will achieve
        the 5–6 band only if the ideas that are developed are reasonably “coherent” with supporting
        details that are “mostly appropriate”
      will make the candidate’s viewpoint clear: the candidate may write a balanced argument or a
        polemic, adopt an analytic approach, etc
      will provide clear, coherent and detailed reasons for the candidate’s viewpoint(s)
      may personalize the issue by providing brief examples drawn from the candidate’s own
        experience
      may adopt unexpected or unconventional approaches (eg argument presented within an
        invented or fictional context) provided that there is a clear link to the key idea(s) in the stimulus.
