M15/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T




English B – Higher level – Paper 1
Anglais B – Niveau supérieur – Épreuve 1
Inglés B – Nivel superior – Prueba 1

Monday 4 May 2015 (morning)
Lundi 4 mai 2015 (matin)
Lunes 4 de mayo de 2015 (mañana)

1 h 30 m


Text booklet – Instructions to candidates
yy Do not open this booklet until instructed to do so.
yy This booklet contains all of the texts required for paper 1.
yy Answer the questions in the question and answer booklet provided.

Livret de textes – Instructions destinées aux candidats
yy N’ouvrez pas ce livret avant d’y être autorisé(e).
yy Ce livret contient tous les textes nécessaires à l’épreuve 1.
yy Répondez à toutes les questions dans le livret de questions et réponses fourni.

Cuaderno de textos – Instrucciones para los alumnos
yy No abra este cuaderno hasta que se lo autoricen.
yy Este cuaderno contiene todos los textos para la prueba 1.
yy Conteste todas las preguntas en el cuaderno de preguntas y respuestas.




                                                                                              2215 – 2226
     9 pages/páginas                                      © International Baccalaureate Organization 2015
                                                     –2–                  M15/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

Text A



         Come dine with us
         At first sight, it could easily be the food hall in a shopping centre
         or motorway service station, with its self-service counters and
         random combinations of tables, each one decorated with a
         small vase of flowers. Despite appearances to the contrary,
 5       this is no public cafeteria. The scene is, in fact, Samworth
         Enterprise Academy, in Leicester, United Kingdom. The
         innovative design of the school has placed the dining
         room – or restaurant, as it is called here – at its heart.

         The Academy, located in one of the most socially
10       deprived areas of the city, was conceived specifically with
         food and eating in mind. On this particular morning, the
         mums eat breakfast at one table, while at another a pupil
         sits hunched with his head down, his annoyed father in
         discussion with a teacher. The restaurant is also used as
15       a meeting room, and the three are talking about the boy’s
         progress.

         “In most schools you would go into an office to discuss your child, but our parents would
         find that difficult and perhaps intimidating,” Patricia Dubas, the principal, says. “Holding the
         meeting in the restaurant makes it more open somehow and less frightening.”

20       The approach taken by Samworth is to be the focus of an academic study that is going to
         be carried out by the University of Leicester. Unlike most research into the impact of food
         on young people, this one will examine how it affects social skills and general personal
         development. The correlation may not be immediately obvious but Dubas is on to something
         here. By providing free breakfast to any parents and pupils who want it, she is encouraging
25       an open-access policy, which has led to reduced rates of truancy. In addition, parents who
         participate in the day-to-day life at Samworth often take on voluntary, supervisory roles,
         which can lead to paid employment there.

         Nick Lalli will conduct the research over three years for his PhD. “Food has a huge role
         to play in personal and social development, including such aspects as promoting personal
30       hygiene. The skills pupils pick up in school will impact on their relationships,
         their interactions within the community and will have a motivating effect on their lives
         generally,” he says.


     ‘Come dine with us: Samworth Academy’s restaurant is more than just somewhere to serve lunch’,
                          Dorothy Lepkowska, 1 March 2012, The Independent. Used with permission.
                                                           –3–                 M15/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

Text B


          Pakistan Man: A stint with the [extra] ordinary
          By Jahanzaib Haque (Published: November 17, 2013)
              Share this article   Print this page        Email


         Meet Pakistan Man — the latest comic superhero to emerge as
         part of a growing trend of comics spilling over from the virtual
         world into print. Dubbed Pakistan’s first superhero, a claim some
         in the local community of amateur illustrators would dispute,
 5       Pakistan Man is the brainchild of 24-year-old Hassan Siddiqui.
         The comic is the logical culmination of a childhood passion for
         drawing cartoons. The road to Pakistan Man, however, was
         paved on Facebook.

         While most of Siddiqui’s cartoons were simple one-liners or
10       two to three panel affairs on local politics and culture, the
         young illustrator and writer decided to work on a larger
         creative project around a local superhero, an idea he had first
         conceived in college.

         The first issue of the comic is a fairly simple origin story* though its message is somewhat convoluted,
 15      something that perhaps unintentionally reflects the real issue of existing conflicting narratives about
         Pakistan and national identity.

         The son of poor parents, Pakistan Man assumes his heroic avatar after a chance encounter with
         Sultan Rahi, who later becomes his mentor. After five years of rigorous training and armed with a
         superhero costume and the ability to fly, he is ready to save Pakistan as instructed by Sultan Rahi.

20       The drawings are basic, the inking is digital and the plot is predictable, but this is perhaps necessary for
         an origin story. “Pakistan Man is meant to represent the Pakistani people, showing how anyone can
         become a superhero,” Siddiqui explains.

         The young creator points out that one of the biggest challenges to drawing comics in Pakistan is trying
         to tackle issues without offending people. The lack of knowledge about comic books as an alternate
25       form of creative expression does not help the situation either. Fortunately, the challenge of finding a
         publisher for the comic was bypassed by going down the self-publishing route.

         [ – X – ]  Pakistan Man sees a second or third issue, or ends 16 pages long, depends on how the current
         version fares with the audience. [ – 13 – ], while the dedication to publishing comics in the face of
         multiple hurdles is impressive, at the end of the day, Pakistan Man offers  [ – 14 – ]  that is not amateur
30       or already seen before. The plot is  [ – 15 – ], while the writing and jokes are childish and  [ – 16 – ]  to
         appeal to anyone over the age of 15. If our man with the cloak does return, he’ll  [ – 17 – ]  work on his
         one-liners more than his punches.

                                                    Adapted from Jahanzaib Haque, The Express Tribune (2013)



* origin story: an account explaining how fictional characters gained their superpowers

                                                                       Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                     –4–                M15/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

Text C




         Text removed for copyright reasons
         –5–                M15/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T




Text removed for copyright reasons




                     Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                  –6–               M15/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

Text D




                                 End of the Line




         When Frank and I stepped through the post office doors, there was a crowd gathered,
         gawking at the new fixture on the wall like a chorus of wide-mouthed frogs. I had to
         get closer, and that was where being a girl that’s scrawnier than a wire fence came in
         handy. Fortunately, Frank, my twin of eleven years, was just the same.

 5       “Come on.” I said, grabbing his hand, and we slid through the cracks between people
         until we spilled out in front.

         Finally I got a good look. It was fixed to the plaster next to the postmaster’s window, the
         place of honour usually reserved for the “Wanted” posters. Beady-eyed Zedekiah Smith,
         the bank robber, still hung there, but even he had been pushed aside for something
10       more important.

         A telephone. The first one in town.

         “How’s it work?” Noah Crawford called out. Noah’s the best fix-it man around, and I
         could tell he was itching to get his fingers on those shiny levers.

         “Don’t rightly know,” answered the postmaster, and he tugged at his goatee1 as if it
15       might tell him. “I do know the sound of your voice moves along wires strung on poles.
         It’s sort of like the telegraph, only you hear words instead of dots and dashes.”

         “Ah,” the crowd murmured, and I felt my own mouth move along.

         I gazed at that gleaming wood box and something happened inside me.
         Something – I can only guess – that might be like falling in love. The thought of talking
20       into that box – of making my voice sail through wires in the sky – it took over my brain. I
         couldn’t get it out.

         “Frank,” I whispered to my twin. “I have to use that telephone.”

         Five minutes later, Frank towed me up Main Street, toward home. “Liza –” he began,
         but I cut him off. We two thought so much alike, I had Frank’s questions answered
25       before he even asked.
                                                    –7–               M15/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T


         “You’re right,” I said. “It costs five cents and I don’t have it. But look.” I pulled him over
         to the window of Poulson’s Variety Store. “You see those?”

         I pointed to a handful of shimmery rocks spread on black velvet. Some were a shiny
         gray shot through with gold streaks, others yellow as cheese curds. And one, clear and
30       jagged, sat like an icicle, leftover from wintertime.

         Frank’s eyebrows screwed up and I could tell he wasn’t following.

         “If I found one of those, I bet they’d pay me for it.” I explained.

         With a shake of his head, Frank hooked two thumbs under his suspenders2. “But Liza –”

         I held up a hand – he couldn’t tell me anything I didn’t already know. “I’ve got that
35       figured, too. I’ll bet we could find some at North Creek – in the mine.”

                            Text: www.eastoftheweb.com/short-stories. Used with the author’s permission.
                        Photo: “ChampaignCountyHistoricalMuseum 20080301 4271” by Dori – Own work.
                  Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 us via Wikimedia Commons – https://commons.wikimedia.
                           org/wiki/File:ChampaignCountyHistoricalMuseum_20080301_4271.jpg#/media/
                                            File:ChampaignCountyHistoricalMuseum_20080301_4271.jpg
                                                                                                       )



1
     goatee: a short beard
2
     suspenders: a pair of braces for holding up trousers




                                                               Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                 –8–               M15/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

Text E


         Davos* for students

         Over the past three days, 70 people, considered the world’s top students, have been
         in Dublin trying to sort out problems such as climate change, global conflict and
         the future of education. No pressure, then. The event concluded last night with the
         presentation of awards at Dublin City Hall. We asked international students Josh Zoffer,
 5       Amy Burnside and Moeka Komachi what the future holds.

         Q: What’s the biggest challenge facing your generation?

         Josh:    “Apathy. I think our generation faces a crisis of individualism. People are
                  often more focused on themselves than on large problems, and the big
                  challenge is to change that.”

10       Amy:     “Our worth as people has come to be defined by what we do. And struggling
                  to find meaningful work for young people has affected self-esteem. I think
                  depression has really spiralled because of that, and, particularly in Ireland,
                  a lot of people have left to find that meaning, which is not always available
                  here.”

15       Moeka: “Being overwhelmed by having too much going on; there are too many choices
                and too much knowledge out there. I don’t know if I’m choosing the right
                things.”


         Q: Are you optimistic or pessimistic for your generation?

         Josh:    “Optimistic. We have one of the most talented, best-educated generations in
20                world history entering adulthood. We have more resources to help mobilize
                  people and to fight problems.”

         Amy:     “I think there is a great sense of hope that it doesn’t have to be the way it
                  is now forever. Particularly in Ireland, I think things are moving in the right
                  direction. It’s just very slow.”

25       Moeka: “Can I say ‘realistic’ instead of ‘pessimistic’? Unless we are guided to try to
                figure out what to do with our knowledge, I feel we are just going to be left
                overwhelmed and lost.”
                                               –9–                M15/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T




      Q: What big idea do you have?

      Josh:    “Consumer social responsibility: getting people to buy products that are
30             sourced and produced responsibly, getting people to care about where
               everything they buy comes from – that is one of the best ways of getting
               corporations to change the way they do business.”

      Amy:     “Greater dialogue between disciplines. When people talk about their passion
               and share it with you, you can find out things you didn’t know about your own
35             discipline, and you can work together to make something more valuable.”

      Moeka: “Being able to extend beyond your comfort zone.”


                            ‘Davos for students’: the brightest undergrad brains ponder the big issues.
                                    Joe Humphreys. 16 November 2013. Courtesy of The Irish Times.



* Davos: refers to the World Economic Forum
