M12/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


                    May / mai / mayo 2012

        ENGLISH / ANGLAIS / INGLÉS A1

                       Standard Level
                       Niveau Moyen
                        Nivel Medio

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2




8 pages/páginas
                              –2–         M12/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                                –3–            M12/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Provisional marking

During the early period of your marking your team leader (or principal examiner in the case
of team leaders) will contact you to discuss the standard of marking and the interpretation of
the marking notes. Before this discussion, it is necessary to have provisionally marked
(in pencil) about ten scripts.

If your team leader has failed to make contact with you, please try to make contact with her
or him yourself, by phone or e-mail.

                                   ASSESSMENT CRITERIA

Criteria A and B

The danger of rewarding or penalizing the use of illustration/references/quotations twice in both
these categories should be avoided.

Criterion B

“Personal response” and “independence of thought” appear as the levels of the descriptors increase.
What is sought is an engaged and individual treatment of the chosen topic. Engaged and individual
essays will usually make themselves clear by showing insight into the implications of the question
and the quality and interest of the details cited in support.

The first person singular does not automatically constitute a personal response and conversely an
impersonal academic style does not necessarily indicate a lack of personal response.

Criterion C

It is expected that every question set will provide candidates with ample opportunities to
demonstrate their awareness of the demands of this criterion. However, where a question does not
explicitly offer such opportunities, examiners should interpret criterion C broadly in order to ensure
that candidates are not unfairly disadvantaged. In such cases it would be sufficient for candidates
to show, as appropriate to the question, an awareness of how elements such as plot, character,
setting, structure, voice, etc., are used by writers to meet their purposes. No matter how the
question is phrased, candidates must also address related matters of style and technique.

“Awareness” and “appreciation” of literary features are the key elements under this criterion.
The mere labelling, without appreciation, of literary features will not score the highest marks.
On the other hand, the candidate who is attentive to literary features and deals with them in a
meaningful way, but who does not consistently use the vocabulary of literary criticism, can still be
awarded the higher achievement levels.

Reminder: the term “literary features” is broad and includes elements as basic as plot, character,
etc., attention to which is valid and must be rewarded as appropriate.
                                                 –4–            M12/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Criterion D

Any form of structuring to the essay will be rewarded if it is effective and appropriate. Different
conventions are in operation and therefore all approaches are acceptable and will be judged on the
basis of their effectiveness. Examiners should remember that structure does not exist by itself,
but any structure must be measured by appropriate reference to the terms of the question and by its
capacity to integrate these towards the development of an organized and coherent essay.

Reminder: In this criterion, supporting examples must be evaluated in terms of how fluently they
are incorporated/integrated to shape/advance the argument, not in terms of their appropriateness
or accuracy.

Criterion E

If you have reservations about awarding a four, you should ensure that these are well-founded
before awarding a three. The broadness of achievement in level three sometimes makes examiners
reluctant to award four.

Judgment needs to be used when dealing with lapses in grammar, spelling and punctuation;
therefore do not unduly penalize.

Mechanical accuracy is only part of this criterion. Ensure that all the other elements are considered.

Examiners should be careful to avoid being prejudiced in their application of this criterion by
achievement levels in other criteria. It is possible to score highly on this criterion even if candidates
have scored in the lower levels on other criteria, and vice versa.

These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking and as a
supplement to the published external assessment criteria for written paper 2. They are not
offered as an exhaustive and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must
rigidly adhere. Good ideas or angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded
as appropriate. Similarly, answers which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested
here should not be so heavily penalized as to distort appreciation of individuality.

With reference to criterion C, the better answers will contain examples that show a
satisfactory sense of stylistic features with some awareness of their effects, using critical
analysis and pertinent detail.

The best answers will show a strong sense of the stylistic and comparable features of the
works, as well as the effects of these features.

Of course, some of the points listed below will appear in weaker papers, but are unlikely to
be developed.

These apply to all answers below.
                                               –5–           M12/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




All satisfactory to good answers must include some pertinent detail (described, paraphrased
or directly quoted) to support assertions and reveal knowledge of the texts studied.
Relevant discussion of literary features must appear in every response. Answers should
evince some discernible form of organization and demonstrate standard written English.

Very good to excellent answers must be grounded in the features demanded for “satisfactory”
answers and may go beyond that basis in the ways described below as well as in other,
somewhat unpredictable features which show individual thinking and an engaged,
well-supported address of the texts.

Drama

1.   A satisfactory to good answer will consider how time and place are presented, and for what
     purposes, in two or more plays (time can be interpreted as seasons, clock time or periods in
     history) and make some comment on the overall effects of the presentation.

     A very good to excellent answer may give a more detailed, sophisticated and extensive
     analysis of the methods used, and their purposes, to present time and place, and consider their
     effects.


2.   A satisfactory to good answer will identify methods that are used to convey thoughts
     (e.g. soliloquy, monologue, stage directions, music, journals, diaries, letters), show how in
     each of the plays thoughts are conveyed and consider some of the effects.

     A very good to excellent answer may give a more detailed and thorough analysis of how and
     to what effect playwrights have conveyed the thoughts of their characters, and show how
     these thoughts influence understanding of the plays.
                                              –6–           M12/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Poetry

Poems should be taken from the works of at least two poets.

If a candidate fails to use at least two poets, mark down two levels in both criterion A,
Knowledge and Understanding of Works and criterion B, Response to the Question.

Contrary to previous instructions, answers must not be penalized for using two poems only,
providing each poem is by a different poet.

3.   A satisfactory to good answer will identify visual imagery (as opposed to other kinds of
     imagery) used by two or more poets and discuss some of the ways in which it is used to
     contribute to meaning.

     A very good to excellent answer may consider visual imagery in a more coherent and
     sophisticated manner, and evaluate with greater understanding how it contributes to meaning.


4.   A satisfactory to good answer will show an understanding of the terms “stanza” and
     “paragraph”, identify poems in which stanzas are found, and discuss their nature and role in
     the structure of the poems and the organization of ideas. It will make some comment on their
     effects and arrive at some judgment as to whether stanzas are comparable to paragraphs.

     A very good to excellent answer may demonstrate a firmer grasp of the way in which stanzas
     contribute to the effective organization of ideas. It may consider how stanzas and paragraphs
     may be used differently.
                                               –7–            M12/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Prose: The Novel and Short Story

5.   A satisfactory to good answer will identify some of the ways in which the narrative voice
     influences our impression of the characters.

     A very good to excellent answer may identify more complex forms of narrative voice,
     recognize possible changes in voice, and show how the reader is influenced in their
     impressions of the characters.


6.   A satisfactory to good answer will identify episodes where misinterpreted conversations
     and/or actions have an impact on the development of a novel or short story, and consider
     some of the ways in which this affects the works.

     A very good to excellent answer may show a more perceptive insight into the nature and
     impact of such episodes, analysing in greater detail the degree to which they affect the
     development of the work as a whole.



Prose: Other than the Novel and Short Story

7.   A satisfactory to good answer will identify in the chosen works characters who are insane,
     eccentric or mentally disturbed, discussing how they are presented and making some
     comment on the roles they play in the works.

     A very good to excellent answer may analyse in greater depth and detail the importance or
     role of the insane, eccentric or mentally disturbed, and evaluate their contribution to the works
     as a whole.


8.   A satisfactory to good answer will identify the ways in which missed opportunities can be
     important and how they can affect plot or characters or both, making some comment on how
     writers have presented these failures and to what effect.

     A very good to excellent answer may analyse in greater detail the nature of the missed
     opportunities and the impact they have upon the works as a whole.
                                               –8–           M12/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


General Questions on Literature

9.    A satisfactory to good answer will define behaviour which can be considered as being
      immoral and discuss how writers create understanding for characters who behave immorally,
      making some comment on the readers’ response to them.

      A very good to excellent answer may show a more perceptive grasp of how immoral actions
      can be judged (or how one’s feelings about them can be ambiguous). It may also evaluate the
      success or otherwise of the effort to create such responses.


10.   A satisfactory to good answer will recognize the element of intensity in obsessions and/or
      addictions, identify appropriate examples, discuss how these features are presented and make
      some comment on their role in the works.

      A very good to excellent answer may explore more fully the obsessions and/or addictions
      concerned, analysing in greater depth and detail how they are conveyed and explore more
      perceptively their contribution to the works as a whole.


11.   A satisfactory to good answer will identify situations that display humour or sadness or the
      interaction of the two, and their effects.

      A very good to excellent answer may show a deeper understanding and appreciation of how
      effects can be achieved through humour or sadness, or an interaction of the two, on the works
      as a whole.


12.   Depending on the texts used, the setting may include any or all of the following: a small
      room, a town, a country, time periods. Thus the setting may be interpreted at a number of
      levels but it must be related to the ideas in that text.

      A satisfactory to good answer will identify and consider ways in which setting is used to
      emphasize important ideas.

      A very good to excellent answer may demonstrate a more sophisticated understanding and
      appreciation of the comprehensive nature and impact of “setting”, evaluating the part it plays
      in emphasizing ideas.
