M12/1/A1ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


                    May / mai / mayo 2012

        ENGLISH / ANGLAIS / INGLÉS A1

                        Higher Level
                      Niveau Supérieur
                       Nivel Superior

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




5 pages/páginas
                              –2–         M12/1/A1ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                               –3–           M12/1/A1ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




Provisional marking

During the early period of your marking your team leader (or principal examiner in the case
of team leaders) will contact you to discuss the standard of marking and the interpretation of
the marking notes. Before this discussion, it is necessary to have provisionally marked
(in pencil) about ten scripts.

If your team leader has failed to make contact with you, please try to make contact with her
or him yourself, by phone or e-mail.

                                   ASSESSMENT CRITERIA

Criteria A and B

The danger of rewarding or penalizing the use of illustration/references/quotations twice in both
these categories should be avoided.

Criterion B

The passages for commentary offer candidates a variety of possibilities for analysis
and interpretation. The test of any interpretation is that it has to be tied carefully to the words,
images and relevant details of the text. Personal response, in the same way, must be tied to
the passage.

In the descriptor for level 2, there may be other conditions under which a “2” may be awarded,
such as a limited use of evidence or a generally weak response. Substantiation of points may be
made but be very weak/superficial.

What is sought by “personal response” is an individual voice and engagement with how the
text works. Engaged and individual commentaries will usually make themselves clear by the depth
of insight into the text and the quality and interest of the details cited in support.

The first person singular does not automatically constitute a personal response and conversely an
impersonal academic style does not necessarily indicate a lack of personal response.

Criterion C

“Awareness” and “appreciation” of literary features are the key elements under this criterion.
The mere labelling, without appreciation, of literary features will not score the highest marks.
On the other hand, the candidate who is attentive to literary features and deals with them in a
meaningful way, but who does not consistently use the vocabulary of literary criticism, can still be
awarded the higher achievement levels.

Reminder: the term “literary features” is broad and includes elements as basic as plot, character,
etc., attention to which is valid and must be rewarded as appropriate.
                                                 –4–            M12/1/A1ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Criterion D

Any form of structuring to the commentary will be rewarded if it is effective and appropriate.
Different conventions are in operation and therefore all approaches, including the linear (line by
line analysis), are acceptable and will be judged on the basis of their effectiveness.
Examiners should remember that structure does not exist by itself, but any structure must be
measured by appropriate reference to the passage or poem and by its capacity to integrate these
towards the development of an organized and coherent commentary.

Reminder: In this criterion, supporting examples must be evaluated in terms of how fluently they
are incorporated/integrated to shape/advance the argument, not in terms of their appropriateness
or accuracy.

Criterion E

If you have reservations about awarding a four, you should ensure that these are well-founded
before awarding a three. The breadth of achievement in level three sometimes makes examiners
reluctant to award four.

Use judgment when dealing with lapses in grammar, spelling and punctuation; therefore do not
unduly penalize.

Mechanical accuracy is only a part of this criterion.            Ensure that all the other elements
are considered.

Examiners should be careful to avoid being prejudiced in their application of this criterion by
achievement levels in other criteria. It is possible to score highly on this criterion even if candidates
have scored in the lower levels on the other criteria, and vice versa.

These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking and as a supplement to
the published external assessment criteria for written paper 1. They are not offered as an exhaustive
and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must rigidly adhere. Good ideas or
angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate. Similarly, answers
which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here may still be very good answers.

Of course, some of the points listed below will appear in weaker papers, but are unlikely to
be developed.
                                                –5–           M12/1/A1ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


The following elements are particularly relevant to criteria A, B and C.

Question 1. Prose

Satisfactory to good papers, three to four, on a spectrum of increasing precision and detail, may:

   comment on the way in which Austin is presented
   consider the relationship between Austin and Josephine, Josephine and Leo, and Leo and Austin
   show an understanding of the reactions of Leo
   comment on the introduction and significance of the egg
   comment on the sudden violence towards the end of the passage.

Very good to excellent papers, four to five, on a spectrum of increasing sophistication and literary
sensibility, may also:

 explore with more sophistication the presentation and reactions of Austin, and comment on the
  way that Austin tries to ingratiate himself with Leo
 comment on the presentation of Josephine
 consider with greater insight the various relationships, and tensions, in the passage
 comment on the language used in connection with the egg
 explore the manner in which the behaviour of Leo is portrayed
 consider the narrator’s perspective and shifts of focus, and the way that dialogue is used.


Question 2. Poem

Satisfactory to good papers, three to four, on a spectrum of increasing precision and detail, may:

 show a grasp of the situation of silkworms and their “masters”
 demonstrate some understanding of what is happening to the silkworms during the second half of
  the poem
 comment on some of the imagery
 make some comment on the overall tone of the poem.

Very good to excellent papers, four to five, on a spectrum of increasing sophistication and literary
sensibility, may also:

 demonstrate a grasp of how the poet conveys the silkworms’ instinctive awareness and
  acceptance of their situation
 offer a wider interpretation of this situation in keeping with evidence presented in the poem
 show a more sophisticated understanding of the mood and meaning of the poem
 show a more assured grasp of the tone of the poem
 offer some interpretation of what is happening in the final stanza.
