M12/1/A1SWE/HP2/SWE/TZ0/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


                    May / mai / mayo 2012

        SWEDISH / SUÉDOIS / SUECO A1


                        Higher Level
                      Niveau Supérieur
                       Nivel Superior

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2




6 pages/páginas
                          –2–         M12/1/A1SWE/HP2/SWE/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive
use of examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate
and must not be reproduced or distributed to any other
person without the authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                             –3–          M12/1/A1SWE/HP2/SWE/TZ0/XX/M


All adequate to good answers must include some pertinent detail (described, paraphrased or
directly quoted) to support assertions and reveal knowledge of the texts studied. Relevant
discussion of literary features must appear in every response. Answers should demonstrate
some discernible form of organization and demonstrate standard use of language.

Good to excellent answers must be grounded in the features demanded for “adequate”
answers. In going beyond those features, it may be in the ways described below as well as
in other, somewhat unpredictable ways which show individual thinking and an engaged,
well-supported address of the texts.

Drama

1.   An adequate to good answer will identify and describe how the protagonist’s main idea(s) are
     eventually confronted by some sort of opposition and should mention the effect this
     confrontation has on the overall impression of the works studied.

     A good to excellent answer will describe in a more sophisticated way, how the protagonist’s
     main idea(s) are eventually confronted by some sort of opposition and should provide
     convincing examples of the effect this confrontation has on the overall impression of the
     works studied.


2.   An adequate to good answer will clearly identify ideas presented in the form of monologues
     as well as show how this is done and with what effect on the overall impression of the
     works studied.

     A good to excellent answer will show with greater precision, supported by well-chosen
     examples, how ideas are presented in the form of monologues as well as show, in a more
     pertinent way, how this is done and with what effect on the overall impression of the
     works studied.
                                               –4–           M12/1/A1SWE/HP2/SWE/TZ0/XX/M


Poetry

Poems should be taken from the works of at least two poets.

If the candidate fails to use at least two poets, mark down two levels in criterion A:
Knowledge and Understanding of Works.

3.   An adequate to good answer will identify some examples of how at least two poets try to
     portray the tension between reality and ideals. They should also discuss how and with what
     effect this has been done.

     A good to excellent answer will provide pertinent and convincing examples to show how at
     least two poets try to portray the tension between reality and ideals. They will also reveal a
     deeper insight into how and with what effect this has been done.


4.   An adequate to good answer will show, with some examples, a clear awareness of how the
     first line of a poem is often the most significant. Additionally they will comment on the effect
     this has on the reader’s understanding and interpretation of the poem as a whole.

     A good to excellent answer will, using carefully chosen examples, show with greater depth
     and precise analysis how a poet’s use of language in the first line of a poem is often the most
     significant and how it can set the tone and theme of the poem as a whole.



Short Story

5.   An adequate to good answer will identify some techniques that good writers of short stories
     use to bring characters to life. They will also demonstrate a degree of understanding of the
     techniques employed by the authors with ideas that are generally relevant and supported by
     examples from the work studied.

     A good to excellent answer will, with the use of carefully chosen examples, reveal a deeper
     insight of the techniques that good writers of short stories use to bring characters to life.
     They will also demonstrate a good of understanding of the techniques employed by the author
     with ideas that are relevant and supported by pertinent and convincing examples from the text.


6.   An adequate to good answer will be able to identify and discuss elements of both fantasy and
     reality in the short stories studied. They should also provide a discussion, that is generally
     relevant, on how and to what effect the authors present these two aspects.

     A good to excellent answer will show, with the use of carefully chosen examples, a deeper
     understanding of the different ways in which fantasy and reality are presented and how they
     shape and determine the interpretation of the short stories studied.
                                                –5–           M12/1/A1SWE/HP2/SWE/TZ0/XX/M


Novel

7.    An adequate to good answer will identify and describe the narrative voice and show, with the
      use of some examples, how the narrative perspective has influenced their understanding of the
      works studied.

      A good to excellent answer will, with the use of well-chosen examples, clearly identify and
      show the significance of the narrative perspective and how it is expressed. Furthermore, they
      will give detailed insight into the effect this has on their understanding of the works studied.


8.    An adequate to good answer will identify and describe the concept of uprooting and discuss
      its significance to the works as a whole.

      A good to excellent answer will demonstrate a more in depth understanding of the concept of
      uprooting, and with the use of pertinent and convincing examples, discuss its significance to
      the works as a whole.



General Questions on Literature

9.    An adequate to good answer will attempt to identify and define hyperbole in the context of
      their chosen authors and give examples of how this device is used for emphasis and to what
      effect in the works studied.

      A good to excellent answer will define hyperbole more precisely and show, with well-chosen
      examples, a deeper insight into the ways in which this device is used for emphasis and to what
      effect in the works studied.


10.   An adequate to good answer will identify examples of the ways in which norms and values
      are presented in the works studied. Additionally, they will attempt a reasonable comparison
      of how their chosen authors present these ideas.

      A good to excellent answer will, with thoughtfully chosen examples, show how norms and
      values are presented in the works studied. They will also provide a pertinent and in depth
      comparison of how the presentation of these ideas contributes to their understanding of the
      works as a whole.


11.   An adequate to good answer will identify examples of challenges and provocations in the
      works studied. In addition they will explore the idea that these challenges may be difficult to
      deal with, but also satisfying for the reader.

      A good to excellent answer will identify and discuss in depth relevant examples of challenges
      and provocations in the works studied. In addition, they will explore some of the techniques
      employed by the authors to create these challenges.
                                              –6–           M12/1/A1SWE/HP2/SWE/TZ0/XX/M


12.   An adequate to good answer will give examples of how the chosen authors appeal to one or
      more of the five senses in the works studied. In addition, they will attempt a reasonable
      comparison of how sensory perception is used in the works studied.

      A good to excellent answer will discuss the ways in which their chosen authors appeal to one
      or more of the five senses with a deeper insight and will provide a convincing comparison of
      how sensory perception is used in the works studied. Pertinent and precisely analysed
      examples will support the candidates’ ideas.
