M22/2/ABARA/SP1/ARA/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                  May / Mai / Mayo de 2022


                   Arabic / Arabe / Árabe B


                         Standard level
                         Niveau moyen
                          Nivel Medio


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




9 pages/páginas
                                            –2–               M22/2/ABARA/SP1/ARA/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2022

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2022

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2022

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                              –3–                   M22/2/ABARA/SP1/ARA/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion A: Language

How successfully does the candidate command written language?
• To what extent is the vocabulary appropriate and varied?
• To what extent are the grammatical structures varied?
• To what extent does the accuracy of the language contribute to effective communication?

  Marks                                                      Level descriptor
      0         The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
                Command of the language is limited.
                Vocabulary is sometimes appropriate to the task.
    1–3
                Basic grammatical structures are used.
                Language contains errors in basic structures. Errors interfere with communication.
                Command of the language is partially effective.
                Vocabulary is appropriate to the task.
                Some basic grammatical structures are used, with some attempts to use more
    4–6
                complex structures.
                Language is mostly accurate for basic structures, but errors occur in more complex
                structures. Errors at times interfere with communication.
                Command of the language is effective and mostly accurate.
                Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied.
    7–9         A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used.
                Language is mostly accurate. Occasional errors in basic and in complex grammatical
                structures do not interfere with communication.
                Command of the language is mostly accurate and very effective.
                Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied, including the use of idiomatic
                expressions.
  10–12
                A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used effectively.
                Language is mostly accurate. Minor errors in more complex grammatical structures
                do not interfere with communication.

                                                                                                                               ‫اﻟﻠﻐﺔ‬
 ‫ ﺑﻌﺾ اﻷﺧﻄﺎء ﺗﻜﻮن‬.‫ وھﺬا اﻷﻣﺮ ﯾﺠﺐ أن ﯾﺄﺧﺬه اﻟﻤﺼﺤﺤﻮن ﺑﻌﯿﻦ اﻻﻋﺘﺒﺎر‬،‫ﻟﯿﺴﺖ ﻟﺠﻤﯿﻊ اﻷﺧﻄﺎء اﻟﻠﻐﻮﯾﺔ اﻟﺘﻲ ﯾﻘﻊ ﻓﯿﮭﺎ اﻟﻤﻤﺘﺤﻦ ذات اﻷھﻤﯿﺔ‬
        .‫ وھﻨﺎك أﺧﻄﺎء ﺑﺴﯿﻄﺔ ﻻ ﺗﺄﺛﯿﺮ ﻟﮭﺎ ﻋﻠﻰ ﻓﮭﻢ اﻟﻤﻌﺎﻧﻲ وﻣﺆﺷﺮاﺗﮭﺎ‬،ً‫ذا ﺗﺄﺛﯿﺮ واﺿﺢ ﻋﻠﻰ اﻟﻤﻌﻨﻰ وﻣﺆﺷﺮاﺗﮫ ﻣﻤﺎ ﯾﺠﻌﻞ ﻓﮭﻢ اﻟﻤﻘﺼﻮد ﻣﺘﻌﺬرا‬
   .‫ ﻓﻲ ﺣﯿﻦ أن أﺧﻄﺎء أﺧﺮى ﻗﺪ ﺗﻜﻮن ﻧﺎﺟﻤﺔ ﻋﻦ إﻏﻔﺎل اﻟﻤﻤﺘﺤﻦ ﻟﮭﺎ‬،‫ﺑﺎﻹﺿﺎﻓﺔ إﻟﻰ أﺧﻄﺎء ﺗﻌﻜﺲ ﺿﻌﻔﺎ ﺟﻮھﺮﯾﺎ ﻓﻲ اﻟﺘﻌﺎﻣﻞ ﻣﻊ اﻟﻠﻐﺔ وﻗﻮاﻋﺪھﺎ‬
                                                                                                                            ‫اﻟﻌﺜﺮات‬
      ‫ ﻓﻌﻠﻰ ﺳﺒﯿﻞ اﻟﻤﺜﺎل ﯾﻌﻤﺪ اﻟﻜﺜﯿﺮ ﻣﻦ اﻟﻤﻤﺘﺤﻨﯿﻦ ﻋﻨﺪ اﻟﻜﺘﺎﺑﺔ إﻟﻰ ﻋﺪم ﺗﺼﺮﯾﻒ اﻟﻔﻌﻞ ﺑﺼﻮرﺗﮫ‬،‫ﺗﻜﻮن اﻷﺧﻄﺎء ﻋﻠﻰ ﻣﺴﺘﻮﯾﺎت ﻣﺨﺘﻠﻔﺔ اﻟﺼﻌﻮﺑﺔ‬
،‫ أو ﯾﻐﻔﻠﻮن ﻋﻦ ﺣﺬف ﺣﺮف اﻟﻌﻠﺔّ ﻣﻦ آﺧﺮ اﻟﻔﻌﻞ اﻟﻤﻌﺘﻞ اﻵﺧﺮأو اﻟﻨﻮن ﻣﻦ أواﺧﺮ اﻷﻓﻌﺎل اﻟﺨﻤﺴﺔ اﻟﻤﻀﺎرﻋﺔ اﻟﻤﺠﺰوﻣﺔ واﻟﻤﻨﺼﻮﺑﺔ‬،‫اﻟﺼﺤﯿﺤﺔ‬
                                                               .‫رﻏﻢ أﻧﮭﻢ ﯾﻌﺮﻓﻮن ﻣﺘﻰ ﯾﺴﺘﺨﺪم اﻟﻨﻔﻲ أو ﺻﯿﻐﺔ اﻷﻓﻌﺎل اﻟﺨﻤﺴﺔ ﻓﻲ اﻟﻜﺘﺎﺑﺔ‬
                                                                                                                   ‫اﻷﺧﻄﺎء اﻟﻤﺘﻜﺮرة‬
       ‫ ﻛﺎﻟﺠﻤﻊ ﺑﯿﻦ ﻓﺎﻋﻠﯿﻦ ﻓﻲ اﻟﺠﻤﻠﺔ ﻣﺜﻞ "درﺳﻮا اﻟﻄﻼب" أو اﺳﺘﺨﺪام ﻓﻌﻞ ﻣﺘﺼﻞ ﺑﻮاو‬،‫ھﻨﺎك ﺑﻌﺾ اﻷﺧﻄﺎء ﻓﻲ اﻟﺒُﻨﻰ ﺗﺘﻜﺮر ﺑﺼﻮرة ﻣﻨﺘﻈﻤﺔ‬
                                                                             ."‫ ﻣﺜﻞ "اﻟﻀﯿﻔﺎن وﺻﻠﻮا ﺻﺒﺎﺣﺎ‬،‫اﻟﺠﻤﺎﻋﺔ ﻣﻊ ﺻﯿﻐﺔ اﻟﻤﺜﻨﻰ‬
                                                                                                                             ‫ﺛﻐﺮات‬
 ‫ ﻓﻌﻠﻰ ﺳﺒﯿﻞ اﻟﻤﺜﺎل ﯾﻐﻔﻞ اﻟﻤﻤﺘﺤﻦ ﻋﻦ اﺳﺘﺨﺪام اﻟﻔﻌﻞ رﻏﻢ‬.‫ أو أﻧﮭﺎ ﻻ ﺗﻈﮭﺮ رﻏﻢ ﺿﺮورة اﺳﺘﺨﺪاﻣﮭﺎ‬،‫ﺑﻌﺾ اﻟﺒُﻨﻰ اﻟﻠﻐﻮﯾﺔ ﻧﺎدرا ﻣﺎ ﺗﺄﺗﻲ ﺻﺤﯿﺤﺔ‬
                                                                                                            .‫ﻛَﻮن اﻟﺠﻤﻠﺔ ﺑﺤﺎﺟﺔ ﻟﺬﻟﻚ‬
                                                       –4–                 M22/2/ABARA/SP1/ARA/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B: Message

To what extent does the candidate fulfil the task?
  • How relevant are the ideas to the task?
  • To what extent are ideas developed?
  • To what extent do the clarity and organization of ideas contribute to the successful delivery of
    the message?

The “descriptor unpacked” explain the assessment criteria in greater detail. Where a candidate’s
response does not correspond exactly to a single mark band, the statements in bold should be
used as a guide for the ‘best fit’ approach.

 Marks                Level descriptor                                    Descriptor unpacked

 0         The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
           The task is partially fulfilled.          The link between the response and task tends to be unclear;
           Few ideas are relevant to the task.       the reader has difficulty understanding the message.
           Ideas are stated, but with no             The response touches upon some aspects of the task but there
           development.                              is also much unrelated information.
     1–3   Ideas are not clearly presented and do    The response addresses the task in a simple manner, and
           not follow a logical structure, making    supporting details and/or examples barely feature, if at all.
           the message difficult to determine.       The ideas do not link well together; inadequate or inappropriate
                                                     use of cohesive devices confuse the message.
           The task is generally fulfilled.          The link between the response and the task is mostly
           Some ideas are relevant to the task.      detectable; the reader’s general understanding of the
           Ideas are outlined, but are not fully     message is not impeded, despite some ambiguity.
           developed.                                The response covers some aspects of the task, or touches upon
     4–6   Ideas are generally clearly presented     all aspects but superficially.
           and the response is generally             The response includes some supporting details and examples.
           structured in a logical manner, leading   The ideas are organized in a logical way; some cohesive
           to a mostly successful delivery of the    devices are used appropriately to aid the delivery of the
           message.                                  message, although there may be areas of confusion at times.
           The task is fulfilled.                    The link between the response and the task is clear; the
           Most ideas are relevant to the task.      reader has a good understanding of the message conveyed.
           Ideas are developed well, with some       The response covers all aspects of the task, despite losing focus
           detail and examples.                      at times.
     7–9   Ideas are clearly presented and the       The response uses supporting details and examples to clarify
           response is structured in a logical       the message.
           manner, supporting the delivery of the    The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive devices are
           message.                                  used appropriately to deliver the message with little or no
                                                     ambiguity.
           The task is fulfilled effectively.        The link between the response and the task is precise and
           Ideas are relevant to the task.           consistently evident; the reader has a clear understanding
           Ideas are fully developed, providing      of the message conveyed.
           details and relevant examples.            The response covers all aspects of the task fully, and maintains
 10–12     Ideas are clearly presented and the       focus throughout.
           response is structured in a logical and   The response uses well-chosen supporting details and examples
           coherent manner that supports the         to illustrate and explain ideas persuasively.
           delivery of the message.                  The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive devices are
                                                     used appropriately to deliver the message with clarity and ease.

Note: When marking candidate responses, keep in mind that neither the factual accuracy of the
information presented, nor the validity of the candidates’ personal opinions, are being assessed.
Therefore, scripts that are factually inaccurate should not be marked down, provided the ideas
presented have coherence and are sufficiently developed.
                                                –5–              M22/2/ABARA/SP1/ARA/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion C: Conceptual understanding

To what extent does the candidate demonstrate conceptual understanding?
   • To what extent is the choice of text type appropriate to the task?
   • To what extent are register and tone appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
      task?
   • To what extent does the response incorporate the conventions of the chosen text type?

  Marks                                     Level descriptor
    0   The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
        Conceptual understanding is limited.
        The choice of text type is generally inappropriate to the context, purpose or audience.
   1–2  The register and tone are inappropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
        task.
        The response incorporates limited recognizable conventions of the chosen text type.
        Conceptual understanding is mostly demonstrated.
        The choice of text type is generally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   3–4  The register and tone, while occasionally appropriate to the context, purpose and
        audience of the task, fluctuate throughout the response.
        The response incorporates some conventions of the chosen text type.
        Conceptual understanding is fully demonstrated.
        The choice of text type is appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   5–6  The register and tone are appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
        task.
        The response fully incorporates the conventions of the chosen text type.

Note: Examiners must balance all three elements in criterion C (choice of text type,
appropriateness of tone and register, and use of text type conventions) to arrive at the final mark.
                                                            ‫–‪–6‬‬                  ‫‪M22/2/ABARA/SP1/ARA/TZ0/XX/M‬‬


‫)‪Question specific guidance (Criterion B and C‬‬

                                                                                                                    ‫اﻟﺴﺆال اﻷول‬

‫ﺳﺘﺰور ﻣﺪرﺳﺘﻚ ﻣﺪﯾﻨﺔ أﺧﺮى ﻟﺤﻀﻮر ﻣﻌﺮض اﻟﺰھﻮر اﻟﺴﻨﻮي‪ .‬ﺑﺼﻔﺘﻚ ﻣﻤﺜﻞ اﻟﻄﻼب ﻟﻔﺼﻠﻚ‪ ،‬ﻓﺈن ﻣﮭﻤﺘﻚ ھﻲ إﺑﻼغ اﻟﻄﻼب اﻵﺧﺮﯾﻦ‬                      ‫‪.1‬‬
     ‫ﺑﺘﻔﺎﺻﯿﻞ اﻟﺮﺣﻠﺔ‪ .‬اﻛﺘﺐ ﻧﺼﺎ ً ﻟﺰﻣﻼﺋﻚ ﻓﻲ اﻟﻔﺼﻞ ﻟﺘﺤﺪﯾﺪ ﺑﺮﻧﺎﻣﺞ اﻟﺮﺣﻠﺔ وﻛﯿﻒ ﯾﺘﻮﻗﻊ ﻣﻦ اﻟﻄﻼب أن ﯾﺘﺼﺮﻓﻮا ﻛﻤﻤﺜﻠﯿﻦ ﻟﻤﺪرﺳﺘﻚ‪.‬‬


            ‫ﯾﻮﻣﯿﺎت )ﺷﺨﺼﯿﺔ(‬                              ‫ﻣﺪوﻧﺔ إﻟﻜﺘﺮوﻧﯿّﺔ‬                        ‫ﻣﺠﻤﻮﻋﺔ ﻣﻦ اﻟﺘﻌﻠﯿﻤﺎت‬


‫‪Criterion B:‬‬

                                                                                          ‫• اﻟﮭدف ﻣن اﻟرﺣﻠﺔ‪/‬أھﻣﯾﺔ اﻟرﺣﻼت‬
                                                                                              ‫• اﻟﺗﻌرﯾف ﺑﻣﻌرض اﻟزھور‬
                                                         ‫• ﺗﺣدﯾد ﺑرﻧﺎﻣﺞ اﻟرﺣﻠﺔ ﻣﺛﻼ‪ :‬ﻣوﻋد اﻟﺗﺟﻣﻊ واﻟوﺻول وﺗﻔﺎﺻﯾل اﻟﻣزارات‬
                                                       ‫• اﻟﺗوﻗﻌﺎت ﻣن اﻟطﻼب ﻣﺛﻼ‪ :‬اﻻﻟﺗزام ﺑﺎﻟﻣواﻋﯾد وﺑﺎﻟﺗﻌﻠﯾﻣﺎت اﻟﺧﺎﺻﺔ ﺑﺎﻟﻣﻌرض‬
                                                           ‫• اﻷﺛر اﻹﯾﺟﺎﺑﻲ ﻟﻼﻟﺗزام ﺑﺎﻟﺗﻌﻠﯾﻣﺎت ﻋﻠﻰ اﻟطﻼب وﺳﻣﻌﺔ اﻟﻣدرﺳﺔ‬


‫‪Criterion C:‬‬

‫‪Choice of text type:‬‬

                                 ‫‪Text type‬‬        ‫‪Rationale‬‬
‫‪Appropriate‬‬                           ‫ﻣﺟﻣوﻋﺔ ﻣن‬           ‫ﻷن اﻟﻧص ﯾﺳﺗﮭدف ذﻛر ﺗﻔﺎﺻﯾل ﺑرﻧﺎﻣﺞ وﺗﻌﻠﯾﻣﺎت ﻣوﺟﮭﺔ ﻟﻠطﻼب‬
                                        ‫اﻟﺗﻌﻠﯾﻣﺎت‬     ‫ﻷن اﻟﻧص ﯾﺧﺎطب اﻟﺟﻣﮭور اﻟﻣﺳﺗﮭدف )اﻟطﻼب( ﺑﺷﻛل ﻣﺑﺎﺷر ﻓﻲ ﺷﻛل‬
                                                                                       ‫ﺗﻌﻠﯾﻣﺎت ﻣﺣددة ﻓﻲ ﻧﻘﺎط ﻣﺣددة‪.‬‬

‫‪Generally appropriate‬‬                ‫ﻣدوﻧﺔ إﻟﻛﺗروﻧﯾﺔ‬                    ‫رﺑﻣﺎ ﯾﻛﺗب ﻓﻲ ﺻورة ﻣدوﻧﺔ إﻟﻛﺗروﻧﯾﺔ ﻛﺗﺎﺑﺔ إﻧﺷﺎﺋﯾﺔ ﻣﻘﺎﻟﯾﺔ‪.‬‬
                                                        ‫ﯾﻣﻛن ﻧﺷر اﻟﻣدوﻧﺔ ﻋﻠﻰ ﻣواﻗﻊ اﻟﺗواﺻل اﻻﺟﺗﻣﺎﻋﻲ اﻟﺗﻲ ﯾﺷﺎرك ﻓﯾﮭﺎ اﻟطﻼب‪.‬‬
                                                         ‫ﺗﻣﻛن اﻟﻣدوﻧﺔ ﻣن اﻟﺗﻔﺎﻋل اﻟﻣﺑﺎﺷر و ﻣﻌرﻓﺔ آراء اﻟطﻼب و ﻣدى إﻗﺑﺎﻟﮭم ﻋﻠﻰ‬
                                                                                                                       ‫اﻟرﺣﻠﺔ ‪.‬‬

‫‪Generally inappropriate‬‬           ‫ﯾوﻣﯾﺎت )ﺷﺧﺻﯾﺔ(‬                              ‫اﻟﻣﺳﺗﮭدﻓون ﻣن اﻟﻧص طﻼﺑﺎ ً وﻟﯾس ﻧﺻﺎ ً ﺷﺧﺻﯾﺎ ً‬
                                                              ‫ﺗﺳرد اﻟﯾوﻣﯾﺎت اﻻﻧطﺑﺎﻋﺎت واﻷﻓﻛﺎراﻟﺷﺧﺻﯾﺔ واﻷﺣداث ﺣﺳب وﻗوﻋﮭﺎ‬
                                                                            ‫وﺗﺳﻠﺳﻠﮭﺎ اﻟزﻣﻧﻲ ﻓﻼ ﺗﺗﻧﺎﺳب ﻛﺛﯾرا ﻣﻊ ھدف اﻟﻧص‪.‬‬

‫‪Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these‬‬
‫‪conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the‬‬
‫‪“generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.‬‬


‫‪Register and tone:‬‬
                                                                                                         ‫• رﺳﻣﻲ – ﺷﺑﮫ رﺳﻣﻲ‬
                                                                                                            ‫• ﻣﺗﺣﻣس ‪ -‬ﻣﺗﻔﺎﺋل‬

‫‪Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.‬‬
                                                            ‫–‪–7‬‬                  ‫‪M22/2/ABARA/SP1/ARA/TZ0/XX/M‬‬


                                                                                                                  ‫اﻟﺴﺆال اﻟﺜﺎﻧﻲ‬

‫أﺛﻨﺎء زﯾﺎرﺗﻚ ﻟﻤﺘﺤﻒ اﻟﻔﻦ اﻟﺸﻌﺒﻲ اﻟﺘﻘﻄﺖ ﺻﻮرا ً ﻣﻤﯿﺰة ﻧﺸﺮﺗﮭﺎ ﻋﻠﻰ وﺳﺎﺋﻞ اﻟﺘﻮاﺻﻞ اﻻﺟﺘﻤﺎﻋﻲ ﻓﺤﺎزت ﻋﻠﻰ إﻋﺠﺎب اﻟﻜﺜﯿﺮﯾﻦ وﻧﺘﯿﺠﺔ‬        ‫‪.2‬‬
      ‫ﻟﺬﻟﻚ زادت اﻟﺰﯾﺎرات ﻟﻠﻤﺘﺤﻒ ﺑﺸﻜﻞ ﻣﻠﺤﻮظ‪ ،‬وﻣﻦ ﺛﻢ ﺗﻠﻘﯿﺖ ﻋﺮﺿﺎ ً ﻣﻦ ﻗﻨﺎة ﺗﻠﯿﻔﺰﯾﻮﻧﯿﺔ ﻣﺸﮭﻮرة ﻟﻠﺤﺪﯾﺚ ﺣﻮل اﻟﻤﻮﺿﻮع‪ .‬اﻋﺮض‬
                                  ‫ﻣﻌﻠﻮﻣﺎت ﺣﻮل زﯾﺎرﺗﻚ ﻟﻠﻤﺘﺤﻒ وﻛﯿﻔﯿﺔ اﺳﺘﺜﻤﺎر ھﺬا اﻟﺘﺄﺛﯿﺮ اﻟﻨﺎﺗﺞ ﻋﻦ ﺣﺒﻚ ﻟﻠﺘﺼﻮﯾﺮ ﻣﺴﺘﻘﺒﻼً‪.‬‬


                 ‫ﻣﻘﺎﺑﻠﺔ‬                               ‫ﻣﺠﻤﻮﻋﺔ ﻣﻦ اﻟﺘﻌﻠﯿﻤﺎت‬                          ‫ﺧﻄﺎب ﺷﻔﮭﻲ‬


‫‪Criterion B:‬‬


                                                                          ‫أﺳﺑﺎب اﺧﺗﯾﺎر زﯾﺎرة ﻣﺗﺣف اﻟﻔن اﻟﺷﻌﺑﻲ‬                   ‫•‬
                                                               ‫اﻟﺣدﯾث ﻋن ھواﯾﺔ اﻟﺗﺻوﯾر واﺳﺗﻐﻼﻟﮭﺎ‪ ،‬وﻛﯾف ﺑدأت‬                     ‫•‬
                                                          ‫دور وﺳﺎﺋل اﻟﺗواﺻل اﻻﺟﺗﻣﺎﻋﻲ ﻓﻲ ﻧﺷر اﻷﻋﻣﺎل‪/‬اﻟﺛﻘﺎﻓﺎت‬                     ‫•‬
                              ‫ﻋرض ﻣﻌﻠوﻣﺎت ﺣول زﯾﺎرة اﻟﻣﺗﺣف ﻣﺛﻼ‪ :‬اﻟﺗوﻗﯾت وﻣﺎ ﺷﺎھدت واﻻﻧطﺑﺎﻋﺎت ﺣول اﻟزﯾﺎرة‬                        ‫•‬
‫ﻛﯾﻔﯾﺔ اﺳﺗﺛﻣﺎر ھذا اﻟﺗﺄﺛﯾر اﻟﻧﺎﺗﺞ ﻋن ﺣب اﻟﺗﺻوﯾر ﻣﺛﻼ‪ :‬زﯾﺎرة أﻣﺎﻛن ﺳﯾﺎﺣﯾﺔ واﻹﺳﮭﺎم ﻓﻲ ﺗﻧﺷﯾط اﻟﺳﯾﺎﺣﺔ أو ﺗﺻوﯾر أﻧﺷطﺔ‬                  ‫•‬
                                     ‫ﺗطوﻋﯾﺔ وﻋرﺿﮭﺎ ﻟﻠﺟﻣﮭور‪ ،‬ﺗﻧﺷﯾط اﻻﻗﺗﺻﺎد )ﺗوﻓﯾر ﻓرص ﻋﻣل‪ ،‬ﺗﺣرﯾك اﻻﻗﺗﺻﺎد(‬

‫‪Criterion C:‬‬

‫‪Choice of text type:‬‬

                                  ‫‪Text type‬‬       ‫‪Rationale‬‬
‫‪Appropriate‬‬                                ‫ﻣﻘﺎﺑﻠﺔ‬                                      ‫ﻷن اﻟﺳﯾﺎق ﯾدور ﻓﻲ ﺣوار ﺗﻠﯾﻔزﯾوﻧﻲ‬
                                                  ‫ﻋرض اﻟﻣﻌﻠوﻣﺎت ﯾﺗم ﻣن ﺧﻼل اﻻﺳﺗﻔﺳﺎر ﻋن اﻟﺗﻔﺎﺻﯾل اﻟﻣﺧﺗﻠﻔﺔ اﻟﺗﻲ ﺗﻧﺎﺳب‬
                                                                                                              ‫ﻓن اﻟﻣﻘﺎﺑﻠﺔ‪.‬‬
                                                               ‫اﻟﻣﻘﺎﺑﻠﺔ اﻟﺗﻠﻔزﯾوﻧﯾﺔ وﺳﯾﻠﺔ ﻟﺗﺣﻘﯾﻖ ھدف اﻟﻧص ﻋﻠﻰ ﻧطﺎق واﺳﻊ‪.‬‬

‫‪Generally appropriate‬‬                  ‫ﺧطﺎب ﺷﻔﮭﻲ‬                                       ‫رﺑﻣﺎ ﯾﻌرض اﻟﻣﺗﻛﻠم ھذا ﺑﺷﻛل ﺷﻔﮭﻲ أﯾﺿﺎ ً‬
                                                          ‫ﯾﻣﻛن أن ﯾﻛون اﻟﺧطﺎب اﻟﺷﻔﮭﻲ ﻣن ﺧﻼل ﻧدوة ﺗﻠﻔزﯾزﻧﯾﺔ ﻣوﺟﮭﺔ ﻟﻠﻣﺷﺎھدﯾن‬
                                                                                                   ‫ﻓﯾﺣﻘﻖ ﻣن ﺧﻼﻟﮫ ھدف اﻟﻧص‪.‬‬
‫‪Generally inappropriate‬‬                 ‫ﻣﺟﻣوﻋﺔ ﻣن‬                                       ‫طﺑﯾﻌﺔ اﻟﻧص ﻻ ﺗﺗواﻓﻖ ﻣﻊ اﻟﺗﻌﻠﯾﻣﺎت‪.‬‬
                                          ‫اﻟﺗﻌﻠﯾﻣﺎت‬         ‫ﺗوﺟﯾﮫ ﻣﺟﻣوﻋﺔ ﻣن اﻟﺗﻌﻠﯾﻣﺎت ﯾﻛون ﻟﺟﻣﮭور ﻣﺣدد وھذا ﯾﺧﺗﻠف ﻣﻊ ھدف‬
                                                                                                                   ‫اﻟﻧص‪.‬‬

‫‪Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these‬‬
‫‪conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the‬‬
‫‪“generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.‬‬


‫‪Register and tone:‬‬
                                                                                                       ‫• رﺳﻣﻲ – ﺷﺑﮫ رﺳﻣﻲ‬
                                                                                                            ‫• ﻣﺗﻔﺎﺋل – ﻣﮭﺗم‬

‫‪Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.‬‬
                                                          ‫–‪–8‬‬                  ‫‪M22/2/ABARA/SP1/ARA/TZ0/XX/M‬‬


                                                                                                                    ‫اﻟﺴﺆال اﻟﺜﺎﻟﺚ‬

    ‫ﺗﺤﺎول ﺗﻮﻓﯿﺮ اﻟﻤﺎل ﻟﻘﻀﺎء ﻋﻄﻠﺔ ﻛﺒﯿﺮة ﻣﻊ اﻷﺻﺪﻗﺎء ﺑﻌﺪ اﻻﻧﺘﮭﺎء ﻣﻦ اﻣﺘﺤﺎﻧﺎﺗﻚ‪ ،‬وﻗﺮرت أن ﺗﻀﻊ ﺧﻄﺔ‪ .‬اﻛﺘﺐ ﻧﺼﺎ ً ﯾﺤﺘﻮي ﻋﻠﻰ‬            ‫‪.3‬‬
                       ‫ﺗﻔﺎﺻﯿﻞ ﺣﻮل ھﺪﻓﻚ ﻣﻦ ﺗﻮﻓﯿﺮ اﻟﻤﺎل وﻣﺎ ﯾﻤﻜﻨﻚ اﻟﻘﯿﺎم ﺑﮫ ﻟﻜﺴﺐ اﻟﻘﻠﯿﻞ ﻣﻦ اﻟﻤﺎل اﻹﺿﺎﻓﻲ ﻓﻲ وﻗﺖ ﻓﺮاﻏﻚ‪.‬‬


           ‫ﯾﻮﻣﯿﺎت )ﺷﺨﺼﯿﺔ(‬                                  ‫ﻣﻘﺎﺑﻠﺔ‬                                ‫ﻣﺪوﻧﺔ إﻟﻜﺘﺮوﻧﯿّﺔ‬



‫‪Criterion B:‬‬


                                                                          ‫ﻣﻘدﻣﺔ ﻋن أھﻣﯾﺔ اﻟﻌطﻠﺔ ﺑﻌد ﻋﻧﺎء اﻻﻣﺗﺣﺎﻧﺎت‬              ‫•‬
                                                 ‫ﻣﺗطﻠﺑﺎت اﻟﻌطﻠﺔ ﻣﻊ اﻷﺻدﻗﺎء وﺗﻔﺎﺻﯾﻠﮭﺎ ﻓﯾﻣﺎ ﯾﺗﻌﻠﻖ ﺑﺎﻟﻣﺎل وﻣدة اﻟﻌطﻠﺔ‬              ‫•‬
                                              ‫ﺗﻔﺎﺻﯾل ﺣول اﻟﮭدف ﻣن ﺗوﻓﯾر اﻟﻣﺎل ﻣﺛﻼ‪ :‬ﺧطﺔ اﻟﻌطﻠﺔ وﻣﺎ ﺗﻧوي أن ﺗﻔﻌل‬                  ‫•‬
                            ‫طرق اﻟﻛﺳب ﻣﺛﻼ‪ :‬اﻻﺳﺗﻐﻧﺎء ﻋن ﺑﻌض ﻣﺗطﻠﺑﺎت‪ ،‬اﻟﻌﻣل ﺑﻌد ﺳﺎﻋﺎت اﻟدراﺳﺔ أو اﻟﻌﻣل أوﻧﻼﯾن‬                     ‫•‬

‫‪Criterion C:‬‬

‫‪Choice of text type:‬‬

                                ‫‪Text type‬‬       ‫‪Rationale‬‬
‫‪Appropriate‬‬                      ‫ﯾوﻣﯾﺎت )ﺷﺧﺻﯾﺔ(‬                                        ‫ﻛﺗﺎﺑﺔ ﻋن ھدف ﺷﺧﺻﻲ أو ذاﺗﻲ‬
                                                    ‫ﻛﺗﺎﺑﺔ اﻟﯾوﻣﯾﺎت ﻟﺗﺳﺟﯾل اﻟﺧواطر اﻟﺷﺧﺻﯾﺔ اﻟﺗﻲ ﯾﺣدث اﻹﻧﺳﺎن ﺑﮭﺎ ﻧﻔﺳﮫ‬
                                                                      ‫وﺗﺗﯾﺢ ﻟﮫ ﻛﺗﺎﺑﺔ اﻟﺗﻔﺎﺻﯾل اﻟﺗﻲ ﯾرى أﻧﮭﺎ ﺗﺣﻘﻖ ھدﻓﮫ‪.‬‬

‫‪Generally appropriate‬‬               ‫ﻣدوﻧﺔ إﻟﻛﺗروﻧﯾﺔ‬                        ‫رﺑﻣﺎ ﺗوﺟﮫ ﻟﺟﻣﮭور ﺧﺎص ﻛﻌرض ﻟﺗﺟرﺑﺔ ﻣﺳﺗﻘﺑﻠﯾﺔ‬
                                                      ‫رﺑﻣﺎ ﻟﻣﺷﺎرﻛﺔ ﻗراء اﻟﻣدوﻧﺔ ﺗﻔﺎﺻﯾل ﺧطﺔ اﻟﻌطﻠﺔ وطرق ﻛﺳب اﻟﻣﺎل ﻟﻼﺳﺗﻔﺎدة‬
                                                                                             ‫ﻣن ﺗﻌﻠﯾﻘﺎﺗﮭم ﻓﻲ وﺿﻊ ﺧطﺗﮫ‪.‬‬
‫‪Generally inappropriate‬‬                      ‫ﻣﻘﺎﺑﻠﺔ‬                                             ‫ﻻ ﯾوﺟد طرف آﺧر ﻓﻲ اﻟﻣﻘﺎﺑﻠﺔ‬
                                                          ‫ﻻ ﺗﺗواﻓﻖ اﻟﻣﻘﺎﺑﻠﺔ ﻣﻊ ﻧص اﻟﺳؤال ﺣﯾث ﻻ ﯾوﺟد ﻣﺎﯾﺷﯾر إﻟﻰ إﻣﻛﺎﻧﯾﺔ ﻛﺗﺎﺑﺔ‬
                                                                                                                      ‫ﻣﻘﺎﺑﻠﺔ‪.‬‬

‫‪Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these‬‬
‫‪conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the‬‬
‫‪“generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.‬‬


‫‪Register and tone:‬‬
                                                                                                              ‫• ﺷﺑﮫ رﺳﻣﻲ‬
                                                                                                          ‫• ﻣﺗﺣﻣس – ﻣﺧطط‬

‫‪Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.‬‬
                                                         ‫–‪–9‬‬                   ‫‪M22/2/ABARA/SP1/ARA/TZ0/XX/M‬‬


‫)‪Appendix: Text type conventions (Criterion C‬‬

‫‪The most common and recognisable conventions of the text types are given below:‬‬

                                                                                                              ‫ﻣﺟﻣوﻋﺔ ﻣن اﻟﺗﻌﻠﯾﻣﺎت‬
                                                                                 ‫• ﯾﺧﺎطب اﻟﺟﻣﮭور اﻟﻣﺳﺗﮭدف ﺑﺷﻛل ﻣﺑﺎﺷر‪.‬‬
                                                                                        ‫• ﯾﺗﺿﻣن اﻟﻧص ﻋﻧواﻧﺎ ً رﺋﯾﺳﯾﺎ ً ﻣﺑﯾﻧﺎ ً‪.‬‬
                                 ‫• ﯾﺗم ﻋرض اﻟﻧص ﺑﺷﻛل واﺿﺢ ﺑﺣﯾث ﯾﺗﺿﻣن‪ :‬ﻓﻘرات وﻋﻧﺎوﯾن ﻓرﻋﯾﺔ وﺗرﻗﯾم وﺑﻧط ﺑﺎرز … إﻟﺦ‪.‬‬
                                                                              ‫• ﯾﺗﺿﻣن اﻟﻧص ﻣﻘدﻣﺔ ﻗﺻﯾرة وﺧﺎﺗﻣﺔ واﺿﺣﺔ‪.‬‬

                                                                                                               ‫ﻣدوﻧﺔ إﻟﻛﺗروﻧﯾﺔ‬
                                                                     ‫ﻣﺷوﻗﺎ ً ﯾﺛﯾر اھﺗﻣﺎم وﻓﺿول ّ‬
                                                                   ‫اﻟﻘراء‬                    ‫اﻟﻣدوﻧﺔ ﻋﻧواﻧﺎ ً ّ‬
                                                                                                             ‫ّ‬     ‫• ﺗﺗﺿ ّﻣن‬
       ‫• ﯾﮭﺗ ّم ﺑﺎﻟﺟﻣﮭور اﻟﻣﺳﺗﮭدَف‪ ،‬وﯾﺗﺣﻘّﻖ ذﻟك ﻣن ﺧﻼل اﻟﺗﻔﺎﻋل اﻟﻣﺑﺎﺷر ﺑﺄﺳﻠوب ﯾﺛﯾر اھﺗﻣﺎم اﻟﻘﺎرئ )ﻛﻣﺎ ﯾﻣﻛن إﺿﺎﻓﺔ ﻣﻛﺎن ﻣﺧ ّ‬
      ‫ﺻص‬
                                                                                                         ‫ﻹﻣﻛﺎﻧﯾﺔ اﻟﺗﻌﻠﯾﻖ(‬
                                                                                    ‫ّ‬
                                                                                  ‫• ﯾﺿﯾف ﺧﺎﺗﻣﺔ ﻣﻧﺎﺳﺑﺔ ﺗﻣ ّﮭد ﻹﻧﮭﺎء اﻟﻧصّ‬

                                                                                                              ‫ﯾوﻣﯾﺎت ﺷﺧﺻﯾﺔ‬
                                                                                                      ‫• ﯾﺿﻊ ﻋﻧواﻧﺎ ً ﻣﻧﺎﺳﺑﺎ ً‬
                                                                                    ‫• ﯾﺳﺟّل اﻟﯾوم واﻟﺗﺎرﯾﺦ )اﻟﻣﻛﺎن واﻟزﻣﺎن(‬
                                                           ‫• ﯾﺳرد اﻷﻓﻛﺎر واﻻﻧطﺑﺎﻋﺎت واﻷﺣداث ﺣﺳب وﻗوﻋﮭﺎ وﺗﺳﻠﺳﻠﮭﺎ اﻟزﻣﻧﻲ‬

                                                                                                                          ‫ﻣﻘﺎﺑﻠﺔ‬
                                                                                 ‫• ﯾﺿﻊ ﻋﻧواﻧﺎ وﻣﻘدﻣﺔ ﺗﻣ ّﮭد ﻟﻣوﺿوع اﻟﻣﻘﺎﺑﻠﺔ‬
                                           ‫ﻣﺗدرج وﻣﻧطﻘﻲ‬
                                                   ‫ّ‬    ‫• ﯾﺿ ّﻣن اﻟﻣﻘﺎﺑﻠﺔ أﺳﺋﻠﺔ وإﺟﺎﺑﺎت ﻣﺗراﺑطﺔ ﺗوﺿّﺢ ﺑﻧﺎء ﻧصّ اﻟﻣﻘﺎﺑﻠﺔ ﺑﺷﻛل‬
                                                                                                      ‫• ﯾﻠ ّﺧص اﻟﻣﻘﺎﺑﻠﺔ ﺑﺧﺎﺗﻣﺔ‬

                                                                                                                  ‫ﺧطﺎب ﺷﻔﮭﻲ‬
                                                  ‫• ﯾﻠﻘﻲ ﺗﺣﯾّﺔ ﺗﻧﺎﺳب اﻟﺟﻣﮭور اﻟﻣﺳﺗﮭدَف وﯾﺳﺗﺧدم ﻣﻘدّﻣﺔ ﻣﺧﺗﺻرة ﺗﻣ ّﮭد ﻟﻠﻣوﺿوع‬
                                                                                            ‫• اﺳﺗﺧدام ﺿﻣﯾر اﻟﻣﺧﺎطب واﻟﻣﺗﻛﻠّم‬
                                                                            ‫• ﯾﻧﮭﻲ اﻟﺧطﺎب ﺑﺗﻠﺧﯾص اﻷﻓﻛﺎر ﻣﻊ اﻟﺗﺣﯾﺔ اﻟﺧﺗﺎﻣﯾﺔ‬
