© International Baccalaureate Organization 2022

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2022

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2022

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
English ab initio – Standard level – Paper 2 – Reading comprehension
Anglais ab initio – Niveau moyen – Épreuve 2 – Compréhension écrite
Inglés ab initio – Nivel Medio – Prueba 2 – Comprensión de lectura
Thursday 12 May 2022 (afternoon)
Jeudi 12 mai 2022 (après-midi)
Jueves 12 de mayo de 2022 (tarde)

1h


Text booklet – Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this booklet until instructed to do so.
y This booklet accompanies paper 2 reading comprehension.

Livret de textes – Instructions destinées aux candidats
y N’ouvrez pas ce livret avant d’y être autorisé(e).
y Ce livret accompagne la partie de l’épreuve 2 portant sur la compréhension écrite.

Cuadernillo de textos – Instrucciones para los alumnos
y No abra este cuadernillo hasta que se lo autoricen.
y Este cuadernillo acompaña a la parte de comprensión de lectura de la prueba 2.




                                                                                              2222 – 2812
     4 pages/páginas                                      © International Baccalaureate Organization 2022
                     –2–                 2222 – 2812


Text A




         Removed for copyright reasons
                                                  –3–                                            2222 – 2812


Text B


                   T h e Yo u n g L e w i s h a m P r o j e c t




         The beginnings

         In 1974, some young people in Lewisham (London) were in trouble with the police. They were
         stealing motorbikes because they were bored and had nothing to do. It was then that one
         of the local residents read about a course where young people learnt to repair motorbikes.
   5     Together, the local residents of Lewisham made one of their garages into a small workshop
         and encouraged local youths to come and learn the basics of motorbike mechanics. The
         Young Lewisham Project was born.

         The here and now

         The Young Lewisham Project offers a wide range of vocational programmes to young people
  10     who are not doing well at school.

         Programmes take place each weekend at the project site. These include furniture-mending,
         art and gardening, as well as motorbike and bicycle maintenance. Up to 150 young people
         participate each year and can even take part in the planning process. Trips into the
         community also take place during the year.

  15     When participants complete the Young Lewisham Project, they are encouraged to continue
         with other educational courses or work placements. Several of the participants have now
         been offered paid employment by the Young Lewisham Project itself.

         Thanks to the Young Lewisham Project, young people learn to be active citizens. They have
         a feeling of well-being, take self-responsibility, develop their communication skills, and learn
  20     about the local community. In addition, they develop friendships with people on the course.




                                                               Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                   –4–                                           2222 – 2812


Text C




         Teen inventor’s tips to make you creative
         When Ann Makosinski was growing up in Canada, she
         didn’t play video games and seldom watched television
         – only half an hour on weekends when her schoolwork
         was done. Instead, she listened to 19th century opera and
    5    classical Indian music, learned piano and violin, watched
         silent films at home and played with electronic gadgets.

         Now 19 years old, Makosinski has won several major
         prizes for her inventions. These include a flashlight that
         works with the heat of the human hand and a coffee cup
  10     that uses heat to charge a phone.

         Our news reporter talked with her to get some advice about how to be creative from an early
         age and how to turn a good idea into an invention. Here are some of her tips.

         [ – 28 – ]
         Unlike most of her friends, Makosinski did not have a cellphone at high school. She says she
  15     concentrated better on her studies without it. She suggests that creative people who want more
         time to invent go on a technology-free diet for a week or two. “In this way, they will have more
         spare time.”

         [ – 29 – ]
         Makosinski chose to study English literature at university. She explains that it is important to
  20     develop an interest in both art and science. “If you make something but the invention does not
         look good to the customer, nobody is going to buy it.”

         [ – 30 – ]
         According to Makosinski, one of the hardest parts of creating something is not giving up even
         when the task is difficult and you are not good at it.

  25     [ – 31 – ]
         Makosinski believes that you must concentrate on a project. “You should not listen to loud music
         or go to social get-togethers.”

         [ – 32 – ]
         Makosinski says that when you start to create something you must not think about the goal
  30     or the dream but instead, accept you might not be successful. “The first time you try to make
         something, it probably won’t work but you learn more when you fix a mistake than when you get
         it right immediately.”
Disclaimer:

Texts used in IB language assessments are taken from authentic, third-party sources. The views expressed within
them belong to their individual authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the IB.

References:

Text B   Young Lewisham Project, n.d., All About Us. [online] Available at: https://www.younglewisham.org.uk/our-vision
         [Accessed 24 November 2018]. Source adapted.

Text C   Slaughter, G., 2017. Teen inventor’s seven tips to make you creative too. [online] Available at:
         https://www.ctvnews.ca/lifestyle/teen-inventor-s-seven-tips-to-make-you-creative-too-1.3229524
         [Accessed 11 November 2018]. Source adapted.
