M22/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                   May / Mai / Mayo de 2022

                  English / Anglais / Inglés B


                         Higher level
                       Niveau supérieur
                        Nivel Superior


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




9 pages/páginas
                                            –2–              M22/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2022

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2022

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2022

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                –3–              M22/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion A: Language

How successfully does the candidate command written language?
• To what extent is the vocabulary appropriate and varied?
• To what extent are the grammatical structures varied?
• To what extent does the accuracy of the language contribute to effective communication?

 Marks                                         Level descriptor
    0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
            Command of the language is limited.
            Vocabulary is sometimes appropriate to the task.
  1–3       Some basic grammatical structures are used, with some attempts to use more
            complex structures.
            Language contains errors in both basic and more complex structures. Errors interfere
            with communication.
            Command of the language is partially effective.
            Vocabulary is generally appropriate to the task and varied.
  4–6       A variety of basic and some more complex grammatical structures is used.
            Language is mostly accurate for basic structures, but errors occur in more complex
            structures. Errors at times interfere with communication.
            Command of the language is effective and mostly accurate.
            Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied, including the use of idiomatic
            expressions.
  7–9
            A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used effectively.
            Language is mostly accurate. Occasional errors in basic and in complex grammatical
            structures do not interfere with communication.
            Command of the language is mostly accurate and very effective.
            Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and nuanced and varied in a manner that
            enhances the message, including the purposeful use of idiomatic expressions.
 10–12      A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used selectively in
            order to enhance communication.
            Language is mostly accurate. Minor errors in more complex grammatical structures
            do not interfere with communication.

Language
Not all errors have the same importance, and examiners should bear this in mind. Some errors
affect the communication of meaning significantly, and others do not. Also, some errors indicate a
fundamental lack of command of the language, while others may simply indicate a moment of
forgetfulness.

SLIPS – mistakes at all levels of difficulty, but erratic and occasional – eg the candidate normally
forms past tenses well, but occasionally forgets “-ed”.

FLAWS – errors occur more regularly, particularly in certain structures – eg past tenses are formed
correctly quite often, but are not really reliable, and there may be basic confusions (eg past simple
versus present perfect).

GAPS – some structures are rarely correct, or simply don’t appear – eg the past tenses are
needed, but do not appear.
                                                      –4–                 M22/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B: Message
To what extent does the candidate fulfil the task?
  • How relevant are the ideas to the task?
  • To what extent are ideas developed?
  • To what extent do the clarity and organization of ideas contribute to the successful delivery of
    the message?

The “descriptor unpacked” explain the assessment criteria in greater detail. Where a candidate’s
response does not correspond exactly to a single mark band, the statements in bold should be
used as a guide for the ‘best fit’ approach.

Marks            Level descriptor                                    Descriptor unpacked
  0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
        The task is partially fulfilled.          The link between the response and task tends to be unclear;
                                                  the reader has difficulty understanding the message.
        Few ideas are relevant to the task.
                                                  The response touches upon some aspects of the task but there
        Ideas are stated, but with no             is also much unrelated information.
 1–3    development.
                                                  The response addresses the task in a simple manner, and
        Ideas are not clearly presented and do    supporting details and/or examples barely feature, if at all.
        not follow a logical structure, making
        the message difficult to determine.       The ideas do not link well together; inadequate or inappropriate
                                                  use of cohesive devices confuse the message.
        The task is generally fulfilled.          The link between the response and the task is mostly
                                                  detectable; the reader’s general understanding of the
        Some ideas are relevant to the task.      message is not impeded, despite some ambiguity.
        Ideas are outlined, but are not fully     The response covers some aspects of the task, or touches upon
        developed.                                all aspects but superficially.
 4–6
        Ideas are generally clearly presented     The response includes some supporting details and examples.
        and the response is generally
        structured in a logical manner, leading   The ideas are organized in a logical way; some cohesive
        to a mostly successful delivery of the    devices are used appropriately to aid the delivery of the
        message.                                  message, although there may be areas of confusion at times.
        The task is fulfilled.                    The link between the response and the task is clear; the
                                                  reader has a good understanding of the message conveyed.
        Most ideas are relevant to the task.
                                                  The response covers all aspects of the task, despite losing focus
        Ideas are developed well, with some       at times.
        detail and examples.
 7–9                                              The response uses supporting details and examples to clarify
        Ideas are clearly presented and the       the message.
        response is structured in a logical
        manner, supporting the delivery of the    The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive devices are
        message.                                  used appropriately to deliver the message with little or no
                                                  ambiguity.
        The task is fulfilled effectively.        The link between the response and the task is precise and
                                                  consistently evident; the reader has a clear understanding
        Ideas are relevant to the task.           of the message conveyed.
        Ideas are fully developed, providing      The response covers all aspects of the task fully, and maintains
        details and relevant examples.            focus throughout.
10–12
        Ideas are clearly presented and the       The response uses well-chosen supporting details and examples
        response is structured in a logical and   to illustrate and explain ideas persuasively.
        coherent manner that supports the
        delivery of the message.                  The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive devices are
                                                  used appropriately to deliver the message with clarity and ease.


Note: When marking candidate responses, keep in mind that neither the factual accuracy of the
information presented, nor the validity of the candidates’ personal opinions, are being assessed.
Therefore, scripts that are factually inaccurate should not be marked down, provided the ideas
presented have coherence and are sufficiently developed.
                                                –5–              M22/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion C: Conceptual understanding

To what extent does the candidate demonstrate conceptual understanding?
   •    To what extent is the choice of text type appropriate to the task?
   •    To what extent are register and tone appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of
        the task?
   •    To what extent does the response incorporate the conventions of the chosen text type?

 Marks                                        Level descriptor
   0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
          Conceptual understanding is limited.
          The choice of text type is generally inappropriate to the context, purpose or audience.
  1–2     The register and tone are inappropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
          task.
          The response incorporates limited recognizable conventions of the chosen text type.
          Conceptual understanding is mostly demonstrated.
          The choice of text type is generally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
  3–4     The register and tone, while occasionally appropriate to the context, purpose and
          audience of the task, fluctuate throughout the response.
          The response incorporates some conventions of the chosen text type.
          Conceptual understanding is fully demonstrated.
          The choice of text type is appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
  5–6     The register and tone are appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
          task.
          The response fully incorporates the conventions of the chosen text type.



Note: Examiners must balance all three elements in criterion C (choice of text type,
appropriateness of tone and register, and use of text type conventions) to arrive at the final mark.
                                                   –6–               M22/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


 Question specific guidance (Criterion B and C)

 Task 1

 You and your friend planned to travel together after graduation but you fell out because you
 could not agree on where to go or what to do. Now, you want to resolve the situation with your
 friend. Write a text in which you express why you think the situation occurred, how your feelings
 have changed, and offer ideas that both you and your friend might be able to agree to.

 Email                             Journal entry                     Proposal

 Criterion B:
 •   The three required elements of the task are (i) to express the writer’s views on why the
     situation occurred, (ii) to reflect on how the writer’s feelings have changed, and (iii) to propose
     plans that both parties might be able to agree to.
 •   Equal weight does not have to be given to all three elements, but all should be given some
     developed attention. If one is ignored, or given only cursory attention [e.g. if (i) states one view
     only, (ii) merely takes the form of a single-sentence apology, or if (iii) consists solely of a
     suggestion to meet over coffee to discuss possible plans], no more than the 4-6 band should
     be awarded, since the task has only been ‘generally fulfilled’ at best.
 •   Discussion of (i) may include a description of what happened, but it should focus primarily on
     their thoughts as to why they fell out; (ii) may mention negative feelings only but should give
     particular opinion on how negative feelings, such as anger, disappointment, resentment,
     despair, detachment, frustration etc., have changed; (iii) may mention what each individually
     would like to do but should suggest a conciliatory action plan.
 •   The ingenuity of the plans outlined in (iii) should not affect marking, as long as they are
     relevant and reasonably credible.

 Criterion C:
 Choice of text type:
                            Text type        Rationale
Appropriate                 Email            This text type is suitable for individual communication
                                             to a specific friend/acquaintance, and for the
                                             exploration of personal attitudes and experiences.
Generally appropriate       Journal entry    This text type is suitable for expressing one’s thoughts,
                                             but it is primarily for personal and private
                                             communication, to oneself. This choice may be
                                             considered ‘appropriate’ if the response covers all three
                                             elements and is clearly designed as a draft of ideas to
                                             be communicated to the friend in some other way.
Generally inappropriate     Proposal         This text type is typically used for setting out strategies
                                             for addressing a problem in a formal way. It is not
                                             usually used to communicate personal issues with
                                             another individual.

 Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
 conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the
 “generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.

 Register and tone:
 •   informal register
 •   an apologetic tone, which may become encouraging, engaging and lively

 Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                  –7–                M22/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


 Task 2

 You are increasingly frustrated by the world’s apparent inability to address the challenges of
 climate change. You want to engage the attention of the wider community. Write a text in which
 you describe your frustration, outline a possible plan for action, and explain why it is important to
 take action now.

 Blog                               Email                            Letter to the Editor

 Criterion B:

 •   The three required elements of the task are (i) to describe personal frustration about the lack of
     action on climate change, (ii) to outline a possible plan for action, and (iii) to explain the
     importance of taking action now, rather than at some future date.
 •   Equal weight does not have to be given to all three elements, but all should be given some
     developed attention. If one is ignored, or given only cursory attention [e.g. if (i) merely takes the
     form of a single-sentence statement of frustration, ii) mentions only one action now, or if (iii)
     says in a sentence that taking action now is important], no more than the 4-6 band should be
     awarded, since the task has only been ‘generally fulfilled’ at best.
 •   Factual knowledge about e.g. the science behind climate change need not be accurate, and
     the action plan need not be strictly feasible. Neither of these factors should affect marking, as
     long as the ideas expressed are reasonably relevant.

 Criterion C:

 Choice of text type:
                            Text type        Rationale
Appropriate                 Letter to the    This text type is suitable for raising awareness among
                            Editor           members of the public about an issue of concern to
                                             the writer. The aim is to express the writer’s personal
                                             perspective as persuasively as possible.
Generally appropriate       Blog             This text type is suitable for first-person
                                             communication, normally to an audience of people
                                             who share an interest in the topic. The choice may be
                                             considered ‘appropriate’ if the writer urges the readers
                                             to follow up with action that will ‘engage the attention
                                             of the wider community’ (e.g. spread the word,
                                             organise campaigns, etc.).
Generally inappropriate     Email            This text type is typically used for individual
                                             communication to a specific friend/acquaintance. It is
                                             not usually used to ‘engage the attention of the wider
                                             community’.

 Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
 conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the
 “generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.


 Register and tone:
 • semi-formal to formal register; flashes of informality permitted if the text is a Blog or Email
 • an appropriately serious, persuasive tone

 Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                    –8–              M22/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


 Task 3

 Your friend recently experienced cyberbullying, and you feel this is an increasingly common
 problem. You want to involve your school in addressing the problem. Write a text in which you
 describe what happened to your friend, explain the effects of cyberbullying on the school
 community, and suggest ways in which your school could tackle the problem.

 Email                               Letter to the Editor            Proposal

 Criterion B:

 •   The three required elements of the task are (i) to describe the cyberbullying experienced by the
     friend, (ii) to explain the effects that cyberbullying is having on the wider school community, and
     (iii) to suggest ways in which the school could tackle the problem.
 •   Equal weight does not have to be given to all three elements, but all should be given some
     developed attention. In this case, element (iii) is especially important. If any element is ignored,
     or given only cursory attention [e.g. if either (i) or (ii) is only very brief and general, without any
     detail], no more than the 4-6 band should be awarded, since the task has only been ‘generally
     fulfilled’ at best.
 •   Discussion of (i) may introduce the topic of cyberbullying in general, but should focus on the
     friend’s experience; (ii) may include impacts on individuals, but it should focus primarily on how
     the issue affects the wider school community; (iii) may refer to an overall solution but should
     focus specifically on detailed ways in which the school could tackle the problem.
 •   The practicality of the measures proposed in (iii) should not affect marking, as long as they are
     relevant and reasonably credible.

 Criterion C:

 Choice of text type:
                             Text type         Rationale
Appropriate                  Proposal          This text type is suitable for communication to a group
                                               or an individual with decision-making powers, such as
                                               the Principal and other key stakeholders in the school
                                               community. It is suited to outline a problem and
                                               setting out strategies for addressing it.
Generally appropriate        Email             This text type is commonly used for individual
                                               communication, and for the exploration of personal
                                               attitudes and experiences. The choice may be
                                               considered ‘appropriate’ if the response is specifically
                                               addressed to the Principal or other school authority.
Generally inappropriate      Letter to the     This text type is typically used for raising awareness
                             Editor            about an issue of concern to the writer among the
                                               general public. It is not used to communicate with a
                                               specific individual or group about a localized issue
                                               (i.e. ways to tackle cyberbullying at their school).

 Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
 conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the
 “generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.

 Register and tone:
 • semi-formal to formal register
 • serious, polite and persuasive tone

 Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                               –9–              M22/2/ABENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Appendix: Text type conventions (Criterion C)

The most common and recognisable conventions of the text types are given below:

Email
• clear sense of address to a specific person
• statement of Subject in the heading
• appropriate opening and closing salutations

Journal entry
• first person narration
• closing statement to round off the entry
• no self-evident explanatory phrases (e.g. “I saw Alicia, my best friend”)

Proposal
• title summarising the overall subject
• clearly set-out format, e.g. headings, short clear paragraphs, bullets, numbering, insetting etc.
• style aimed to persuade a specified audience

Blog
• first person statement and/or narration
• awareness of the reader, e.g. direct address, a lively and interesting style etc.
• closing statement, e.g. invitation to comment, a conclusion drawn etc.

Letter to the editor
• appropriate opening and closing salutations
• reference to the original article/issue raised
• interesting and engaging style
