M22/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                   May / Mai / Mayo de 2022

        English / Anglais / Inglés ab initio


                         Standard level
                         Niveau moyen
                          Nivel Medio


               Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




13 pages/páginas
                                            –2–              M22/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2022

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2022

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2022

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                –3–              M22/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Criterion A: Language

How successfully does the candidate command written language?
• To what extent is the vocabulary appropriate and varied?
• To what extent are the grammatical structures varied?
• To what extent does the accuracy of the language contribute to effective communication?

  Marks    Level descriptor
    0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
           Command of the language is limited
           Vocabulary is sometimes appropriate to the task.
    1-2    Basic grammatical structures are used.
           Language contains errors in basic structures. Abundant repetition and inaccuracies
           interfere with meaning.
           Command of the language is generally effective.
           Vocabulary is generally appropriate to the task, and varied.
           Some basic grammatical structures are used, with some attempts to use more complex
    3-4
           structures.
           Language is generally accurate for basic structures, but errors occur in more complex
           structures. Errors at times interfere with communication.
           Command of the language is effective and mostly accurate.
           Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied.
    5-6
           A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used effectively.
           Language is mostly accurate. Occasional errors do not interfere with communication.


Language
Not all errors have the same importance, and examiners should bear this in mind. Some errors
affect the communication of meaning significantly, and others do not. Also, some errors indicate a
fundamental lack of command of the language, while others may simply indicate a moment of
forgetfulness.

SLIPS – mistakes at all levels of difficulty, but erratic and occasional – eg the candidate normally
forms past tenses well, but occasionally forgets “-ed”.

FLAWS – errors occur more regularly, particularly in certain structures – eg past tenses are formed
correctly quite often, but are not really reliable, and there may be basic confusions (eg past simple
versus present perfect).

GAPS – some structures are rarely correct, or simply don’t appear – eg the past tenses are
needed, but do not appear.
                                                 –4–              M22/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B: Message

To what extent does the candidate fulfil the task?
   • How relevant are the ideas to the task?
   • To what extent are ideas developed?
   • To what extent do the clarity and organization of ideas contribute to the successful delivery
      of the message?

The “descriptor unpacked” explain the assessment criteria in greater detail. Where a candidate’s
response does not correspond exactly to a single mark band, the statements in bold should be
used as a guide for the ‘best fit’ approach.

 Marks   Level descriptor                    Descriptor unpacked
 0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
 1–2     The task is partially fulfilled. The link between the response and task is unclear at
                                          times; the reader has difficulty in understanding the
         Some ideas are relevant.
                                          message.
         Ideas are stated, but with no
                                          The response covers only some points in the task, and
         development.
                                          not all the points expressed are relevant.
         Ideas are not clearly presented
                                          Supporting details and/or examples barely feature, if at
         and do not follow a logical
                                          all.
         structure, making the message
         difficult to determine.          The ideas do not link well together; inadequate or
                                          inappropriate use of cohesive devices confuse the
                                          message.
 3–4     The task is generally fulfilled.    The link between the response and the task is mostly
                                             clear; the reader’s overall understanding is not
         Most ideas are relevant to the
                                             impeded, despite some ambiguity.
         task.
                                             The response covers most of the points in the task, and
         Some ideas are developed with
                                             most of the points expressed are relevant.
         some detail and examples.
                                             The response includes some supporting details and
         Ideas are generally clearly
                                             examples.
         presented and the response is
         generally structured in a logical   The ideas are organized in a logical way; basic cohesive
         manner, leading to a mostly         devices are used correctly to aid the delivery of the
         successful delivery of the          message, although they may be areas of slight confusion
         message.                            at times.
 5–6     The task is fulfilled               The link between the response and the task is clear;
         effectively.                        the reader has a good understanding of the message
                                             conveyed.
         Ideas are relevant to the task.
                                             The response covers all the points in the task, and the
         Ideas are developed well,
                                             points expressed are relevant.
         providing details and relevant
         examples.                           The response uses supporting details and examples to
                                             clarify the message.
         Ideas are clearly presented and
         the response is structured in a     The ideas are organized well; a range of basic cohesive
         logical manner, supporting the      devices are used correctly to deliver the message with
         delivery of the message.            little or no ambiguity.


Note: When marking candidate responses, keep in mind that neither the factual accuracy of the
information presented, nor the validity of the candidates’ personal opinions, are being assessed.
Therefore, scripts that are factually inaccurate should not be marked down, provided the ideas
presented have coherence and are sufficiently developed.
                                                    –5–              M22/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion C: Conceptual understanding

To what extent does the candidate demonstrate conceptual understanding?
   •       To what extent is the choice of text type appropriate to the task?
   •       To what extent are register and tone appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of
           the task?
   •       To what extent does the response incorporate the conventions of the chosen text type?

  Marks       Level descriptor
    0         The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
              Conceptual understanding is limited.
              The choice of text type is generally inappropriate to the context, purpose or audience.
       1
              The register and tone are inappropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the task.
              The response incorporates limited recognizable conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is mostly demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is generally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
       2      The register and tone, while occasionally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience
              of the task, fluctuate throughout the response.
              The response incorporates some conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is fully demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
       3
              The register and tone are appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the task.
              The response fully incorporates the conventions of the chosen text type.


Note: Examiners must balance all three elements in criterion C (choice of text type,
appropriateness of tone and register, and use of text type conventions) to arrive at the final mark.
                                                 –6–                M22/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Question specific guidance (Criterion B and C)


Task 1

 You want to celebrate the end of your high school studies with all the students in your class. Write
 a text to encourage them to mark this moment in their lives. Explain why this celebration is
 important and suggest two or more activities that students can do together.

 Blog                              Card                                Speech


Criterion B:

Points to be covered:
• a reference to the context: the class is about to graduate from high school and students in the
  class should mark this occasion
• one or more reasons to explain why this celebration is important (they may not see each other
  for a long time, school graduation marks a new stage in life…)
• at least two suggestions of activities students can do together to mark this occasion (a
  celebratory meal, an excursion, a ceremony…)


Criterion C:

Choice of text type:
                            Text type             Rationale
Appropriate                 Speech                The text type is suited to delivering a message to
                                                  a group of people gathered in a specific place (e.g.,
                                                  a meeting in a school).
Generally appropriate       Blog                  The text type is suited to delivering a message to
                                                  a group of people, but it is a mass media text so it
                                                  is not generally used to contact people the writer
                                                  knows (classmates). However, if the response
                                                  makes clear that the blog is to be read by
                                                  classmates (e.g. a class blog), it may be
                                                  considered “appropriate”.
Generally inappropriate     Card                  The text type is usually addressed to a single
                                                  recipient and not to a group. It is generally used for
                                                  informing and is not discursive i.e. it would not
                                                  include an explanation or suggestion (as required
                                                  by the task).

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”, and the
“generally inappropriate” text type can considered “generally appropriate”.

Register and tone:
• Register is semi-formal with some informal elements
• Tone is persuasive and enthusiastic

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                 –7–                M22/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Task 2

 Your neighbours have phoned to ask you to look after their children because of a family
 emergency. Your parents are not at home. Write a text to inform your parents about the situation:
 where you are, what the emergency is and what you are doing to help the neighbours.

 Blog                               Email                              Message

Criterion B:

Points to be covered:
• a reference to the context: the writer informs their parents about where they are (next door, at
  the neighbours’).
• an explanation of why they are at the neighbours’ house with a reference to a specific
  emergency (one of the neighbours’ children is in hospital; the parents had to work late
  unexpectedly…) “I am at the neighbours’ because of a family emergency”, without a reference
  to a specific event, is not sufficient.
• a description of what the writer is doing to help the neighbours with at least one specific activity
  (making dinner, helping with homework, babysitting...). “I am helping the neighbours”. without a
  precise example, is not sufficient.


Criterion C:

Choice of text type:
                            Text type             Rationale
Appropriate                 Message               This text type (which may be interpreted as a
                                                  written note/message, WhatsApp message or
                                                  other electronic message) is suited to
                                                  communicating a simple message with people who
                                                  share the same space, or are in close contact (a
                                                  family or friend).
Generally appropriate       Email                 The text type is suited to communicating with
                                                  individuals or small groups known to the writer, but
                                                  not necessarily with people the writer comes in
                                                  regular contact with (parents). However, if the
                                                  response makes clear that the target audience is
                                                  ‘the parents’, it may be considered appropriate.
Generally inappropriate     Blog                  The text type is primarily a mass media text and
                                                  not usually used to communicate a message to a
                                                  specific person(s).

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”, and the
“generally inappropriate” text type can considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• Register is semi-formal to informal
• Tone is informative and possibly anxious.

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                –8–                 M22/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Task 3

 As part of your high school exchange programme, you are going to spend three months living with
 a family in an English-speaking country. Write a text to introduce yourself to the family: describe
 your character and your interests and explain why you decided to participate in this exchange
 programme.

 Email                             Message                             Speech

Criterion B:

Points to be covered:
• a reference to the purpose of the text: to introduce the writer to an English-speaking family
• at least one reference to the writer’s character (shy, enthusiastic, optimistic...).
• a mention of at least one interest (sports, music, languages…).
• at least one reason for participating in the exchange programme (to travel, to improve their
  English, to meet interesting people…).


Criterion C:

Choice of text type:
                            Text type             Rationale
Appropriate                 Email                 The text type is suited to personal communication
                                                  with specific people known to the writer, but who
                                                  are not in close proximity.
Generally appropriate       Message               The text type (which may be interpreted as a
                                                  written note/message, WhatsApp message or
                                                  other electronic message) is suited for giving
                                                  information, but not necessarily for addressing
                                                  people the writer has not yet met.
Generally inappropriate     Speech                The text type is typically used for delivering a
                                                  message to a group of people gathered in a
                                                  specific place (e.g., a meeting). It is not suited to
                                                  addressing one or two people (a host family).

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”, and the
“generally inappropriate” text type can considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• Register is semi-formal
• Tone is enthusiastic and informative

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                –9–                 M22/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Task 4

 In your town, people prefer to travel by car rather than by public transport. Write a text to explain
 the advantages of using public transport and to suggest two other ways to reduce the traffic in the
 centre of town.

 Article                           Debate                              Report


Criterion B:

Points to be covered:
• a reference to the issue: people in the town prefer to travel by car than by public transport
• at least one advantage of using public transport (reduced cost, no difficulty parking, less
  pollution in the town centre…)
• two (or more) suggestions to reduce traffic in the centre of town (develop tram and bus
  services; provide free bicycles…)


Criterion C:

Choice of text type:
                            Text type             Rationale
Appropriate                 Article               The text type is a mass media text type and is
                                                  suited to providing information to a large audience
                                                  that the writer does not know (people in the town).
Generally appropriate       Report                The text type is suited to providing an evaluation of
                                                  something that has taken place (the traffic
                                                  situation), but it is usually intended to be read by a
                                                  specific person not a large audience. If the
                                                  response makes clear that the report has been
                                                  published to be read by the people of the town, it
                                                  may be considered “appropriate”.
Generally inappropriate     Debate                The text type is typically used to provide a
                                                  reasoned argument for or against an idea; it is not
                                                  usually a mass media text.


Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”, and the
“generally inappropriate” text type can considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• Register is semi-formal
• Tone is informative and persuasive.

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                – 10 –              M22/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Task 5

 As part of the work experience programme at your school, you had a summer job at the local
 library. This experience was generally interesting but sometimes difficult. Write a text for the
 supervisor of the programme to describe what you did, what you enjoyed and what you found
 difficult.

 Email                              Interview                          Report


Criterion B:

Points to be covered:
• a reference to the context: a text addressed to the supervisor about work experience at the local
  library
• at least one example of the work done in the library (sorting the books, helping customers,
  answering questions…)
• at least one reference to an enjoyable aspect of the job (helping children, choosing books for
  display). NB. the example should not repeat information already given.
• at least one reference to an aspect which was not enjoyable (working on weekends, not
  listening to music or talking while in the library). NB. the example should not repeat information
  already given.


Criterion C:

Choice of text type:
                            Text type             Rationale
Appropriate                 Report                The text type is suited to providing an evaluation of
                                                  something that has taken place (work experience),
                                                  to be read by a specific person (the supervisor).
Generally appropriate       Email                 The text type is suitable for communicating with a
                                                  person or people known to the writer. However, it
                                                  is less suitable as a formal and evaluative text.
                                                  If the email contains a formal evaluation, such as a
                                                  report, then the choice may be considered
                                                  “appropriate”.
Generally inappropriate     Interview             The text type is primarily a mass media text type
                                                  and not usually addressed to a specific person (the
                                                  supervisor).

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”, and the
“generally inappropriate” text type can considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• Register is semi formal to formal
• Tone is informative and logical

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                 – 11 –             M22/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Task 6

 Should young people have the right to vote at age 15? Your teacher has asked you to share your
 thoughts on this topic with the class. Write a text either agreeing or disagreeing with this idea. Give
 three reasons to support your opinion.

 Article                              Debate                           Interview


Criterion B:

Points to be covered:
• a reference to the topic for discussion (should people have the right to vote at age 15?) and to
  the audience (the class)
• the opinion of the speaker: an expression of agreement or disagreement
• three reasons to either agree or disagree. If the candidate gives reasons both to agree and
  disagree, award the lower mark in the appropriate mark band.


Criterion C:

Choice of text type:
                            Text type             Rationale
Appropriate                 Debate                The text type is suited to providing a reasoned
                                                  argument for or against an idea (the right to vote at
                                                  15). It is suitable for a school context.
Generally appropriate       Article               The text type is suited to communicating ideas of
                                                  general interest to the audience, but it is usually a
                                                  mass media text and not usually used in a small
                                                  group context (the class). The choice may be
                                                  considered “appropriate” if the response makes
                                                  clear that this is an article published in a
                                                  school/class              newspaper/magazine/online
                                                  platform.
Generally inappropriate     Interview             The text type is primarily a mass media text type
                                                  and not usually written for a small group (the
                                                  class). It is also a text type in which another
                                                  person’s views are presented through a series of
                                                  questions, rather than the writers’ own views.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type can be considered “appropriate”, and the
“generally inappropriate” text type can considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• Register is semi-formal
• Tone is persuasive

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                               – 12 –          M22/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Appendix: Text type conventions (Criterion C)

The most common and recognisable conventions of the text types are given below:

Article
    • Headline / title
    • Writer’s name
    • Date of publication
    • Brief introduction and conclusion

Blog
   •   Title
   •   Time / Date
   •   Writer’s name / username
   •   Reference to audience (directly, or through use of “we” and “you” etc)

Card
   •   Name of the recipient and sender
   •   Opening salutations
   •   Closing salutations
   •   Date

Debate
   • The topic of the debate
   • The opinion of the debater on the topic
   • Arguments for or against the topic
   • A concluding comment

Email
  • Form of address (“Dear…”, “To…”)
  • Opening and closing greeting
  • Sender’s name

Interview
    • Title
    • Question and answer format or reported speech
    • Short introduction
    • Concluding remarks (These may be quite detailed or limited to, “Thank you”)
    • Name of interviewer

Message
  • Name of sender and recipient
  • Opening comment / title/ salutations
  • Closing comment or salutations
  • time/date/place

   N.B. Accept messages delivered electronically (eg text/SMS messages). In such cases, the
   name of the sender is not essential.
   If the electronic message is presented as a conversation/dialogue, this is acceptable as long as
   the person replying is the target audience.
                                             – 13 –          M22/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Report
   • Date
   • Title
   • Author of report
   • Short introduction and conclusion

Speech
   • Opening address / greeting / statement
   • Reference to audience (directly, or through use of “we” and “you” etc)
   • Concluding remarks / closing statement
