M22/2/ABKOR/SP1/KOR/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                   May / Mai / Mayo de 2022


             Korean / Coréen / Coreano B


                         Standard level
                         Niveau moyen
                          Nivel Medio


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




9 pages/páginas
                                            –2–              M22/2/ABKOR/SP1/KOR/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2022

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2022

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2022

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                             –3–            M22/2/ABKOR/SP1/KOR/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion A: Language

How successfully does the candidate command written language?
• To what extent is the vocabulary appropriate and varied?
• To what extent are the grammatical structures varied?
• To what extent does the accuracy of the language contribute to effective communication?

  Marks                                      Level descriptor
     0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
            Command of the language is limited.
            Vocabulary is sometimes appropriate to the task.
   1–3
            Basic grammatical structures are used.
            Language contains errors in basic structures. Errors interfere with communication.
            Command of the language is partially effective.
            Vocabulary is appropriate to the task.
            Some basic grammatical structures are used, with some attempts to use more
   4–6
            complex structures.
            Language is mostly accurate for basic structures, but errors occur in more complex
            structures. Errors at times interfere with communication.
            Command of the language is effective and mostly accurate.
            Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied.
   7–9      A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used.
            Language is mostly accurate. Occasional errors in basic and in complex grammatical
            structures do not interfere with communication.
            Command of the language is mostly accurate and very effective.
            Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied, including the use of idiomatic
            expressions.
  10–12
            A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used effectively.
            Language is mostly accurate. Minor errors in more complex grammatical structures
            do not interfere with communication.


언어
모든 오류의 중요도가 같지 않으며 평가자들은 이 점을 기억하여야 합니다. 뜻을 전달하는데
있어서 중대한 영향을 미치는 오류가 있고, 그렇지 않은 오류도 있습니다. 또한, 어떤 오류는 순간
착각을 하여 한 실수일 수도 있지만 어떤 오류는 그 언어 사용에 대한 기본적인 이해가 되어 있지
않아서 저지르는 오류입니다.
실수 (Slips) – 모든 난이도에서 일어날 수 있는 실수이지만 가끔, 그리고 일정치 않게 일어나야
합니다. – 예를 들어, 학생이 보통은 과거 시제를 잘 사용하였지만 가끔 실수를 하는 경우입니다.
결점 (Flaws) – 보다 규칙적으로, 특히 특정 문법 구조에 일어나는 오류입니다. – 예를 들어, 과거
시제를 바르게 쓰는 경우가 많이 있어도 정확도가 안정적이지 못 하여 학생이 기본적으로 다른
시제와 혼동 하고 있는 경우입니다.

결함 (Gaps) – 어떤 언어 구조가 올바로 사용되는 경우가 거의 없거나 아예 없는 경우입니다. –
예를 들어, 과거 시제가 필요한 경우에도 과거 시제를 사용하지 못 하는 경우입니다.
                                                 –4–             M22/2/ABKOR/SP1/KOR/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B: Message
To what extent does the candidate fulfil the task?
  • How relevant are the ideas to the task?
  • To what extent are ideas developed?
  • To what extent do the clarity and organization of ideas contribute to the successful delivery of
    the message?

The “descriptor unpacked” explain the assessment criteria in greater detail. Where a candidate’s
response does not correspond exactly to a single mark band, the statements in bold should be
used as a guide for the ‘best fit’ approach.

 Marks            Level descriptor                              Descriptor unpacked
   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
         The task is partially fulfilled.    The link between the response and task tends to
                                                 be unclear; the reader has difficulty understanding
         Few ideas are relevant to the task.     the message.
         Ideas are stated, but with no           The response touches upon some aspects of the task
         development.                            but there is also much unrelated information.
  1–3    Ideas are not clearly presented and     The response addresses the task in a simple manner,
         do not follow a logical structure,      and supporting details and/or examples barely feature,
         making the message difficult to         if at all.
         determine.                              The ideas do not link well together; inadequate or
                                                 inappropriate use of cohesive devices confuse the
                                                 message.
         The task is generally fulfilled.        The link between the response and the task is
                                                 mostly detectable; the reader’s general
         Some ideas are relevant to the          understanding of the message is not impeded,
         task.                                   despite some ambiguity.
         Ideas are outlined, but are not fully   The response covers some aspects of the task, or
         developed.                              touches upon all aspects but superficially.
  4–6
         Ideas are generally clearly             The response includes some supporting details and
         presented and the response is           examples.
         generally structured in a logical       The ideas are organized in a logical way; some
         manner, leading to a mostly             cohesive devices are used appropriately to aid the
         successful delivery of the              delivery of the message, although there may be areas
         message.                                of confusion at times.

         The task is fulfilled.                  The link between the response and the task is
                                                 clear; the reader has a good understanding of the
         Most ideas are relevant to the task.    message conveyed.
         Ideas are developed well, with          The response covers all aspects of the task, despite
         some detail and examples.               losing focus at times.
  7–9
         Ideas are clearly presented and the     The response uses supporting details and examples to
         response is structured in a logical     clarify the message.
         manner, supporting the delivery of      The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive
         the message.                            devices are used appropriately to deliver the message
                                                 with little or no ambiguity.
         The task is fulfilled effectively.      The link between the response and the task is
                                                 precise and consistently evident; the reader has a
         Ideas are relevant to the task.         clear understanding of the message conveyed.
 10–12
         Ideas are fully developed, providing The response covers all aspects of the task fully, and
         details and relevant examples.       maintains focus throughout.
                                                    –5–             M22/2/ABKOR/SP1/KOR/TZ0/XX/M


             Ideas are clearly presented and the    The response uses well-chosen supporting details and
             response is structured in a logical    examples to illustrate and explain ideas persuasively.
             and coherent manner that               The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive
             supports the delivery of the           devices are used appropriately to deliver the message
             message.                               with clarity and ease.


Note: When marking candidate responses, keep in mind that neither the factual accuracy of the
information presented, nor the validity of the candidates’ personal opinions, are being assessed.
Therefore, scripts that are factually inaccurate should not be marked down, provided the ideas
presented have coherence and are sufficiently developed.



Criterion C: Conceptual understanding

To what extent does the candidate demonstrate conceptual understanding?
   •       To what extent is the choice of text type appropriate to the task?
   •       To what extent are register and tone appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of
           the task?
   •       To what extent does the response incorporate the conventions of the chosen text type?

  Marks                                            Level descriptor
       0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
              Conceptual understanding is limited.
              The choice of text type is generally inappropriate to the context, purpose or audience.
   1–2        The register and tone are inappropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response incorporates limited recognizable conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is mostly demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is generally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   3–4        The register and tone, while occasionally appropriate to the context, purpose and
              audience of the task, fluctuate throughout the response.
              The response incorporates some conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is fully demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   5–6        The register and tone are appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response fully incorporates the conventions of the chosen text type.



Note: Examiners must balance all three elements in criterion C (choice of text type, appropriateness
of tone and register, and use of text type conventions) to arrive at the final mark.
                                                 –6–                M22/2/ABKOR/SP1/KOR/TZ0/XX/M


Question specific guidance (Criterion B and C)

Task 1

 여러분은 최근 유기견 보호소 봉사활동에 다녀왔습니다. 이 곳에서 처음 경험하는 일들도
 많고, 도움이 필요한 일도 보였습니다. 그래서 다음 번 봉사활동 때는 더 많은 젊은
 사람들이 이 유기견 보호소에 와서 일을 할 수 있도록 권장하고 싶었습니다. 유기견
 봉사활동에 가면 어떤 일을 해야 하고, 왜 더 많은 사람의 도움이 필요한 지에 대한 글을
 쓰세요.



Criterion B:

• 유기견에 대한 설명은 괜찮지만, 글의 내용은 유기견 보호소 봉사활동에서 이루어지는
  일들을 중점적으로 제시해야 함 (예를 들어 설명하는 것이 바람직함)
• 어떤 것들이 사람들의 도움이 필요하고, 왜 필요한지 이유 제시


Criterion C:

Choice of text type:

                            Text type        Rationale
Appropriate                 블로그              젊은 사람들에게 소식을 전하는 가장 좋은 방법
Generally appropriate       신문 기사            다양한 사람들에게 전달하기 좋음
Generally inappropriate     토론문              많은 사람들의 참여를 원하는 글이기 때문에
                                             토론하는 것은 맞지 않음

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the
“generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• 비슷한 연령의 독자들에게 쓰는 친근한 말투, 표현 사용
• 제시/제안하는 톤

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                 –7–                M22/2/ABKOR/SP1/KOR/TZ0/XX/M


Task 2

 정부는 금연 운동의 한 일환으로 내년부터 백화점과 학교 주변 등 여러 곳에 금연 구역을
 확충하자는 제안이 나오고 있습니다. 비흡연자들은 이 제안을 기뻐하지만, 흡연자들은 이
 소식이 반갑지 않습니다. 지역 사회의 인식을 높이기 위해 금연 구역 확충의 장점과
 단점에 대한 글을 쓰세요.



Criterion B:

• 금연 운동에 대한 설명 가능하지만 전체적인 내용은 지역 사회의 인식을 높이기 위한
  금연 구역 확충의 설명이여함
• 금연 구역 확충의 장점과 단점이 모두 들어가야함

Criterion C:

Choice of text type:

                            Text type        Rationale
Appropriate                 토론문              장단점을 비교하는 것이기에 토론이 제일 적합함
Generally appropriate       신문기사             장단점 소식을 많은 사람들에게 전달하기에 좋음

Generally inappropriate     이메일              공적인 문제를 공론화하는 것이기 때문에 사적인
                                             전달 방식인 이메일은 부적합함

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the
“generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• 격식있는 표현 사용
• 친구들에게 사용하는 정다운 표현은 부적합

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                 –8–                M22/2/ABKOR/SP1/KOR/TZ0/XX/M


Task 3

 여러분은 지난 여름 방학 동안 섬머 (summer) 프로그램을 이용해서 한국에 있는 사람과
 언어 및 문화 교류를 시작했습니다. 막상 하고 보니, 생각보다 더 유익하고 재미있는
 시간이었습니다. 그래서 학교 친구들에게 이 프로그램을 소개하고 싶었습니다.
 프로그램이 어떤 점에서 기대했던 것 보다 더 좋았고, 어떻게 지원할 수 있는지에 대한
 글을 쓰세요.



Criterion B:

• 전반적인 섬머 프로그램에 대해 이야기 할 수 있으나, 언어 및 문화 교류에 대한 소개
  필요
• 프로그램에서 좋았던 점 제시
• 지원 방법 구체적으로 제시

Criterion C:

Choice of text type:

                            Text type        Rationale
Appropriate                 이메일              학교 친구들에게 사적으로 알려주기 적합
Generally appropriate       블로그              또래 독자들에게 정보를 전달하기 좋음

Generally inappropriate     보고서              개인 경험을 공유하는 것임으로 격식있는
                                             보고서는 부적합함

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the
“generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• 친구들에게 쓰는 친근한 표현 사용
• 설득하는 어투

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                            –9–             M22/2/ABKOR/SP1/KOR/TZ0/XX/M


Appendix: Text type conventions (Criterion C)

The most common and recognisable conventions of the text types are given below:

토론문
•   발표문 서두에 적절한 인사 표현이 있음
•   발표의 주제에 대해 간단히 소개
•   적절한 결론 및 마무리 인사

이메일

•   제목 기재
•   서두에 받는이 이름과 적절한 인사 표현
•   이메일의 목적 간단히 소개
•   마지막에 보내는이 이름 적절한 인사말 기재
•   수신자 정보 기재

블로그

•   제목 제시
•   독자들에 대한 직접적이고 적절한 호칭, 지칭 사용
•   날짜와 이름 기재

신문 기사

•   제목/헤드라인 제시
•   독자층에 대한 이해를 바탕으로 한 내용 기술
•   적절한 서론, 본론, 결론 전개

감상문
•   제목 제시
•   이름 기재
•   간단한 서론 및 명료한 결론
