M22/2/ABSWA/HP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                   May / Mai / Mayo de 2022



                  Swahili / Swahili / Swahili B


                         Higher level
                       Niveau supérieur
                        Nivel Superior


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




9 pages/páginas
                                            –2–              M22/2/ABSWA/HP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2022

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2022

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2022

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                             –3–            M22/2/ABSWA/HP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion A: Language

How successfully does the candidate command written language?
• To what extent is the vocabulary appropriate and varied?
• To what extent are the grammatical structures varied?
• To what extent does the accuracy of the language contribute to effective communication?

  Marks                                      Level descriptor
     0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
            Command of the language is limited.
            Vocabulary is sometimes appropriate to the task.
   1–3      Some basic grammatical structures are used, with some attempts to use more
            complex structures.
            Language contains errors in both basic and more complex structures. Errors interfere
            with communication.
            Command of the language is partially effective.
            Vocabulary is generally appropriate to the task and varied.
   4–6      A variety of basic and some more complex grammatical structures is used.
            Language is mostly accurate for basic structures, but errors occur in more complex
            structures. Errors at times interfere with communication.
            Command of the language is effective and mostly accurate.
            Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and varied, including the use of idiomatic
            expressions.
   7–9
            A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used effectively.
            Language is mostly accurate. Occasional errors in basic and in complex grammatical
            structures do not interfere with communication.
            Command of the language is mostly accurate and very effective.
            Vocabulary is appropriate to the task, and nuanced and varied in a manner that
            enhances the message, including the purposeful use of idiomatic expressions.
  10–12     A variety of basic and more complex grammatical structures is used selectively in
            order to enhance communication.
            Language is mostly accurate. Minor errors in more complex grammatical structures
            do not interfere with communication.

Lugha
Si makosa yote yana umuhimu sawa na watahini wanafaa kukumbuka haya. Baadhi ya makosa
huathiri mawasiliano ya maana kwa kiasi kikubwa, na mengine hayaathiri. Pia, baadhi ya makosa
huonyesha ukosefu wa kimsingi wa lugha, wakati makosa mengine huweza kuashiria usahaulifu.

KUTELEZA – Makosa hutokea katika ngazi zote za ugumu, lakini hayatokei mara kwa mara – kwa
mfano, mtahiniwa kwa kawaida anatunga sentensi vyema wakati uliopita, lakini mara chache
anasahau kiambishi “-li-”.

DOSARI – Makosa hutokea mara kwa mara, hasa katika miundo fulani – kwa mfano, wakati
uliopita unaundwa kwa usahihi mara nyingi, lakini si wa kuaminika, na kunaweza kuwa na
mikanganyiko ya kimsingi (kwa mfano, wakati uliopita dhidi ya wakati timilifu).

MAPENGO – Baadhi ya miundo huwa sahihi kwa nadra au haijitokezi – kwa mfano, wakati uliopita
unahitajika, lakini haujitokezi.
                                                  –4–               M22/2/ABSWA/HP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B: Message
To what extent does the candidate fulfil the task?
     • How relevant are the ideas to the task?
     • To what extent are ideas developed?
     • To what extent do the clarity and organization of ideas contribute to the successful delivery of
       the message?

The “descriptor unpacked” explain the assessment criteria in greater detail. Where a candidate’s
response does not correspond exactly to a single mark band, the statements in bold should be
used as a guide for the ‘best fit’ approach.

 Marks              Level descriptor                             Descriptor unpacked
 0          The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
            The task is partially fulfilled. The link between the response and task tends to be
                                                unclear; the reader has difficulty understanding the
            Few ideas are relevant to the       message.
            task.
                                                The response touches upon some aspects of the task but
            Ideas are stated, but with no       there is also much unrelated information.
     1–3    development.
                                                The response addresses the task in a simple manner, and
            Ideas are not clearly presented     supporting details and/or examples barely feature, if at all.
            and do not follow a logical         The ideas do not link well together; inadequate or
            structure, making the message       inappropriate use of cohesive devices confuse the
            difficult to determine.             message.
            The task is generally fulfilled.    The link between the response and the task is mostly
                                                detectable; the reader’s general understanding of the
            Some ideas are relevant to the      message is not impeded, despite some ambiguity.
            task.
                                                The response covers some aspects of the task, or
            Ideas are outlined, but are not     touches upon all aspects but superficially.
            fully developed.
     4–6                                        The response includes some supporting details and
            Ideas are generally clearly         examples.
            presented and the response is       The ideas are organized in a logical way; some cohesive
            generally structured in a logical   devices are used appropriately to aid the delivery of the
            manner, leading to a mostly         message, although there may be areas of confusion at
            successful delivery of the          times.
            message.
            The task is fulfilled.              The link between the response and the task is clear;
                                                the reader has a good understanding of the message
            Most ideas are relevant to the      conveyed.
            task.
                                                The response covers all aspects of the task, despite
            Ideas are developed well, with      losing focus at times.
     7–9    some detail and examples.
                                                The response uses supporting details and examples to
            Ideas are clearly presented and     clarify the message.
            the response is structured in a     The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive devices
            logical manner, supporting the      are used appropriately to deliver the message with little or
            delivery of the message.            no ambiguity.
            The task is fulfilled effectively. The link between the response and the task is precise
                                                and consistently evident; the reader has a clear
            Ideas are relevant to the task.     understanding of the message conveyed.
 10–12
            Ideas are fully developed,          The response covers all aspects of the task fully, and
            providing details and relevant      maintains focus throughout.
            examples.
                                                   –5–              M22/2/ABSWA/HP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


             Ideas are clearly presented and     The response uses well-chosen supporting details and
             the response is structured in a     examples to illustrate and explain ideas persuasively.
             logical and coherent manner         The ideas are organized well; a range of cohesive devices
             that supports the delivery of the   are used appropriately to deliver the message with clarity
             message.                            and ease.


Note: When marking candidate responses, keep in mind that neither the factual accuracy of the
information presented, nor the validity of the candidates’ personal opinions, are being assessed.
Therefore, scripts that are factually inaccurate should not be marked down, provided the ideas
presented have coherence and are sufficiently developed.



Criterion C: Conceptual understanding

To what extent does the candidate demonstrate conceptual understanding?
   •       To what extent is the choice of text type appropriate to the task?
   •       To what extent are register and tone appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
           task?
   •       To what extent does the response incorporate the conventions of the chosen text type?

  Marks                                           Level descriptor
       0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
              Conceptual understanding is limited.
              The choice of text type is generally inappropriate to the context, purpose or audience.
   1–2        The register and tone are inappropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response incorporates limited recognizable conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is mostly demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is generally appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   3–4        The register and tone, while occasionally appropriate to the context, purpose and
              audience of the task, fluctuate throughout the response.
              The response incorporates some conventions of the chosen text type.
              Conceptual understanding is fully demonstrated.
              The choice of text type is appropriate to the context, purpose and audience.
   5–6        The register and tone are appropriate to the context, purpose and audience of the
              task.
              The response fully incorporates the conventions of the chosen text type.



Note: Examiners must balance all three elements in criterion C (choice of text type,
appropriateness of tone and register, and use of text type conventions) to arrive at the final mark.
                                                 –6–                M22/2/ABSWA/HP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


Question specific guidance (Criterion B and C)

Swali 1

 Umesoma makala moja ya gazeti kuhusu changamoto ambazo wanaohitimu vyuoni hukabiliana
 nazo wanapoingia katika soko la ajira. Andika matini ambapo unaelezea changamoto ile ngumu
 zaidi, jinsi ya kukabiliana nayo na uelezee ni kwa nini ni muhimu kuchukua hatua hiyo.

       Barua kwa mhariri                      Blogu                           Wasilisho



Criterion B:

• Jibu linafaa kujadili changamoto ambazo wanaohitimu vyuoni hukabiliana nazo wanaposaka ajira
  baada ya chuo; lakini sio wakiwa tayari kazini. Inaweza kuwa changamoto moja au changamoto
  nyingi.
• “Jinsi ya kukabiliana” inafaa kuangazia suluhu za changamoto za kutafuta ajira.
• “ Kwa nini” inafaa kueleza manufaa ya kupata suluhisho la changamoto hizo katika utafutaji wa
  ajira.


Criterion C:

Choice of text type:

                            Text type        Rationale
Appropriate                 Barua kwa        Aina hii ya matini inaakisi maoni ya mwandishi juu ya
                            mhariri          mada au wazo fulani. Barua kwa mhariri ni matini
                                             inayotumwa kwa gazeti/jarida na yeyote katika umma,
                                             halafu inachapishwa ili isomwe na umma.
Generally appropriate       Wasilisho        Aina hii ya matini ni ya muundo wa mazungumzo ya
                                             kuwasilishwa kwa mdomo. Wasilisho linalenga
                                             kueleza jambo fulani kwa uwazi.
Generally inappropriate     Blogu            Aina hii ya matini kimsingi husomwa na wasomaji
                                             wasiobainishwa, na hutegemea msomaji kujitafutia
                                             taarifa.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the
“generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• Sajili iliyo nusu rasmi na rasmi
• Toni iliyo makini na ya kushirikisha

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                 –7–                M22/2/ABSWA/HP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


Swali 2

 Ili kusherehekea tamaduni tofauti katika shule yako, utawala wa shule umeanzisha kamati ya
 masuala ya kitamaduni. Waliochaguliwa katika kamati hiyo hawawakilishi tamaduni zote zilizoko
 shuleni. Kama mmoja wa wanachama wa kamati hiyo, andika matini ukielezea kile ambacho
 kimefanyika, kwa nini kimefanyika na ni nini kinapaswa kufanywa ili kuboresha hali hiyo.

       Barua kwa mhariri                      Blogu                           Wasilisho

Criterion B:

• Jibu linapswa kuchunguza muundo wa kamati na jinsi wanachama hawawakilishi tamaduni zote
  na asili tofauti zilizoko shuleni. “Tamaduni zote” inaweza kujumuisha wanafunzi, walimu na
  wafanyakazi wengine shuleni.
• “Kile ambacho kimefanyika” inaweza kujumuisha vigezo vilivyotumika kuchagua wanachama wa
  kamati, mipango na hatua ambazo kamati imechukua, au mipango na hatua kamati inapanga
  kuchukua ili kufanikisha kusherehekea kwa “tamaduni tofauti”
• “Kwa nini” inafaa kutoa sababu za hatua zilizochukuliwa au zitakazochukuliwa na kamati.
• “Nini kinapaswa kufanywa” inafaa kujadili mapendekezo yatakayoangazia hali ya kamati ya
  kutokuwa na wanachama wanaowakilisha tamaduni zote zilizoko shuleni.


Criterion C:

Choice of text type:

                            Text type        Rationale
Appropriate                 Wasilisho        Aina hii ya matini ni ya muundo wa mazungumzo ya
                                             kuwasilishwa kwa mdomo. Wasilisho linalenga
                                             kueleza jambo fulani kwa uwazi.
Generally appropriate       Blogu            Aina hii ya matini kimsingi husomwa na wasomaji
                                             wasiobainishwa, na hutegemea msomaji kujitafutia
                                             taarifa.
Generally inappropriate     Barua kwa        Aina hii ya matini inaakisi maoni ya mwandishi juu ya
                            mhariri          mada au wazo fulani. Barua kwa mhariri ni matini
                                             inayotumwa kwa gazeti/jarida na yeyote katika umma,
                                             halafu inachapishwa ili isomwe na umma.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the
“generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• sajili iliyo nusu rasmi na isiyo rasmi
• Toni iliyo makini na inayoshirikisha

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                                –8–                 M22/2/ABSWA/HP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


Swali 3

 Kutokana na kupigwa marufuku kwa wanafunzi kutazama vituo vya michezo na burudani
 isipokuwa vituo vya habari katika ukumbi wa televisheni, kumekuwa na malalamiko miongoni
 mwa wanafunzi. Ungetaka kutoa maoni kuhusu jambo hilo. Andika matini ambapo unaelezea
 hali hiyo na jinsi wanafunzi wanavyohisi, upendekeze suluhu kwa niaba ya wanafunzi wenzako
 na uthibitishe pendekezo lako.

       Barua kwa mhariri                   Barua pepe                        Mahojiano



Criterion B:

• Jibu linapaswa kueleza kwa uwazi “hali”, marufuku kwa wanafunzi kutazama vituo vya michezo
  isipokuwa vituo vya habari, na “malalamiko” kama machungu yao kutokana na marufuku hiyo.
• “Suluhu” inafaa kuangazia mapendekezo yatakayogusia malalamiko. Mapendekezo yanaweza
  kujaribu kufanya pande zote mbili kutosheka; yaani, malalamiko ya wanafunzi kutatuliwa na pia
  utawala wa shule kuridhika na mapendekezo hayo.
• “Uthibitishe” lazima itoe sababu za mapendekezo hayo na jinsi yatakavyosuluhisha hali iliyoko.


Criterion C:

Choice of text type:

                            Text type        Rationale
Appropriate                 Mahojiano        Aina hii ya matini inaakisi majibu yanayotolewa na
                                             mtu(watu) binafsi moja kwa moja- katika muundo wa
                                             Swali na Jibu- au matini inayoripoti na kutoa majibu
                                             yanayotolewa na mtu/watu kwa muhtasari katika
                                             mtindo wa kiuanahabari unaojumuisha nukuu za moja
                                             kwa moja.
Generally appropriate       Barua kwa        Aina hii ya matini inaakisi maoni ya mwandishi juu ya
                            mhariri          mada au wazo fulani. Barua kwa mhariri ni matini
                                             inayotumwa kwa gazeti/jarida na yeyote katika umma,
                                             halafu inachapishwa ili isomwe na umma.
Generally inappropriate     Barua pepe       Aina hii ya matini inafaa kwa lengo la kutoa taarifa,
                                             lakini kimsingi inatumiwa kuwasiliana na watu binafsi
                                             au vikundi vidogo vya watu.

Note: If a response makes the context, audience and purpose of the writing clear, and these
conform to the task, the “generally appropriate” text type may be considered “appropriate”, or the
“generally inappropriate” text type considered “generally appropriate”.


Register and tone:
• sajili iliyo nusu rasmi na isiyo rasmi
• Toni iliyo makini na inayoshirikisha

Please refer to the appendix for a list of text type conventions.
                                              –9–             M22/2/ABSWA/HP1/SWA/TZ0/XX/M


Appendix: Text type conventions (Criterion C)

The most common and recognisable conventions of the text types are given below:

Barua kwa mhariri
   • Itatumia sauti yenye umakini unaofaa
   • Itatoa maoni kwa mtindo unaovutia na kushirikisha
   • Itajumuisha vipengele vingine rasmi vya barua (tarehe, salamu, salamu za kufunga na
       kadhalika)
   • Itakuwa na utangulizi mfupi.

Wasilisho
  • Itatumia sauti yenye umakini unaofaa
  • Itahutubia hadhira na kuwa nao kutoka mwanzo hadi mwisho (kwa mfano kutumia maneno
       kama “sisi” na “ninyi” na kadhalika)
  • Itaanza kwa kuteka hadhira makini na kutamatisha bila kukanganya mwishowe
  • Itajumuisha balagha kama vile maswali ya balagha, takriri na kadhalika

Blogu
   • Itakuwa na mada inayoshirikisha
   • Itatumia usimulizi wa nafsi ya kwanza
   • Itadhihirisha ufahamu wa wasomaji, kama vile kuzungumza nao moja kwa moja, mtindo
      unaovutia na kusisimua, kuwakaribisha kutoa maoni, na kadhalika
   • Itakuwa na kauli ya kutamatisha ili kumalizia

Mahojiano
  • Itatumia sajili moja mfululizo kwa kila msemaji
  • Itakuwa na kichwa/mada inayofaa
  • Itakuwa na utangulizi na hitimisho
  • Itakuwa na muundo wa swali na jibu, kwa kuonyesha mazungumzo ya kupokezana kati ya
      wasemaji
  • Itaakisi mazungumzo halisi ya mdomo kwa mdomo, pengine pamoja na kukatizana kwingi

Barua pepe
   • Itakuwa na mstari wa mada husika
   • Itadumisha mazungumzo yaliyo wazi kwa mtu mmoja mahsusi
   • Itakuwa na salamu za kufungua na kufunga

*Kumbuka: ‘Kwa:’ /’Kutoka’: na tarehe zinaweza kuwekwa lakini hazihitajiki.
