N20/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                        November 2020


                         Global politics


           Higher level and standard level


                               Paper 2




19 pages
                                           –2–                 N20/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de
tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris,
sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de
tutorat ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement
supérieur, des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes
d’études, des gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des
développeurs d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la
procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse suivante :
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios
de apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores
de aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u
ofrezcan recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este
enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia:
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.
                                                –3–                 N20/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The paper is marked using the generic markbands on the following page, and the
paper specific markscheme that follows. The markscheme for this paper is the same
for HL and SL.

 Markbands for paper two

   Marks                                       Level descriptor

     0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

            The response reveals limited understanding of the demands of the question.
            The response is poorly structured, or where there is a recognizable essay structure
    1–5      there is minimal focus on the task.
            There is little relevant knowledge, and examples are either lacking or not relevant.
            The response is mostly descriptive.

            The response indicates some understanding of the demands of the question.
            There is some evidence of an attempt to structure the response.
            Some relevant knowledge is present, and some examples are mentioned but they are
   6–10      not developed or their relevance to arguments is not clear.
            The response demonstrates limited understanding of the key concepts of the course.
            There is limited justification of main points.
            Counterclaims, or different views on the question are not considered.

            The demands of the question are understood and mostly addressed but the implications
             are not considered.
            There is a clear attempt to structure the response.
            The response is mostly based on relevant and accurate knowledge of global politics,
   11–15
             and relevant examples are given and support arguments.
            The response demonstrates some understanding of the key concepts of the course.
            Many of the main points are justified and arguments are largely coherent.
            Some counterclaims, or different views on the question are considered.

            The demands of the questions are understood and addressed, and most implications
             are considered.
            The response is well-structured.
            The response demonstrates relevant and accurate knowledge and understanding of
   16–20
             global politics, and relevant examples are used in a way that strengthens arguments.
            The response demonstrates a good grasp of the key concepts of the course.
            All or nearly all of the main points are justified and arguments are coherent.
            Counterclaims, or different views on the question are explored.

            A very well structured and balanced response that addresses the demands and
             implications of the question.
            Comprehensive knowledge and in-depth understanding of global politics is applied in
   21–25     the response consistently and effectively, with examples integrated.
            The response demonstrates a very good grasp of the key concepts of the course.
            All of the main points are justified. Arguments are clear, coherent and compelling.
            Counterclaims, or different views on the question are explored and evaluated.
                                                  –4–                 N20/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The content listed indicates possible areas candidates might cover in their answers. They are not
compulsory points. They are only a framework to help examiners in their assessment. Candidates may
take a different approach, which if appropriate, should be rewarded. Examiners should not expect all of
the points listed and should allow other valid points.

An understanding of, and an ability to work with, the key concepts of the course are particularly important
in this paper. Whether or not the key concepts are explicitly mentioned in a question, students are
expected to draw on their conceptual understanding of global politics and are invited to draw on any
political concepts that are relevant to the arguments they put forward.

Power, sovereignty and international relations

1.   Evaluate the claim that power in global politics is about possession of resources.

     Responses are likely to include a definition of power and the discourse on the term. Candidates
     may then move on to identify the different types of power they have studied such as economic
     (possession of resources), military, political, soft, hard and smart power. They may elaborate on
     possession of resources and what it would possibly encompass (such as land, natural resources,
     economic capital, human resource capital, military capabilities, technological advancement, good
     infrastructure, open markets, and supportive trade and investment policies), how it is changing and
     the ways to measure it.

     Arguments in favour of the claim that power in global politics is about possession of resources may
     include:
      Possession of resources enables a state to realize its objectives and garner all kinds of
        influence and power. It is therefore the basis of and prerequisite for a state’s power in global
        politics. In other words, power flows from variables such as acquiring and possessing economic
        power and military strength.
      Economic and military resources and power can be used in two ways – to impact and influence
        other countries or to limit or punish them. For instance, economically powerful countries can use
        their influence to gain access to cheap resources and labor through offering aid for developing
        infrastructure.
      Economic or military resources can be used by a state to enact hard power. There are also
        other coercive economic tools such as sanctions, tariffs, embargo or trade wars which could be
        used by economically powerful states. Economically powerful states can use unequal or
        asymmetric trade and investment balance to gain access to resources and have political
        leverage over other states such as China’s inroads into Africa through investments which gives
        it considerable political leverage as well as access to resources there. Trade blocs could also
        be used for this purpose.
      Military power of a state, which is often considered as ultimate power also needs resources. It is
        easier and more feasible for strong economies to become notable military powers. Prominent
        examples are the US, Russia and China.
      MNCs have begun to wield significant power over state policy making simply because they
        often have more economic resources than certain states and can use their power to influence
        government policy decisions in their favour. Therefore, economic power remains one of the
        most critical factors to the extent that it even shapes state behavior and policies.
      Non-traditional security matters, which do not necessarily lend themselves to solutions through
        other types of power such as military power, also require availability of resources. Climate
        change, the spread of infectious diseases, and food and water security need economic
        resources to be controlled and managed.
      Soft power could also be developed based on availability and possession of resources. For
        instance, providing aid, holding cultural events, ability to attract foreign students for education
        would require or at least could be made more effective if the state possesses resources such as
        economic capital or human resource capital.
     Arguments against the claim that power in global politics is about possession of resources may
     include:
                                            –5–                 N20/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


 Power depends on much more than resources. In order to exercise and accumulate power
  states need many other variables such as good leadership, soft power to persuade through use
  of diplomacy, cultural influence, quality of governance, quality of human resource capital,
  character and morale of the state.
 Soft power, or the ability to get what you want through attraction rather than through coercion,
  through the use of variables such as culture and political values is more effective in certain
  situations and does not necessarily require possession of economic and military resources. For
  instance, spread of cultural power through movies, fast-food.
 The use of resources to enhance economic and military power may not always work effectively
  all of the time or in all circumstances, especially if the targeted state and its government feels
  that steps such as sanctions or punitive measures may harm their interests and they decide not
  to cooperate or even rebel.
 Different forms of power are nested within one another and possession of one enables the
  other, in which case economic power may not necessarily be the most significant one. For
  instance, the soft power of China is often termed as a charm offensive and has been based on
  communicating the idea that Beijing is not a “threat”. For example, China has taken steps such
  as signing the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation with countries in Southeast Asia. This did not
  require possession of resources. But rather, soft power or cooption has led to further economic
  cooperation between the two sides.
 Possession of resources is not enough in a state’s capacity to manage many transnational
  issues such as handling climate change, pandemics or natural disasters. They require
  transnational cooperation, appropriate policies and timely action and effective implementation of
  policies. In short, it is about governance too.
 Mere possession of economic/military power and resources does not necessarily translate into
  political power or influence. For example, Japan with its economic resources doesn’t yield much
  influence politically and strategically.
 Political power does not always require resources and is also a very important type of power in
  terms of its ability to influence decision making and agenda setting. For instance, the power of
  the US in managing North Korea’s nuclearization (through 6 party talks) or the use of this power
  by the permanent members of the UN Security Council through the use of veto power.

Responses should make some reference to specific examples of whether power in global politics is
about possession of resources in terms of military and economic power or not. Candidates could
use examples such as that of China’s aid (economic resources) to countries with authoritarian
regimes such as Sudan which provides them with an advantage over such states. Also candidates
could give examples of situations where hard power (military) has worked better for a state to
achieve its goals such as international action against the ISIS and Syria. Examples of power
without necessarily possessing economic and military resources (soft power) could be the number
of students going to the US to pursue studies or the influence of Indian films on the South Asian
region and beyond. Responses should include a conclusion on the degree to which possession of
resources is the most significant variable defining power in global politics today.
                                                   –6–                 N20/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   Discuss the claim that intergovernmental organizations (IGOs) reduce conflicts.

     Responses are likely to include a definition of intergovernmental organizations as a group
     comprising sovereign states or intergovernmental organizations which are formed based on a
     treaty or formal agreement. These have played an important role in mitigation, resolution and
     prevention of conflicts. Few examples of intergovernmental organizations include the UN and the
     World Bank (at the global level) and EU and ASEAN (at the regional level). Some of these play an
     active role in case of the outbreak of inter-state conflicts. Candidates might choose to discuss
     types of conflicts – resource, territorial, economic, ideological. They could then proceed to identify
     some such conflicts which have arisen in recent times as examples and use them to support their
     arguments and counter claims.

     Arguments in favour of the claim that inter-governmental organizations reduce conflicts may
     include:
      IGOs at the global level such as the UN provide a platform for states to coordinate, cooperate
        and discuss matters (promote interconnectedness) thus enabling easing of tensions. They also
        ensure transparency and bring in an objectivity with their multiple members. The UN is a prime
        example of such a platform
      IGOs help states form a network wherein they influence states and member states help affect
        each other. In sum, the mere presence of such organizations waters down the possibility of
        conflicts turning violent
      IGOs (especially global) have the resources, institutional mechanisms and means to help
        prevent or manage conflict by both use of force (eg some UN peacekeeping missions such as
        United Nations Mission in East Timor (UNAMET and United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation
        Mission (UNIKOM)) and without the use of force such as mediation and negotiation.
      IGOs at the regional level have the dual advantages of being geographically close as also
        culturally more connected with the parties in conflict. They are also likely to share common
        interests and be more familiar with the significant actors in decision making on the conflict. Eg
        ASEAN which permitted conflict mediation after 1976.
      Regional IGOs can provide help to member states in a shorter time frame and with lower costs
        in case of the outbreak of a conflict.
      IGOs which may not necessarily exist with a politico-strategic agenda and focus on the
        economic aspects (such as World Bank and IMF) also have leverage over conflicts. This is true
        especially in cases where they have influence over conflicting parties where they can indirectly
        mould a state’s behavior in a dispute.
                                             –7–                 N20/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Arguments against of the claim that inter-governmental organizations reduce conflicts may include:
 IGOs such as the UN may not always be able to take swift action such as peacekeeping
   operations due to limitations such as veto by the permanent members, lack of finances or even
   the reluctance of member states to provide troops. Troops may even be provided based on
   certain conditions which may limit the effectiveness of management of the conflict in question,
   eg Russian veto in conflict with Ukraine.
 Not all IGOs are able to give binding and implementable decisions, in which case the conflicting
   parties may not pay heed to the suggestions or decisions by the IGO, still not solving the
   conflict. Eg AU is not able to impose agreements because their charter does not provide for it.
 States remain the most significant sovereign players in global politics and can choose to either
   exit from intergovernmental organizations or not join them if it clashes with what they perceive
   to be against their power and national interest.
 IGOs may have limited ability to reduce conflict if parties to the conflict are not ready to accept
   their involvement.
 Regional IGOs may not have the mandate to interfere in conflicts within a state, eg ASEAN.

Candidates should make references to examples of inter-state conflicts where intergovernmental
organizations have been successful in preventing or managing conflicts such as those in Sierra
Leone, Timor Leste and Kosovo (UN), NATO in Kosovo. They could also cite examples of cases
where intergovernmental organizations have not been able to make an effective impact or prevent
conflict such as AU which was ineffective in the conflict in DRC. North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) has enabled peace enforcement.

Responses should include a conclusion on the extent to which intergovernmental organizations
have been able to reduce conflict.
                                                 –8–                  N20/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Human rights

3.   The central problem with international human rights laws and treaties is that they are open
     to different interpretations. Discuss this view.

     Responses are likely to include a definition of human rights as basic claims and entitlements that,
     many argue, one should be able to exercise simply by virtue of being a human being. Candidates
     should refer to specific international human rights laws and/or treaties and the extent to which they
     are subject to different interpretations. The effectiveness of human rights laws and treaties also
     should be discussed with an emphasis on whether or not they are open to different interpretations
     and, if so, the degree to which this renders them ineffective vis-à-vis the codification, protection
     and enforcement of human rights around the world.

     Arguments in favour of the claim that the central problem with international human rights laws and
     treaties is that they are open to different interpretations may include:
      In most countries, people have as many as 400 international human rights and the sheer
        quantity and variety of rights provides little guidance to governments in terms of which right(s)
        should be prioritized, especially given limited governmental budgets.
      Human rights laws and treaties provide no specific guidance to governments. In addition,
        variations in governance structures may interfere with the universal application of international
        laws/treaties. For example, the right to freedom of expression is hotly contested around the
        world: in Europe hate speech is not permitted while in many Islamic countries, any kind of
        defamation against Islam is not protected.
      The ambiguity of international human rights laws/treaties means that it is impossible to arrive at
        a set of clearly defined rules that can be interpreted and applied by trusted institutions at the
        international level.
      While many governments employ the idiom of human rights, they use it to make radically
        different arguments about how countries should behave, eg many countries cite the “right to
        security”, a catch-all idea that protection from crime or terrorism justifies harsh enforcement
        methods.
      The language of rights, untethered to specific legal interpretations, is too spongy to prevent
        governments from committing abuses and can easily be used to clothe illiberal agendas, eg
        Russia referenced the rights of ethnic minorities in Ukraine in order to justify its military
        intervention there in 2014, just as the USA cited Saddam Hussein’s suppression of human
        rights in order to establish support for the Iraq war in 2003.
                                             –9–                  N20/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Arguments against the claim that the central problem with international human rights laws and
treaties is that they are open to different interpretations may include:
 Any ambiguity that may exist at the international level with human rights laws/treaties has been
   resolved at the national level - in many countries the task of clearly interpreting vaguely worded
   international human rights laws/treaties has been delegated to trusted domestic institutions
   such as courts.
 In a similar fashion, vaguely worded international human rights laws and treaties have been
   more clearly codified in the national constitutions of some countries, eg South Africa and Brazil.
 The existence of regional human rights institutions and/or instruments such as the African
   Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights and the American Convention on Human Rights provide
   a more specific and palatable sense of a state’s human rights obligations and thus the chance
   that human rights laws/treaties will be embraced locally.
 Many human rights advocates assert that despite their openness to different interpretation,
   human rights laws/treaties provide important moral support for oppressed people, eg women’s
   rights groups in patriarchal states have drawn inspiration from the ratification of the CEDAW,
   Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch can pressure governments to improve the
   human rights they care about, even if they cannot get states to comply with all their treaty
   obligations.
 The fact that human rights laws/treaties are open to different interpretations is actually beneficial
   as this broadens their application in global politics.
 While human rights laws/treaties are indeed open to different interpretations, this is not their
   central problem, ie the main issue is the lack of state compliance with their legal obligations of
   states due to the principle of sovereignty and/or the weakness of the international human rights
   institutions charged with their protection and enforcement, eg the UN Human Rights Council.

Responses should make some reference to specific examples of human rights laws and/or treaties
in discussing their efficacy, such as the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(ICCPR), the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), the
United Nations Convention against Torture (UNCAT), the Convention Relating to the Status of
Refugees, etc. It is likely that many students will also refer to the 1948 Universal Declaration of
Human Rights (UDHR) and although this is not actually a treaty, per se, many scholars believe that
it is now part of customary international law and so some leeway should be granted here.

Responses should include a conclusion on the degree to which the central problem with
international human rights laws/treaties is that they are open to different interpretations.
                                                  – 10 –              N20/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   Evaluate the view that human rights limit state power in global politics.

     Responses are likely to include a definition of human rights as basic claims and entitlements that,
     many argue, one should be able to exercise simply by virtue of being a human being. Students are
     also likely to provide a definition of power - the ability to effect change and/or the ability to make
     someone do something – and refer to different types of power: hard, soft, and smart. Candidates
     may also briefly discuss their understanding of the role played by the state in global politics.

     Arguments in favour of the view that human rights limit state power in global politics may include:
      Declarations of the UN General Assembly may enjoy the status of customary international law
        and, thus, act to limit the more “conventional” applications of state power, eg the Universal
        Declaration of Human Rights (1948) or the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
        (2007).
      Other institutional changes in the international framework of human rights also play a role in
        limiting state power, eg the greater prominence of the UN Human Rights Commission and the
        appointment of a UN High Commissioner for Human Rights in 1993.
      The key role played by international non-governmental organizations committed to deepening
        state compliance with human rights law, eg Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch, etc.
      Reference to the fact that within the European Union (EU) respect for human rights had always
        been a condition for membership, which then limits what member states can and cannot do.
      The inclusion of human rights into the diplomacy of Western states. Many states or entities,
        such as the EU, now include explicit reference to human rights in their foreign policy, which may
        limit state power.
      Many of the world’s most important trading nations, from Canada and the EU to Brazil and Chile
        include human rights language in their Preferential Trade Agreements (PTAs), which may act as
        a restraint on state power.
      The role of Responsibility to Protect (R2P) may serve as a check on state power. The role
        played by the International Criminal Court (ICC) in limiting egregious violations of human rights
        by a state (or state actors) may also be mentioned in this regard.

     Arguments against the view that human rights limit state power in global politics may include:
      States remain tremendously powerful actors, and over the past decade, the international order
        has seen a structural shift away from those states that traditionally support human rights
        promotion, and towards those that have openly challenged and/or violated human rights norms,
        eg China, Russia and Turkey.
      The post-September 11 era has seen many previous human rights gains reversed as
        governments have altered the priorities accorded to national security over individual liberties, eg
        the US’s “War on Terror”, the EU’s apparent unwillingness to confront Budapest’s treatment of
        immigrants and its roll-back of press freedoms, etc.
      The diplomacy of human rights in global politics may just pay lip service to human rights. States
        retain the ability to ignore such sensibilities when it suits them or when other factors such as
        national security and trade take priority, eg continued Western arms exports to Saudi Arabia
        despite its poor human rights record in the Yemeni civil war.
      While mention of human rights may be embedded in some PTA’s, such references may be
        rhetorical in nature rather than legally binding.
      The application of R2P has been inconsistent due to the political and economic interests of
        more powerful countries, eg 10 of the 11 situations under investigation at the ICC are African
        countries, while governments such as Syria’s commit atrocities with little fear of intervention or
        prosecution because Russia, a P5 state, undermines any attempt to hold the country’s leaders
        accountable.
      Human rights’ laws/treaties are only effective if states choose to comply with them. For instance,
        in October 2017, South Africa, Burundi, and Gambia announced they would withdraw from the
        ICC due to its alleged anti-African bias, showcasing the fact that states retain ultimate power in
        global politics.
                                            – 11 –              N20/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


 Human rights generally affect a state’s soft power and may leave the exercise of hard power
  relatively unaffected.

Candidates should include reference to specific examples to support their evaluation of the claim in
the question such as the Ukraine bringing a series of cases against Russia to the European Court
of Human Rights over the latter’s actions in the occupied Donbass region and Crimea. At the same
time, the world shows an inability to hold states such as Yemen, China and Syria accountable for
gross human rights violations. Any other valid and relevant approaches and examples should be
evaluated positively, so long as the response remains squarely focused on the topic of human
rights in global politics. Candidates may also refer to the related concept of (state) sovereignty by
highlighting how the practice and implementation of human rights may undermine both its internal
and external dimensions thereby limiting a state’s independence or ability to govern.

Responses should include a conclusion on the degree to which human rights are (in)effective in
limiting state power in global politics.
                                                – 12 –              N20/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Development

5.   Evaluate the claim that the challenges of sustainability mean that development may no
     longer be possible.

     Responses should include a definition or description or demonstrate understanding of sustainability
     along the lines of the Brundtland Report (1987): “development that meets the needs of the
     present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs,” and
     make reference to the multidimensional and contested nature of development and the different
     means of measuring it.

     Arguments that support the claim that the challenges of sustainability mean that development may
     no longer be possible may include:
      ambitious economic development (especially if synonymous with growth) and
        sustainability are seen as in conflict with each other. Recent and growing evidence of
        climate change has started to alter priorities towards the latter
      the global consensus to preserve natural resources and ecosystems has recently been
        moved up the political agenda as evidenced by the reaction of world leaders to the
        destruction of the Amazon rainforest (for domestic economic reasons)
      it has been argued that all non-renewable resources are finite and that therefore they
        should not be used. Given current dependence on fossil fuels, minerals and other raw
        materials, sustainable development is not possible at current rates of consumption
      environmental evidence of degradation and the deteriorating quality of the natural
        environment, such as air and water and prevalence of plastics, has led to arguments
        that current modes of development have to stop and be reversed
      because the ability of the natural environment to absorb high levels of pollutants is
        increasingly limited, a tipping point may be reached so it is better to halt development
        now
      even if all development, sustainable and otherwise, were to stop now, some indicators such as
        rising sea level change would continue, so development needs not only stopping but reversing.

     Arguments against the claim that the challenges of sustainability mean that development may no
     longer be possible may include:
      the adoption in 2015 of the UN’s 17 Sustainable Development Goals for 2030 shows
        that there is international consensus that development remains possible but by a
        different path from previously
      a series of environmental disasters related to climate change has brought the feasibility
        of sustainable development towards the top of the academic agenda, eg wildfires,
        extreme hurricanes. For example, Jeffrey Sachs, has argued that the technology and
        political will exist and has linked further development to good governance
      the UN Decade of Education for Sustainable Development (2005-2014) implies that
        education can change behaviours, values and priorities to make sustainability possible.
        Outcomes included summits and agreements such as Rio (2012) and Paris (2015)
      climate change agreements such as Kyoto and Paris (2015, signed by 196 states)
        show that such issues are being taken seriously at the highest levels and that the
        decision to limit global temperature increase to 1.5% shows consensus to reach risk-
        reducing targets
      the emergence, adoption and government promotion of new technologies based on
        renewable energy supplies shows that business and consumers can respond to altered
        priorities, eg solar panels, wind turbines.
      actions taken by developed countries show that further development is possible, eg Netherlands
        railways running on renewables, Singapore’s rooftop SolarNova programme.
                                             – 13 –               N20/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Responses should contain references to specific examples. Candidates could, for example,
consider the arguments over the recent Amazon fires which appeared to have tacit approval from
political leaders. Responses could also consider that this is an area of data conflict, where
reliability, omission and interpretation of data is highly contestable. Also, responses may refer to
recent writing on this debate, eg Deep Adaptation or lack of political will to confront it especially
among populist leaders.

Responses should include a valid conclusion to the question based on an evaluation of the
arguments presented.
                                                 – 14 –               N20/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


6.   Discuss the view that social factors inhibit development.

     Responses should include an attempt to define social factors. In the syllabus content this
     comprises examples such as values, cultures, traditions, gender relations and migration but this is
     not an inclusive list. Responses might also consider rapid population growth, discrimination and
     culture defined more narrowly in terms of attitudes to minorities. Also, responses should
     demonstrate understanding of the multidimensional and contested nature of development and the
     ways it might be measured.

     Arguments in favour of the view that social factors inhibit development may include:
      cultural or religious norms may block the role of women, for example limiting access to
        education and thus undermining their contribution to development, for example persistent low
        levels of female literacy in Afghanistan
      rapid population growth from natural increase implies large families, and poor households are
        less able to invest in the health and education of each child, which may limit the next
        generation’s ability to participate in development. For example, falling fertility is East Asia is
        associated with impressive growth and development in the 20th century, compared with slower
        growth and development in Latin America where family size remained larger
      discrimination against certain groups, deliberately or otherwise, on the basis of caste, language,
        gender or race, may limit the country’s overall rate of development. For example, the economist
        Paul Donovan has argued that racism and homophobia are prevalent in the least competitive
        economies because discrimination denies workers equal opportunity and career options, thus
        wasting human capital
      access to education may be limited for certain groups by social issues, for example traditional
        expectations of the roles of women and girls, early marriage
      where traditions inhibit change or acceptance of change locally, regionally or nationally,
        development might not begin, for example traditions which prevent property ownership or
        inheritance for women may stifle entrepreneurship
      migration can impede development through, for example, loss of a skilled workforce,
        unregulated arrival of large numbers of dependent people in need of support, though effects on
        the country of origin are contestable.

     Arguments against the view that social factors inhibit development may include:
      social factors inhibiting development may be overwhelmed by other factors encouraging
        development such as political and economic factors. For example, urbanisation is a dominant
        feature of development and as cities are built they offer new ways of living and working at high
        density in which previous social structures become less important
      traditional social values may survive among older generations and in the countryside without
        inhibiting development which takes place in a dominant city or sector populated by a younger
        age group. For example, in Europe traditional and modern social values can coexist comfortably
        without any sense of one inhibiting the other
      life in a developed economy sets new standards for emulation which gradually replace
        traditional cultural or religious norms, removing their ability to inhibit development
      globalization fosters common social attitudes which permeate societies and alter traditional
        social values in favour of, for example, gender equality and education
      migration can encourage development through for example, remittances of money from workers
        living abroad, arrival of a displaced but skilled workforce
      social factors comprise only one among many sets of factors which can inhibit development.
        Others such as political and economic factors may be more potent.
                                           – 15 –               N20/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Responses should contain references to specific examples of social factors that may impede or
promote development. For example, candidates may discuss countries which have retained
traditional social structures and values while undertaking development, such as China, Saudi
Arabia, or countries where central government has tried to foster the values of urban mega-cities in
their surrounding rural regions such as Shanghai and Suzhou. Much depends on how “social
factors” are perceived and exemplified.

Responses should include a valid conclusion, having considered the arguments which support and
do not support the view that social factors inhibit development.
                                                  – 16 –              N20/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Peace and conflict

7.   Evaluate the claim that positive peace can never be fully achieved.

     Responses should include a definition or demonstrate an understanding of peace and of positive
     peace. Peace can be defined very narrowly, as “negative peace”, the absence of direct violence, or
     more broadly defined as “positive peace”, the absence of indirect violence. Positive peace is
     defined as “the presence of attitudes, institutions and structures that create and sustain peaceful
     societies” (IEP). Candidates might explore concepts including violence, conflict, negative peace,
     direct violence, war, positive peace, structural violence, cultural violence, social justice, harmony,
     and development. Negative peace is understood as a precursor to positive peace in which issues
     fundamental to conflict are embedded: inequality, repression, human rights, discrimination, judicial
     equity, etc., and candidates might explore these in their evaluation.

     Candidates are likely to align an understanding of positive peace with the eradication of indirect
     violence, and discuss the difficulty of identifying and addressing the issues surrounding indirect
     violence. Given the dynamic nature of societies and states, however, the argument is made that
     indirect violence can never be fully eradicated, making the achievement of positive peace
     impossible. Responses are likely to include discussions of the importance of overtly addressing
     indirect violence in promoting reconciliation and post-conflict justice to achieve a positive peace.
     An awareness that indirect violence is widespread, often endemic, and difficult to fully identify and
     address might be discussed.

     Arguments for the claim that positive peace can never be fully achieved may include:
      that conflict can be so intractable that negative peace/conflict management has been the best
        achievable outcome (eg the Israeli–Palestinian conflict; the Kashmir conflict)
      that some forms of violence emerge from norms and values that make them more difficult to
        address and eradicate (eg extant homophobia in Russia despite decriminalizing homosexuality
        in 1993 as illustrated by the 2013 legislation banning gay “propaganda” among minors; the fact
        that 200 million girls/women alive today have undergone some form of FGM despite strong
        opposition)
      that violence is very dynamic and as culture, societies, and governments change, violence can
        be reactive, complicating its eradication (eg the passage of gay marriage legislation in countries
        including South Africa, the US, and New Zealand, and the subsequent escalation of
        discrimination, repression, isolation, and direct violence directed at LGBT+ communities)
      positive peace is so sweeping and contested a concept that its achievement is complicated by
        different understandings and is often characterized as a utopian ideal (eg feminist peace; inner-
        outer peace; realistic utopia).

     Arguments against the claim that positive peace can never be fully achieved may include:
      the emphasis on development in the international community since WWII has provided finance,
        support and resources to address myriad sources of inequality and injustice that were not
        available in the past (eg development aid; The World Bank’s MDG and SDG)
      the greater inclusion of a variety of political actors in peace negotiations and the use of third
        party mediation facilitates the identification of indirect violence and factors impeding positive
        peace makes its realization increasingly possible (eg the Colombian peace negotiation’s
        General Agreement emphasized the participation of all, enabling greater participation by
        women’s groups, LGBT+ groups, etc)
      the expansion of human rights laws, treaties, declarations, and norms to address 2nd- (ie,
        socio-economic) and 3rd-generation (ie collective-developmental) human rights supports the
        realization of positive peace through awareness, development, and the pursuit of social justice
        (eg the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights [ICESCR]; the Rio
        Declaration on Environment and Development)
      the expansion of mediation and other alternative dispute resolutions (ADR) as tools to pursue
        transitional and restorative justice suggest innovative (if not yet successful) approaches to
                                            – 17 –               N20/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


  realizing positive peace (eg the pursuit of reparations for victims and their families from
  Indonesia to Guatemala).

Responses should make reference to specific examples of conflict and demonstrate a clear
understanding of peace and positive peace. Candidates should incorporate examples of peace
achieved, permitting an evaluation of peace as a process and positive peace as a continuum.
Candidates could use examples of contemporary conflict to discuss issues of positive peace
incorporated, or not, into peace talks and negotiations; eg Middle East peace talks, Colombian
peace plan, peace negotiations with the Taliban in Afghanistan, Aceh Peace Agreement. In
contrast, an argument could be made that an increasing emphasis on the post-conflict environment
and the process of conflict resolution, not merely management, suggests an opportunity to promote
positive peace.

Responses should include the candidate’s position on the claim that positive peace can never be
fully achieved.
                                                  – 18 –               N20/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


8.   Examine the claim that humanitarian intervention is a violation of state sovereignty.

     Responses should include a definition or demonstrate an understanding of both humanitarian
     intervention and state sovereignty. Humanitarian intervention refers to the use of military force in a
     state to stop or avert grave human suffering without the approval of its authorities. Sovereignty is
     characterized as a state’s independence, its ability to make decisions concerning its own domestic
     affairs, and control over its territory, and is the foundation of our current international system.

     The claim that humanitarian intervention violates state sovereignty is based on the understanding
     that sovereignty entails independent authority of the state and its monopoly on the legitimate use of
     force within its territory. Therefore, the claim is that intervention by third parties is without the
     state’s approval, ergo, it is a clear violation of such authority. However, an emerging international
     norm challenges this understanding and supports the concerted international effort to protect
     civilians from mass atrocity crimes of genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanity.
     Candidates might incorporate discussions of the principle of non-intervention, the legitimacy of the
     state, and the use of state violence against its own citizens, leading to outside intervention. Human
     rights, international norms and law, and the responsibility to protect (R2P) doctrine might be
     explored, as may state-citizen relations.

     Arguments for the claim that humanitarian intervention is a violation of state sovereignty may
     include:
      that state sovereignty is enshrined in international law, dating back to the Treaty of Westphalia
        in 1648, which recognizes a state’s right not to be subjected to other forces/states/powers; this
        dissuades humanitarian intervention as illustrated by its limited use
      that state sovereignty is inviolable and therefore third parties should not intervene without a
        state’s approval under any circumstances
      the existence of a social contract between the state and its people, and while all states
        experience challenges, third parties should not interject themselves in that social contract
        (Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau)
      the view that third parties often undertake intervention with ulterior motives, and in these cases,
        humanitarian intervention is pursued to violate state sovereignty, often with political goals such
        as regime change (eg Iraq 2003; Libya 2011).

     Arguments against the claim that humanitarian intervention is a violation of state sovereignty may
     include:
      there are times when the state cannot fulfil its responsibility relative to its citizens and
        humanitarian intervention is needed to address urgent security and other needs (eg Sierra
        Leone 2000)
      that states themselves are often the perpetrators of violence against their own people,
        promoting the intervention of outside actors to try to safeguard the lives and rights of individuals
        (eg Libya 2011; failure to act in cases including Zimbabwe and Syria)
      that illegitimate and fragile or failed states may not have the capacity or will to protect
        individuals, requiring humanitarian intervention or its threat (eg interventions in Iraq, Nigeria,
        and Libya against ISIL and related groups 2014)
      while humanitarian intervention prior to R2P was ad hoc, R2P now requires states to protect
        against mass atrocities, and the failure to do so compels the international community to
        intervene to protect individuals (ie powers vested in the UN Security Council under Chapter VII).
                                             – 19 –               N20/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Responses should include relevant examples of humanitarian intervention or proposed intervention
and apply them to the concept of state sovereignty. Candidates may explore the complexities of
state violence including the four key concerns of R2P: war crimes, genocide, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity. They may discuss the responsibility of the state to its citizens and the
responsibility of the international community to intervene where the state does not fulfil its duty, as
well as unintended consequences and politicization of such interventions. Examples may include
Libya and Iraq, offering the opportunity to address cases in which humanitarian intervention was
used and whether it was a violation of sovereignty. Candidates may include cases in which
humanitarian intervention has been considered but not undertaken, such as Syria, South Sudan,
Ukraine, and Yemen, and how this inaction speaks to sovereignty.

Responses should include the candidate’s position on the claim that humanitarian intervention
violates state sovereignty.
