No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de
tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris,
sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de
tutorat ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement
supérieur, des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes
d’études, des gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des
développeurs d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la
procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse suivante :
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios
de apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores
de aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u
ofrezcan recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este
enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia:
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.
Philosophy
Standard level
Paper 1


Friday 6 November 2020 (afternoon)


1 hour 45 minutes


Instructions to candidates
y   Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y   Section A: answer one question.
y   Section B: answer one question.
y   The maximum mark for this examination paper is [50 marks].




                                                                                               8820 – 5604
      5 pages                                              © International Baccalaureate Organization 2020
                                                  –2–                                          8820 – 5604


                                              Section A

Answer one question from this section. Each question in this section is worth [25 marks].

Core theme: Being human

1.   Look at the following image and its accompanying quotation and develop your response as
     indicated below.




                    “A student’s learning and hard work is a defining moment in their life.”

     With explicit reference to the stimulus and your own knowledge, discuss a philosophical issue
     related to the question of what it means to be human.
                                                 –3–                                         8820 – 5604


2.   Look at the following image and develop your response as indicated below.




                            Sport has the power
                            to change the world
                               and our future
                       The Tokyo 1964 Games completely transformed Japan.
                      The Tokyo 2020 Games, as the most innovative in history,
               will bring positive reform to the world by building on three core concepts:
                      “Striving for your personal best (Achieving Personal Best)”
                              “Accepting one another (Unity in Diversity)”
                     “Passing on Legacy for the future (Connecting to Tomorrow)”




     With explicit reference to the stimulus and your own knowledge, discuss a philosophical issue
     related to the question of what it means to be human.




                                                                                             Turn over
                                                     –4–                                        8820 – 5604


                                                 Section B

Answer one question from this section. Each question in this section is worth [25 marks].

Optional theme 1: Aesthetics

3.    To what extent can art be defined?


4.    Evaluate the claim that to appreciate art properly it is “form” that is important.



Optional theme 2: Epistemology

5.    Evaluate the claim that “the limits of my language mean the limits of my world”.


6.    Evaluate the claim that technology as “the capacity to own, buy and sell knowledge, has
      contributed to the development of the new, knowledge-based societies”.



Optional theme 3: Ethics

7.    Evaluate the view that a moral act is one that originates from a sense of duty.


8.    Evaluate the claim that all morality is relative.



Optional theme 4: Philosophy and contemporary society

9.    Evaluate the claim that “everyone needs boundaries and a space they can call their own,
      therefore distinct societies and cultures need to be maintained”.


10.   Evaluate the claim that technological advancements enhance human progress.



Optional theme 5: Philosophy of religion

11.   Evaluate the claim that there is a God because something exists rather than nothing.


12.   To what extent can religious belief be challenged by psychological considerations?
                                                   –5–                                            8820 – 5604


Optional theme 6: Philosophy of science

13.   Explain and discuss the impact of modern scientific research (such as biology, cognitive science,
      neuroscience and artificial intelligence) on the understanding of the self.


14.   Evaluate the claim that whereas epistemology is focused on the study of knowledge, the
      philosophy of science is concerned with the practices of science.



Optional theme 7: Political philosophy

15.   Evaluate the claim that the purpose of government is the preservation of life, liberty and the
      pursuit of happiness.


16.   Explain and discuss the merits of “power to the people” as an idea in politics.




References:

1.      © International Baccalaureate Organization 2020. Almost 150,000 IB graduates celebrate 2016 exam results, [blog]
        5 July 2016. Available at:
        https://www.ibo.org/news/news-list/almost-150000-ib-graduates-celebrate-2016-exam-results/.

2.      Graphic: © International Baccalaureate Organization 2020.

        © 2020 – International Olympic Committee – All Rights Reserved.

5.      From Ludwig Wittgenstein (1992) Tractatus logico-philosophicus, published by Routledge, part of Taylor and Francis
        Informa UK Ltd -- Books. Used with the kind permission of the publisher.

6.      Republished with the permission of New Zealand Council for Educational Research from ‘Catching the knowledge
        wave?: the knowledge society and the future of education’, Jane Gilbert, 2005; permission conveyed through
        Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.
