No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de
tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris,
sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de
tutorat ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement
supérieur, des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes
d’études, des gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des
développeurs d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la
procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse suivante :
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios
de apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores
de aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u
ofrezcan recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este
enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia:
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.
Social and cultural anthropology
Higher level
Paper 2

Friday 13 November 2020 (morning)


2 hours 30 minutes


Instructions to candidates
y   Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y   Section A: answer the question.
y   Section B: answer two questions.
y   The maximum mark for this examination paper is [45 marks].




                                                                                               8820 – 5802
      4 pages                                              © International Baccalaureate Organization 2020
                                                    –2–                                            8820 – 5802


                                               Section A

Answer the question.

1.   With reference to ethnographic material from one area of inquiry you have studied, discuss
     how identity or society or belief and knowledge helps you to understand one of the following
     issues that is grounded in a real-world example.
     y environment
     y human rights
     y inequality
     y technology
     y violence.[15]

                                               Section B

Answer two questions from the three remaining areas of inquiry you have studied. Each question must
be from a different area of inquiry. You must use specific and clearly identified ethnographic illustrations.
Each question is worth [15 marks].

Belonging

2.    Examine ways in which different kinds of social relations can be used to construct notions of
      the family or community.

3.    Compare and contrast ideology in two societies you have studied in relation to one of the
      following:
      y diaspora
      y discourses of ageing
      y kinship
      y the nation-state.


Classifying the world

4.    Examine the role of symbolism in relation to either boundaries or cosmology.

5.    Compare two systems of classification in relation to one of the following:
      y commodification
      y gender
      y morality
      y ritual and religion.


Communication, expression and technology

6.    Discuss power or society in relation to globalization and technology.

7.    Examine the nature of hybridity in relation to one of the following:
      y commodification
      y media and popular culture
      y forms of symbolic production
      y transnationalism.
                                                   –3–                                         8820 – 5802


Conflict

8.    Compare and contrast the relation between identity and resistance in two societies you
      have studied.

9.    Examine the roles of authority and consensus in relation to one of the following:
      y hegemony
      y systems of inequality
      y social control
      y social movements.


Development

10.   Discuss development in relation to either belief and knowledge or social relations.

11.   Examine the issues surrounding sustainability in relation to one of the following:
      y informal economy
      y modernization
      y poverty and wealth
      y globalization.


Health, illness and healing

12.   Compare and contrast how culture helps to understand ideas about either illness or healing
      practice in two societies you have studied.

13.   Examine ways in which either health or suffering are experienced in relation to one of
      the following:
      y inequality
      y alternative medicines
      y embodiment
      y witchcraft.


Movement, time and space

14.   Discuss either power or symbolism in relation to exclusion and inclusion.

15.   Examine either movement or liminality in relation to one of the following:
      y disjuncture
      y boundaries
      y time
      y virtual communities.




                                                                                               Turn over
                                                   –4–                                           8820 – 5802


Production, exchange and consumption

16.   To what extent have changes in production or consumption altered social relations at the
      local level?

17.   Examine the relation between commodity and capitalism in relation to one of the following:
      y ceremonial exchange
      y consumption
      y globalization
      y work and labour.


The body

18.   Examine ideas about the body in relation to either materiality or identity.

19.   To what extent does the concept of habitus contribute to our understanding of one of the following?
      y personhood
      y the body as performed identity
      y the marginalized body
      y the other.
