M14/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                               May 2014



                        PHILOSOPHY



           Higher Level and Standard Level



                               Paper 1




25 pages
                              –2–             M14/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.
                                                  –3–              M14/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Note to examiners
This markscheme outlines what members of the paper setting team had in mind when they devised
the questions. The topics listed in the bullet points indicate possible areas candidates might cover in
their answers. They are not compulsory points and not necessarily the best possible points. They are
only a framework to help examiners in their assessment. Examiners should be responsive to any other
valid points or any other valid approaches.

Paper 1 guidance (Core Theme and Optional Themes)
Examiners are reminded that in the examination paper it states that candidates are expected to
demonstrate the following skills. Since these skills are encouraged within the assessment criteria,
examiners should take them into account in their marking:
• argue in an organized way using clear, precise language, which is appropriate to philosophy
• demonstrate knowledge and understanding of appropriate philosophical issues
• analyse, develop and critically evaluate relevant ideas and arguments
• present appropriate examples providing support for their overall argument
• identify and analyse counter-arguments
• provide relevant supporting material, illustrations and/or examples
• offer a clear and philosophically relevant personal response to the examination question.

In the examination paper candidates are required to:

Write a response (of approximately 800 words) in which they:
• identify a central philosophical concept or philosophical issue in the passage or photograph that
  addresses the question, “what is a human being?”
• investigate two different philosophical approaches to the philosophical concept or philosophical issue
  they identified
• explain and evaluate the philosophical concept or philosophical issue they identified.

Using the assessment criteria
Candidates at both Higher Level and Standard Level answer one question on the Core Theme
(Section A).
Candidates at Higher Level answer two questions on the Optional Themes (Section B), each based on a
different Optional Theme.
Candidates at Standard Level answer one question on the Optional Themes (Section B).

Answers on the Core Theme and the Optional Themes are assessed according to the assessment criteria
set out on pages 4 to 7 and 10 to 13.
                                                –4–              M14/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 1 Section A Core Theme assessment criteria

A    Expression

     • Has the candidate presented the answer in an organized way?
     • How clear and precise is the language used by the candidate?
     • To what extent is the language appropriate to philosophy?

      Achievement Descriptor
         Level
           0      The candidate has not reached level 1.
           1      The candidate expresses some basic ideas but it is not always clear what the
                  answer is trying to convey. The use of language is not appropriate to philosophy.
           2      The candidate presents some ideas in an organized way. There is some clarity of
                  expression but the answer cannot always be followed. The use of language is not
                  always appropriate to philosophy.
           3      The candidate presents ideas in an organized way and the answer can be easily
                  followed. The use of language is appropriate to philosophy.
           4      The candidate presents ideas in an organized and coherent way and the answer is
                  clearly articulated. The use of language is effective and appropriate to
                  philosophy.
           5      The candidate presents ideas in an organized, coherent and incisive way, insights
                  are clearly articulated and the answer is focused and sustained. The use of
                  language is precise and appropriate to philosophy.
                                              –5–              M14/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


B   Knowledge and understanding

    • To what extent does the candidate demonstrate knowledge of philosophical concepts or issues
      arising from the core theme, prompted by the stimulus material?
    • To what extent are appropriate cross references made between the stimulus material and
      philosophical concepts or issues arising from the core theme?
    • How well has the candidate understood the philosophical arguments, concepts or issues used?

     Achievement Descriptor
        Level
          0      The candidate has not reached level 1.
          1      The candidate demonstrates a superficial knowledge of philosophical concepts or
                 issues arising from the core theme. Cross references to the stimulus material are
                 superficial. There is only a basic understanding of the philosophical arguments,
                 concepts or issues used.
          2      The candidate demonstrates some knowledge of philosophical concepts or issues
                 arising from the core theme. Cross references to the stimulus material are only
                 occasionally appropriate. There is a limited understanding of the philosophical
                 arguments, concepts or issues used.
          3      The candidate demonstrates satisfactory knowledge of philosophical concepts or
                 issues arising from the core theme. Cross references to the stimulus material are
                 satisfactory. Philosophical arguments, concepts or issues are satisfactorily
                 understood.
          4      The candidate demonstrates a good knowledge of philosophical concepts or
                 issues arising from the core theme, which is used effectively to support the
                 answer. Cross references to the stimulus material are good. Philosophical
                 arguments, concepts or issues are largely understood.
          5      The candidate demonstrates a comprehensive and in-depth knowledge of the
                 philosophical concepts or issues arising from the core theme, which is used
                 incisively to support the answer. Cross references to the stimulus material are
                 well handled. Philosophical arguments, concepts or issues are well understood.
                                                 –6–               M14/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


C   Identification and analysis of relevant material

    • How clearly has the candidate identified a relevant philosophical issue in the stimulus material
      that arises from the core theme?
    • To what extent does the candidate present and explore two different philosophical approaches to
      the issue in the stimulus material that arises from the core theme?
    • How effectively does the candidate critically discuss the issue in the stimulus material that arises
      from the core theme?
    • How effectively does the candidate identify and analyse relevant counter-arguments?

     Achievement Descriptor
        Level
          0      The candidate has not reached level 1.
         1–2     The candidate shows little awareness of a relevant philosophical issue in the
                 stimulus material that arises from the core theme and identifies relevant material
                 in only a limited way. There is little analysis and few or no examples are given.
         3–4     The candidate shows some awareness of a relevant philosophical issue in the
                 stimulus material that arises from the core theme and identifies some relevant
                 material. Some appropriate examples are given.
         5–6     The candidate shows an understanding of a relevant philosophical issue in the
                 stimulus material that arises from the core theme and explores two different
                 philosophical approaches to the issue. There is a satisfactory analysis of the
                 material. Examples are generally appropriate and give some support to the
                 answer.
         7–8     The candidate shows an effective understanding of a relevant philosophical issue
                 in the stimulus material that arises from the core theme. The candidate explores
                 two different philosophical approaches to the issue in a convincing way. There is
                 a compelling critical discussion of the issue. Examples are appropriate in their
                 support of the answer. Counter-arguments are identified.
        9–10     The candidate shows an in-depth understanding of a relevant philosophical issue
                 in the stimulus material that arises from the core theme. The candidate explores
                 two different philosophical approaches to the issue in a convincing, engaging and
                 thoughtful way. There is an incisive and compelling critical discussion of the
                 issue. Examples are appropriate and effective in their support of the answer.
                 Counter-arguments are identified and analysed in a convincing way.
                                               –7–              M14/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


D   Development and evaluation

    • Does the candidate develop the argument in a coherent way?
    • How well does the candidate develop and evaluate ideas and arguments?
    • To what extent does the candidate express a relevant personal response?

     Achievement Descriptor
        Level
          0      The candidate has not reached level 1.
         1–2     The candidate develops ideas and arguments in a basic way with little or no
                 evaluation of them.
         3–4     The candidate develops some ideas and arguments but the development is simple,
                 or is asserted without support or reference. There may be some basic evaluation
                 of the ideas and arguments but it is not developed.
         5–6     The candidate develops ideas and arguments in a satisfactory way and evaluates
                 them to some extent. There is some evidence of a relevant personal response.
         7–8     The candidate develops ideas and arguments from a consistently held perspective.
                 Evaluation of the ideas and arguments is effective. There is good evidence of a
                 relevant personal response.
        9–10     The candidate develops ideas and arguments from a consistently held and well
                 justified perspective. Evaluation of the ideas and arguments is compelling or
                 subtle, and convincing. There is strong evidence of a relevant personal response.
                                                 –8–               M14/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                             SECTION A

Core Theme: What is a human being?

1.   Bursts: The Hidden Pattern Behind Everything We Do

     Knowledge of others is the explicit issue from the stimulus, although other associated issues such as
     human nature, where skepticism about the knowledge of others is a fundamental element in the
     human condition, may also be identified as an issue for discussion. Hume’s account of the origins
     of moral language – natural empathy possessed by humans – might be discussed. In addressing
     these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
     • Behaviourist views, existential views of the Other, or any other view that provides a method of
        making a list of relevant features to determine knowledge of another. Is the knowledge of others
        gained from these perspectives necessarily incomplete? Is it effective, nonetheless?
     • The human condition approach might explain the issue by defining the lack of knowledge in
        terms based on a Cartesian notion of self-consciousness, where direct and intimate knowledge of
        others is missing or impossible to access; the significance of this skepticism may be examined
        with reference to one’s moral obligations to others, or how it impacts on one’s knowledge of,
        and relationships with, the external world
     • The problem of solipsism
     • The alienation from ourselves and others may be explained from a religious perspective, where
        our alienation from our God, or, gods, is mirrored in our alienation from each other, or as a
        punishment for breaking the bond between humans and God, or, gods
     • The concepts of solitude and loneliness may also be used as contexts for examining human
        nature and knowledge of others
     • Whether there is anything paradoxical or inconsistent in the fact that the passage claims both that
        our knowledge of others is quite limited but also, allegedly, “what we might know most about”.
                                                  –9–               M14/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   Image of Social Security surfer

     Knowledge of the self, with a particular focus on personal identity, is the explicit issue from the
     stimulus. Responses should reflect this by identifying two senses of identity implicit in the stimulus:
     the legal view on identity, and the persistent or diachronic view, and it is the latter where the
     philosophical value lies (though candidates should be rewarded for identifying both).
     Some responses may concentrate on what the constituent elements of an identity are, but at some
     point in the discussion a more philosophically relevant response would address the question
     of persistence. There are several standard responses to the question of “who am I?”, or with the
     question “what are the grounds for re-identification?”, and these are psychological criteria, bodily
     criteria, and narrative arguments. Locke’s memory criterion is often cited, and most other
     explanations are variants on this; beliefs and desires are often used. Other responses might focus on
     how identity is imposed or constituted through political, religious or social organization, or
     experience, or by way of some other kind of social construction. In addressing these philosophical
     issues candidates might explore:
     • Physicalism and other forms of reductive materialism, may be used to explain self-consciousness
        as the infallible source and origin of identity, as it persists over time
     • Some feminist views on self-identity give primacy to the persistence of the body
     • Others may cite linguistic, religious, or other elements of a culture as constituent elements in
        an identity
     • The moral obligations and rights of an identity; some responses may investigate the tension
        between the innate or pre-determined view of identity and such obligations or rights
     • Skepticism concerning the certainty of knowledge of your own identity is sometimes drawn from
        the observation that our understanding of our identity is different to others’ perception of
        our identity
     • The distinctions between identity and personality
     • The performativity of personal and social identity as elaborated by Judith Butler, et al.
                                              – 10 –            M14/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 1 Section B Optional Themes assessment criteria

A   Expression

    • Has the candidate presented the answer in an organized way?
    • How clear and precise is the language used by the candidate?
    • To what extent is the language appropriate to philosophy?

     Achievement Descriptor
        Level
          0      The candidate has not reached level 1.
          1      The candidate expresses some basic ideas but it is not always clear what the
                 answer is trying to convey. The use of language is not appropriate to philosophy.
          2      The candidate presents some ideas in an organized way. There is some clarity of
                 expression but the answer cannot always be followed. The use of language is not
                 always appropriate to philosophy.
          3      The candidate presents ideas in an organized way and the answer can be easily
                 followed. The use of language is appropriate to philosophy.
          4      The candidate presents ideas in a clear and organized way and the answer is
                 clearly articulated. The use of language is effective and appropriate to
                 philosophy.
          5      The candidate presents ideas in an organized, coherent and incisive way, insights
                 are clearly articulated and the answer is focused and sustained. The use of
                 language is precise and appropriate to philosophy.
                                              – 11 –            M14/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


B   Knowledge and understanding

    • To what extent does the candidate demonstrate knowledge of philosophical issues arising from
      the optional theme?
    • How well has the candidate understood the philosophical arguments and concepts used?

     Achievement Descriptor
        Level
          0      The candidate has not reached level 1.
          1      The candidate demonstrates a superficial knowledge of philosophical issues
                 arising from the optional theme. There is only a basic understanding of the
                 philosophical arguments and concepts used.
          2      The candidate demonstrates some knowledge of philosophical issues arising from
                 the optional theme. There is a limited understanding of the philosophical
                 arguments and concepts used.
          3      The candidate demonstrates satisfactory knowledge of philosophical issues
                 arising from the optional theme. Philosophical arguments and concepts are
                 satisfactorily understood.
          4      The candidate demonstrates a good knowledge of philosophical issues arising
                 from the optional theme, which is used effectively to support the answer.
                 Philosophical arguments and concepts are largely understood.
          5      The candidate demonstrates a comprehensive and in-depth knowledge of
                 philosophical issues arising from the optional theme, which is used incisively to
                 support the answer. Philosophical arguments and concepts are well understood.
                                              – 12 –            M14/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


C   Identification and analysis of relevant material

    • How well has the candidate understood the specific demands of the question?
    • To what extent does the candidate identify and analyse relevant supporting material?
    • To what extent does the candidate provide appropriate examples and use them to support the
      overall argument?
    • How effectively does the candidate identify and analyse relevant counter-arguments?

     Achievement Descriptor
        Level
          0      The candidate has not reached level 1.
        1–2      The candidate shows little understanding of the specific demands of the question
                 and identifies relevant supporting material in only a limited way. There is little
                 analysis and few or no examples are provided.
        3–4      The candidate shows some understanding of the specific demands of the question
                 and identifies and analyses some relevant supporting material. Some appropriate
                 examples are provided.
        5–6      The candidate shows a satisfactory understanding of the specific demands of the
                 question and identifies supporting material that is nearly always relevant. There
                 is a satisfactory analysis of this material. The examples provided are generally
                 appropriate and give some support to the overall argument.
        7–8      The candidate shows an effective understanding of the specific demands of the
                 question and identifies relevant supporting material that is analysed in a sound
                 and thoughtful way. The examples provided are appropriate in their support of
                 the overall argument. Counter-arguments are identified.
        9–10     The candidate shows an in-depth understanding of the specific demands of the
                 question and identifies supporting material that is always relevant. The
                 implications of this material are analysed in detail. The examples provided are
                 well chosen and compelling in their support of the overall argument. Counter-
                 arguments are identified and analysed in a convincing way.
                                              – 13 –            M14/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


D   Development and evaluation

    • Does the candidate develop the argument in a coherent way?
    • How well does the candidate develop and evaluate ideas and arguments?
    • To what extent does the candidate express a relevant personal response?

     Achievement Descriptor
        Level
          0      The candidate has not reached level 1.
        1–2      The candidate develops ideas and arguments in a basic way with little or no
                 evaluation of them.
        3–4      The candidate develops some ideas and arguments but the development is simple,
                 or is asserted without support or reference. There may be some basic evaluation
                 of the ideas and arguments but it is not developed.
        5–6      The candidate develops ideas and arguments in a satisfactory way and evaluates
                 them to some extent. There is some evidence of a relevant personal response.
        7–8      The candidate develops ideas and arguments from a consistently held
                 perspective. Evaluation of the ideas and arguments is effective. There is good
                 evidence of a relevant personal response.
        9–10     The candidate develops ideas and arguments from a consistently held and well
                 justified perspective. Evaluation of the ideas and arguments is compelling or
                 subtle, and convincing. There is strong evidence of a relevant personal response.
                                                 – 14 –             M14/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                              SECTION B

Optional Theme 1: Grounds of epistemology

3.   Explain and discuss what we should do in order to attain knowledge.

     The question opens a discussion on the conditions required for knowledge and might be approached
     from different positions (eg, foundationalism, relativism) or by focusing on different issues
     (eg, types of knowledge, the nature of knowledge). Its analysis is closely related to the question of
     knowledge itself. Descartes’s foundationalism proposes that a belief counts as knowledge if it is
     either foundational or appropriately derived from what is foundational. A belief counts as
     foundational only if it is inconceivable that it be mistaken. Furthermore, knowledge is possible if it
     can be derived from foundations that are immune from error. This raises the issue of skeptical
     doubts concerning the possibility of knowledge. A naturalized alternative views knowledge as a
     natural phenomenon that can be investigated by whatever means are available, including empirical
     means. There are different answers according to different positions: knowledge initially gained
     through the senses (empiricism, a posteriori knowledge); the result of rational intuition
     (rationalism, a priori knowledge).          In addressing these philosophical issues candidates
     might explore:
     • The assumption that we do attain knowledge
     • What we should do in order to attain knowledge; does this lend itself to purely a priori
        (non-empirical) investigation?
     • Whether the issue ultimately rests on how we are to conceive the nature of epistemological
        inquiry
     • Whether true beliefs are converted into knowledge because of the quality of the reasons
        employed in justification
     • Whether to attain knowledge we just need to follow standard ways of accepting knowledge
        claims, eg, common sense or scientific procedures.
                                                  – 15 –             M14/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   Explain and discuss whether our knowledge is objective, or restricted to our own subjective
     perspective on things.

     The question is focused on a central epistemological issue – the possibility of objective knowledge
     – and asks for explanation and discussion. Can we know about the world as it really is, or are we
     restricted to knowledge of the world as it is shaped and coloured by our own thoughts
     and experience? Moderate realism: at least some of our beliefs are objective, that is, logically and
     causally independent of someone’s conceiving of that thing. In addressing these philosophical
     issues candidates might explore:
     • Possible interpretations of “objective”: as the result of a progressive construction that detaches us
        from our individual subjective viewpoints, and in this sense it would include interpretation;
        “objective” meaning that we are contained in a world or reality that transcends our minds;
        “objective” meaning objective facts
     • Objectivity as being different from agreement; ways of justifying objective knowledge: the
        recourse to scientific knowledge
     • The idea that our experience actually is objective in the sense that it is of real physical objects
     • Discussions which might be related, eg, about colour and qualia
     • Popper’s argument that objective knowledge is located in a “World 3”, the world of humanly
        created objective contents of thought, different from the world of physical things and the world
        of mental things
     • The idea behind “I contradict myself”: the reach and possibilities of the idea of contradiction in
        the justification of claiming objectivity
     • The extent to which usual positions (internalism, externalism, foundationalism, coherentism)
        might illuminate the subjective-objective discussion
     • Forms of stating and justifying the subjectivity of knowledge claims
     • What would a “subjective perspective on things” amount to?
     • Is a subjective perspective on things the only realistic possibility (as is often suggested by
        Continental philosophers)?
                                                – 16 –             M14/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Optional Theme 2: Theories and problems of ethics

5.   Evaluate the claim that our moral judgments are projections or expressions of our desires,
     attitudes and preferences.

     This question invites an analysis of ethical non-cognitivism. Various versions such as Ayer’s
     emotivism, Blackburn’s projectivism (quasi-realism), Mackie’s error theory, and expressivism
     (Gibbard) are the main examples. Non-cognitivism holds that moral judgments are neither true nor
     false as they are not appropriate for truth evaluations; they are not beliefs supported by
     cognitive/empirical evidence. In this sense, non-cognitivists are moral irrealists (non-realists).
     Moral judgments or assertions are expressions of emotions, or preferences. In addressing these
     philosophical issues candidates might explore:
     • If moral judgments really are projections of emotions or attitudes, then how can these judgments
        be anything but a mistake or error?
     • If we speak and act as if there is a property of goodness, although there is not, are our thinking
        and speaking not in this way flawed?
     • Whether a projectivist can take rightness, duties, and wrongness seriously. On the one hand,
        they do not exist, but, on the other, I still act and believe as though I have moral commitments
     • If rightness and wrongness are “children of our sentiments” as Hume suggests, then are right and
        wrong not dependent on my sentiments? If my sentiments change, do my concepts of right and
        wrong also change? If my sentiments vanish, does my morality also disappear?
     • Some version of moral cognitivism may be offered as a contrasting position. Here, moral
        judgments are beliefs that are apt for truth or falsity. Moral properties supervene on physical
        properties, or are non-natural properties in themselves. Either way, these properties
        are discernible.
                                                   – 17 –             M14/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


6.   Evaluate the claim that knowing the consequences of an action can tell you what is best, but it
     cannot tell you what is right.

     The aim of this question is to invite an analysis of how consequentialism may, or may not, reconcile
     the alleged conflict between pursuing the best outcome and pursuing the right outcome. It also
     invites discussion of the role of consequentialism as a decision-making tool rather than a
     moral guide. Traditional criticisms of consequentialism have been that it fails to acknowledge, or
     avoids endorsing, actions which are considered morally right; if moral rightness were founded on,
     for example, utility, then whose utility must be considered, and to what extent? Counter positions
     on what is right are usually based on deontological or virtue approaches or on a set of innate moral
     intuitions on what is right. Common arguments raised against classical consequentialism are that it
     ignores individual rights, eg, the taking of one innocent life to save others, and that if utility is the
     criterion of rightness, then it seems that no one can know what is morally right. In addressing these
     philosophical issues candidates might explore:
     • The claim of some consequentialists that their principles are not to be used as a device for
        making individual decisions, but rather as a standard for what is right
     • Indirect or rule, motive, or virtue consequentialism can frame principles of action to correlate
        with morally intuitive notions of what is right, while some claim that it is my moral intuition
        which leads me to select and perform acts that maximize my utility (Hare)
     • The issue of moral integrity, eg, its compatibility, or otherwise, with consequentialist approaches
     • Actual consequentialism allows for the actual consequences of an act to determine rightness,
        while others use the foreseeable consequences as a guide to rightness
     • Mill’s defence of “desirable” meaning both “worthy of being desired” as well as “capable of
        being desired” as a way of committing consequentialism to a criterion of rightness.
                                                  – 18 –             M14/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Optional Theme 3: Philosophy of religion

7.   Evaluate the claim that in order for individuals to rationally accept the existence of God, or,
     the gods, they have no more need to provide adequate evidence for their belief than they have
     to in order to rationally accept the existence of the past.

     The question invites an evaluation of the claim that it can be rational to believe in the existence of
     God (or, the gods), the past, etc, without needing to provide evidence that others would judge
     adequate. The claim amounts to a rejection of the view that a belief can only be rationally
     acceptable if it is based on adequate evidence, or, on a good argument, ie it is a rejection of
     “evidentialism”, a position underpinned by classical foundationalism. According to classical
     foundationalism, a proposition is rationally acceptable only if it is certain for an individual, and it
     can only be certain for an individual if it is about either the individual’s mental states (eg, what
     he/she seems to see) or is self-evident. Much of the debate about the existence of God (which will
     be the focus here) has been conducted in response to the evidentialist requirement. Many atheists
     have cited the existence of evil as evidence against the existence of God (or, at least, God as
     traditionally conceived). It is clear, though, that this provides at most a probabilistic ground for
     denying the existence of God since there is no logical inconsistency between the existence of God
     as traditionally conceived and the existence of evil. Others (eg, Marx, Nietzsche, Freud, Dawkins)
     have unconvincingly advanced reductivist explanations for theistic beliefs. Some theists have relied
     on versions of cosmological, ontological, teleological and moral arguments to satisfy the
     requirements of evidentialism, but even the most impressive versions of these arguments are open
     to criticism. Other theists (eg, Plantinga, Wolterstorff, Alston) have rejected the evidentialist
     requirement and have maintained that certain of our beliefs (eg, in God, about what happened
     yesterday, etc) should be seen as properly basic and so as not having to be supported by evidence
     or argument. According to them, our properly basic beliefs can be relied upon insofar as they are
     neither the product of cognitive dysfunction nor subject to defeating conditions (eg, that theistic
     belief results from projection, that there are unresolvable incompatibilities as between the religious
     beliefs of theists, etc). Agnostics have urged that neither atheists nor theists have furnished strong
     enough evidence or arguments to justify their convictions. In addressing these philosophical issues
     candidates might explore:
     • Considerations for and against evidentialism
     • Classical foundationalism and arguments for and against belief in God, or, the gods
     • The requirements for the rationality of belief and the withholding of belief
     • Reductivist and non-reductivist accounts of belief in God, or, the gods.
                                                – 19 –            M14/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


8.   Evaluate the claim that what ultimately makes an action right or wrong is its being
     commanded or prohibited by God, or, the gods.

     The question invites an evaluation of the claim that morality is consequential upon the commands
     and prohibitions of God, or, the gods. The notion of ethics being constituted by divine commands is
     usually traced back to Plato’s Euthyphro, which raised the question of whether actions are holy
     because they are approved by the gods or are approved by the gods because they are
     (independently) holy. Contemporary philosophical discussions of the relationship between God and
     morality (which will be the focus here) have been centred on divine command accounts.
     Among the considerations that have been proposed in favour of such theories are the following: that
     in consequence of the dependency of humans on God as their creator, humans are dependent on
     God for morality in a manner similar to the way children are dependent on their parents for
     establishing standards of behaviour; second, that to deny the significance of God’s commands for
     morality would be falsely to imply that the moral realm lies outside the province of an omnipotent
     being; and, third, that to reject a divine command account of ethics would bespeak an unwillingness
     to conform to God’s will. Among the objections that have been made to grounding morality on
     God’s commands have been the following: that merely having a reason for adopting a
     divine command ethic (or, merely judging that it would be appropriate to obey God) implies that
     there is reason to do what is right that is independent of what God commands; second, that
     acceptance of a divine command account of morality calls into question whether any moral virtues
     can be ascribed to God because it makes no sense to conceive of God as issuing self-directed
     commands about the right way to behave; and, third, that a divine command account of morality has
     counter-intuitive consequences in that it would commit humans to doing things we judge to be
     immoral were it found that God commanded us to do them. Supporters of divine command
     accounts deny this last point because they contend that all of God’s commands flow out of God’s
     nature. This has been the context for discussions of Kierkegaard’s famous claim about
     “the teleological suspension of the ethical”, in reference to God’s command to Abraham to sacrifice
     his son, Isaac. In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
     • Plato’s discussion of divine command morality in Euthyphro
     • That if there are properties of actions that are right-making what are they?
     • Reasons for, and reasons against, considering God’s commands (the commands of the gods) as
        constituting the right-making properties of actions, including whether mere obedience to
        authority can ever be a sound motivational basis for moral action and responsibility
     • Kierkegaard’s discussion of “the teleological suspension of the ethical” in Fear and Trembling.
                                                  – 20 –             M14/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Optional Theme 4: Philosophy of art

9.    Evaluate the claim that there is no factual basis on which judgments about the value of art
      can either be made or spoken of.

      This question invites an exploration of the basis on which making judgments about art’s value can
      be made. This will encourage a general consideration of whether there can be a factual basis to
      aesthetic judgments. Responses might engage with the traditional separation claimed to exist
      between value and factual language, as raised originally by Hume when he was considering the
      structure of ethical arguments. Candidates might look at possible natural responses in human
      beings, which might be said to trigger psychological responses to works of art. Answers could
      engage with the difference between natural and metaphysical explanations of aesthetic judgments
      and might analyse the difference between the disinterestedness of aesthetic pleasure in contrast to
      other experiences of pleasure. If a natural explanation is explored as a possible factual basis, how
      might this be empirically measured? If there is no basis in fact for such judgments, then are we left
      in a wholly subjective sphere where we speak only of taste when considering art’s value? In
      addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
      • Kant’s aesthetic argument
      • Plato’s treatment of art as an example of the universality of beauty; the difference between
         particular things and universal beauty
      • Alternative accounts of aesthetic judgments, eg, subjective accounts.


10.   Evaluate the claim that good art is art which portrays the world authentically.

      This question invites exploration of the claim that good art involves accurate portrayals of the world.
      For most this means a faithful, or authentic, portrayal being judged by how lifelike an image or
      evocation might be. However, representation of the world can also be done in more abstract ways,
      which might still be judged as authentic. Responses might evaluate art’s mimetic quality and ask if
      this is a basis for authenticity. Examples used to further the response might include a consideration
      of different art media in which the world can be imitated, including visual and aural forms: is the
      lack of a single medium of art a barrier to authenticity? The relationship between accuracy,
      portrayal and authenticity might be explored with a consideration of how this can provoke an
      emotional response. Candidates might look at the difference between form and content when
      considering authenticity in art. In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
      • Plato’s world of Forms imitated by sensible representations which fall short of true beauty; his
         criticism of art as representation
      • Aristotelian mimetic accounts of the function of art
      • Possible limits society would impose on subject material for artistic representation (eg, abuse,
         torture, excessive crime)
      • The technical expertise required to depict originals with accuracy
      • Whether it can be claimed that not all good art is representational
      • Art as expressive of emotion versus art as representational of the world
      • Art forgery; are exact copies of originals of comparable value to the originals?
      • The use of symbolism in art
      • The idea that whether art is good is not a function of the qualities it inherently possesses, but of
         the constructions of its assessors
      • The idea that good art shapes the world rather than representing it.
                                                   – 21 –             M14/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Optional Theme 5: Political philosophy

11.   Evaluate the claim that in a modern democracy there should be toleration of all non-violent
      action.

      This question invites an evaluation of the degree of toleration that can be allowed in
      modern democracies. It allows for the exploration of individual freedoms and rights within a
      democracy, contrasted with the rights of minorities. It raises the question of the role of the state in
      facilitating toleration and deciding areas of human activity that cannot be tolerated. An issue that
      might be considered is the degree to which hate speech and rights of assembly might, or might not,
      be tolerated, perhaps with reference to Mill. The role of education might be discussed as a way of
      raising awareness of the perceived need, and perhaps benefits, which result from toleration.
      The claim in the question can be challenged by sustained arguments putting the case that toleration
      is not necessarily a fundamental feature of a democracy. Ideas of “overlapping consensus” and
      “reasonable pluralism” might be developed. In addressing these philosophical issues candidates
      might explore:
      • The role of legislation and practice
      • The scope for being able to give offence and take offence
      • Reactions to hate speech, discrimination, and exclusion in everyday encounters
      • The consequences for stability in a society where there is no toleration; does a strong
         authoritarian government produce more security and peace of mind?
      • The clash between the freedom to protest and the ongoing economic life of a community (eg, the
         impact on economic interests of movements occupying city streets).


12.   Evaluate the claim that increased political activism at a local level will result in a change in
      the legitimacy of the power of the state.

      The question invites an evaluation of whether the power of the state will diminish if there is a rise in
      local and “grass roots” political activity. The locally based power of people, through
      “town hall meetings”, localized pressure groups, and the media, which operate within the
      boundaries of the law, might be seen to replace the actions and interests of centralized government.
      This raises the question about whether localized activity might result in abuse of power and limit
      harmonization with central government directives. The role of extreme liberal individualism in the
      form of anarchism might be explored along with the potential clash between these views and
      actions, and the potential coercive actions of the state aiming at protecting the people.
      “Grass roots” power might presuppose an inherent nature of humans, that of being good; while in
      contrast a strong centralized state might perceive humans as inherently bad, and needing protection
      from each other. It also raises issues of legitimacy and how local groups might be legitimate and
      truly representative compared to perhaps an elected central government. In addressing these
      philosophical issues candidates might explore:
      • Whether “people-power” effectively replaces the role of the state in a modern
         complex environment
      • Whether the lesser role of the state is in keeping with some Eastern traditions, such as Taoism
      • The role of globalization and removal of national identities, which might lead to a unity of
         people and to a “withering away” of the state
      • The need to control and direct individual drives and passion through state power
      • The issue of being unable to appeal to a higher authority when power and decision making
         is localized.
                                                   – 22 –             M14/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Optional Theme 6: Non-Western traditions and perspectives

13.   With reference to at least one of the non-Western traditions that you have studied, explain
      and discuss the difficulties in achieving equality and justice in a multicultural society (when
      some groups within it understand their cultures to involve distinctive ways of life governed by
      the past, while others consider theirs fluid, open to change and not bound by the past).

      The question asks for an analysis of the difficulties in achieving equality and justice in societies
      made up from groups with opposing conceptions of the importance of maintaining traditional ways
      of living. Answers might incorporate views from various non-Western traditions (eg, concerning
      their stances on pluralism, democracy, etc). Some (eg, Will Kymlicka) take societal culture to
      consist of an inter-generational community, more or less institutionally complete, occupying a given
      territory or homeland, and sharing a distinctive language and history. Taken this way, a culture is
      the entirety of a shared understanding and so the notion of a group’s culture is apt to become frozen,
      thereby entrenching the roles to be played by those inside the group, and widening the differences
      between those inside and those outside the cultural group. On this understanding of culture, in
      order to have equality of freedom, respect and justice for all it is likely that special provisions will
      have to be made by the state for: protection of language (eg, in educational institutions);
      maintenance of the group’s particular practices and institutions; public expression of the group’s
      commitments, etc. This has been, eg, a focus for some Native American and Inuit groups in the
      United States and Canada. If making these special provisions is sometimes at odds with the
      aspiration for equality of freedom, respect and justice (eg, in the ways in which the genders are
      treated) the society has to determine how those practices are to be regarded within its
      legal framework. This has been an issue in, eg, various sub-Continental cultures. Others (eg,
      Iris Marion Young) consider culture to be the meanings people make use of when they
      communicate and interact with each other and so to be fluid, always changing and lacking fixed
      borders. They trace inequalities of freedom, respect and justice to flawed social structures despite
      agreeing that at least some claims for support for “cultural expression” are independently warranted.
      Moreover, they think the first approach outlined above cannot account satisfactorily for inequalities
      stemming from disability, differences of race and class, etc. Thus, they hold that societies that
      aspire to equality for their members must confront the causes of these inequalities regardless of the
      legitimacy of the claims of national, ethnic and religious groups for special forms of support.
      In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
      • The most plausible way(s) to understand the notion of societal “culture”
      • The justifiability of a society making special provisions for those within it who wish to uphold a
          distinctive culture(s)
      • The forms such special provisions might legitimately take if they are justifiable
      • The compatibility of making such special provisions with the aspiration of a society to ensure
          equal freedom, respect and justice for all
      • The specifics for various non-Western traditions concerning the place of the individual as against
          the place of the group.
                                                  – 23 –            M14/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


14.   With reference to at least one of the non-Western traditions that you have studied, evaluate
      the claim that an internationally acceptable conception of human rights requires that social
      institutions be designed so that all human beings at least have reasonably secure, even if not
      legally recognized, access to their entitlements under those rights.

      The question asks for an evaluation of the claim that human rights are only effective when social
      institutions are set up to secure the benefits and protections to which rights holders are entitled.
      Answers might incorporate views from various non-Western traditions (eg, the stance on individual
      rights within Sharia law or within certain Asian cultures). Some claim that for a human right to be
      effective it needs to be incorporated within a society’s legal (including judicial) arrangements.
      However, even though this will often be the case it is not required for at least some human rights.
      For example, a right to adequate nutrition can be given appropriate recognition without having to be
      protected by legislation. More importantly, though, even when human rights have been legally
      provided for there can be obstacles to exercising them. Lack of knowledge and lack of resources,
      for example, can prevent individuals from exercising particular human rights that are legally
      recognized (eg, rights to protection against bullying or harassment by an employer). In that event it
      is more important for an individual to have a supportive social structure that can assist him/her to
      gain access to the object of his/her right. One key human right is a right to live in accordance with
      our own plan of life. Exercising such a right requires various freedoms, including access to
      nutrition, clean water, clothing, shelter and basic health care, along with access to information and
      education, opportunities for political participation, etc. To obtain these freedoms it may be helpful
      to have the backing of the law without it being essential. It may, for example, be just as important
      that ownership of land not be concentrated in the hands of a few, that there be moral opposition to
      usurious lending practices, that there be access to start-up loans, that hoarding of food be
      frowned upon, that education and training be available, etc. Such issues have been prominent in
      both African and Asian societies. In societies that favour the community or the family ahead of the
      individual these informal support mechanisms are especially important because of the likelihood of
      there being opposition to enshrining (what will be thought of as) “individualism” within the law.
      This has often been said to lie behind opposition within some Asian societies in the promotion of
      individual rights. In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
      • The nature of human rights, including whether, and, if so, how, they are related to legal rights
      • The importance for humans wishing to exercise their rights of being able to enforce their rights
      • The importance of societal structures for the facilitation, exercise and enforcement of
         human rights
      • The significance for human rights of societal beliefs about whether the community, the family,
         etc, should have precedence over the individual
      • The specifics of particular non-Western traditions concerning the role of the law and the role of
         rights, both individual and group, within a particular tradition.
                                                   – 24 –             M14/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Optional Theme 7: Contemporary social issues

15.   Evaluate the role that gender differences play in forming an understanding of human identity.

      This question invites an evaluation of the impact that gender differences – including their
      acknowledgement and any understanding that forms as a result – have on understanding human
      identity. The possibility of understanding human essence beyond gender differences might be
      raised in a consideration of what can be considered essentially human. Candidates might explore
      the possibility of understanding of alternative gender experience (eg, a male author writing a novel
      from a female perspective) and consider the epistemic distance between women and men. As
      humans are animals they can be empirically observed which might be relevant alongside the
      feminist critique of social structures in the past (and still in the present if the composition of power
      continues to be) formed by predominantly male agency. Examples might include a treatment of
      transgender awareness in contemporary society, as well as the concept of autonomy and its
      contribution to notions of human identity. Evaluation might include consideration of theories of
      identity based on psychological continuity, or perception of experience. In addressing these
      philosophical issues candidates might explore:
      • Positive discrimination versus accusations of tokenism
      • The individual versus membership of a group
      • The possibility of self-creation
      • Recognition of people through physical awareness
      • Possible issues for mind-body understanding, where the mind is conceived as separate from the
         body and psychological theories of human nature, where the mind is integrally related
         to the body
      • Transgender issues.


16.    “Notions of human stewardship of nature are unhelpful given the inevitable association such
      notions have with a hierarchy. It would be better for humans to understand themselves more
      as part of nature than standing above it.” Discuss and evaluate.

      This question allows for an investigation of various models used to describe the human relationship
      with nature and the environment. A long tradition has humans standing in some sense “above”
      nature due either to a theological understanding of humans being placed at the apex of a hierarchy
      of creation, or due to the particular human ability to subdue, manipulate and subordinate the forces
      of nature. Thus answers might look at the domination of nature by humans, alongside notions of
      stewardship, and more recent ecological approaches which place humans inside, and as part of, a
      natural system, like that posited by the deep ecology movement or the Gaia hypothesis.
      In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
      • Stewardship as reflecting the natural order or as some kind of creation for humans to take care of
         for the creator
      • Stewardship arising from the human ability to manipulate the natural order envisaging some
         sense of productive use of the environment
      • Domination of the natural order so as to take maximum benefit for the species from
         the environment
      • Modern theories of environmental citizenship, eg, the Gaia hypothesis, virtue theory,
         dependency, vulnerability
      • The environment and economics
      • The environment and democracy and power relations
      • The impact of different religious or folk traditions on understanding the human place in nature.
                                                   – 25 –             M14/3/PHILO/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Optional Theme 8: People, nations and cultures

17.   Evaluate the claim that cultural identity is better than national identity as a basis for an
      individual’s identity.

      This question invites an evaluation of the claim that one’s culture is a better identifier of who one is
      rather than one’s nationality. It raises the issue as to whether nationality alone, or at all, can
      establish an individual’s identity. The fact that nationality can be acquired by legal process,
      compared to cultural identity which might involve long term assimilation, could suggest that culture
      would be a better identifier. One’s ethnicity and roots cannot be bestowed by bureaucratic process
      and therefore nationality alone might not be a good indicator of who “I am”. Often cultural clashes
      are more deep rooted than national clashes, and this would suggest that one’s identity stems from a
      cultural origin more than nationality. Cultures cross political/national boundaries and therefore
      identity imposed by a state seems inferior to an identity established by ethnicity. The phenomenon
      of globalization might accentuate cultural origin over national status. In a Marxist tradition
      identities can be seen as transnational; workers united across political boundaries. Fundamentally
      the non-imposed cultural heritage might supercede nationality in terms of true identity.
      In addressing these philosophical issues candidates might explore:
      • The extent to which cultural roots are being lost as a result of globalization
      • Whether politics associated with nationhood offer a stronger tie than cultural heritage
      • Whether in modern urban societies both national identity and cultural identity are being lost as
         individuals become isolated, especially those from minority cultures who reside unwillingly
         within a multicultural nation
      • Whether humans now seek a sense of meaning and identity through other things than culture and
         nation such as work or friends
      • The implications for the identity of individuals who are rendered stateless because neither the
         nation into which they were born nor any other will acknowledge them and accord them an
         identity.


18.   Evaluate the claim that globalization necessitates the creation of more world institutions.

      This question seeks an evaluation of the need to establish more world institutions because of the
      onset of globalization. The role and function of existing world institutions might be evaluated with
      the aim of concluding the degree to which they address global issues. Can new or existing world
      institutions embrace global values or do they merely reflect the values of dominant groups
      of nations? The potential clash between a world orientation and local views and needs could be
      seen as a counter position to the claim in the question. The potential advantages of efficiency,
      speed and cost effectiveness of world institutions might be considered; quick responses resolving
      issues and conflicts might be contrasted with world institutions and centralization establishing
      inefficiency and lack of action because of inabilities to establish consensus about actions, eg, the
      United Nations’ Security Council. Might increasing ethnic mixing dictate the need for world
      standards controlled by world institutions? In addressing these philosophical issues candidates
      might explore:
      • Whether world institutions ever fully understand local circumstances
      • Whether there should be protection of local traditions and expectations even though they may be
         contrary to some universal standard
      • Whether diversity is to be valued and celebrated
      • The question, “if we are one common humanity, are world institutions inevitable?”.
