M14/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX




      22145707

PSYCHOLOGY
HIGHER LEVEL
PAPER 3

Thursday 8 May 2014 (morning)

1 hour


INSTRUCTIONS to candidates

 Do not turn over this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Read the passage carefully and then answer all the questions.
 The maximum mark for this examination paper is [30 marks].




2214-5707                                                                                           2 pages
                                                            © International Baccalaureate Organization 2014
                                                        –2–                 M14/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX

The stimulus material below is based on a research article that describes the differences between the
portrayal of love and romance in Western culture and women’s actual experiences.

             In Western culture, romance is the main theme of many movies, songs and books. However, the
             media’s representations of love are not often what people experience in their own lives. This may
             be a source of frustration.

             The aim of this qualitative study was to investigate the extent to which heterosexual women’s
      5      perceptions of romantic love matched what they had experienced in their own romantic love
             relationships. The researcher was a female psychologist who also worked as a couples’ therapist.
             She said that her reason for doing the study was that ever since she was a young woman she had
             tried to understand her own emotional responses when she was in love. She had seen other women
             struggling with the same questions and emotional responses as she herself had experienced.

     10      This study was conducted in New Zealand. The purposive sample consisted of eight heterosexual
             women who were either therapists or psychology students. They were recruited through the
             researcher’s own social networks.

             The data were collected using semi-structured interviews. With the permission of the participants,
             the interviews were recorded on audiotape and later transcribed. The transcriptions were shown
     15      to the participants to ensure that they were accurate. The transcripts were then analysed using
             inductive content analysis. The analysis revealed themes such as “romantic love is an illusion”
             but also that “romantic love provides intimacy and physical closeness”. All the women talked
             about how they have to “struggle for equality” in their romantic relationships, and that there is
             a “danger of losing friends and of giving up other interests” through focusing too much on their
     20      partners. The researcher acknowledged in the research article that reflexivity was important in
             this study.

             The study revealed that the women had mixed perceptions of romantic love. On the one hand,
             they desired to experience and express love fully, but at the same time they did not want to give up
             their independence. Negative experiences in previous romantic love relationships had taught these
     25      women to resist being too dependent on their male partners and not to give up their own friends and
             interests. According to these women, maintaining some degree of independence results in more
             equal and satisfying love relationships. The researcher concluded that these women’s experiences
             of love are different from stories about love in literature and the media.



Answer all of the following three questions, referring to the stimulus material in your answers. Marks will
be awarded for demonstration of knowledge and understanding of qualitative research methodology.

1.        Evaluate the sampling technique used in this study.                                        [10 marks]

2.        Explain why reflexivity is relevant to this study.                                         [10 marks]

3.        Evaluate the use of semi-structured interviews in this study.                              [10 marks]




2214-5707
