M12/2/A2ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


                    May / mai / mayo 2012

        ENGLISH / ANGLAIS / INGLÉS A2


                       Standard Level
                       Niveau Moyen
                        Nivel Medio


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2




6 pages/páginas
                          –2–         M12/2/A2ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive
use of examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate
and must not be reproduced or distributed to any other
person without the authorisation of IB Cardiff.
                                               –3–           M12/2/A2ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Standard level, paper 2

These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking. They are not offered as
an exhaustive and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must rigidly adhere.
Good ideas or angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate.
Similarly, answers that do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here should not be so
heavily penalized as to distort appreciation of individuality.

These questions invite the candidates to consider the Cultural Option “Language and culture”.

1.   A barely satisfactory answer will provide some reasons for its argument.          One or two
     examples will be given.

     A better answer will draw on appropriate examples in considering the idea that the survival of
     a culture is tied to the survival of its language. The essay will have a coherent structure.

     The best answers will demonstrate a range of reasons for the arguments maintained and will
     support those arguments with examples that are pertinent, precise, and varied. The essays will
     be well organized.


2.   A barely satisfactory answer will offer a general discussion about whether you can ever be
     truly comfortable in two cultures even if you are bilingual. They will take an affirmative or
     negative position. One or two examples will be given.

     A better answer will draw on appropriate examples in making its argument and will have a
     coherent structure.

     The best answers will demonstrate a range of reasons for the arguments maintained, and will
     support those arguments with examples that are pertinent, precise, and varied. The essays will
     be well organized.



These questions invite the candidate to consider the Cultural Option “Media and culture”.

3.   A barely satisfactory answer will offer a general discussion of whether the modern media
     keeps us reliably informed about the world around us. One or two examples will be given.

     A better answer will draw on appropriate examples in making its argument and will have a
     coherent structure.

     The best answers will demonstrate a range of reasons for their arguments and will
     support those arguments with examples that are pertinent, precise, and varied. The essays will
     be well organized.
                                                –4–            M12/2/A2ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   A barely satisfactory answer will make a general argument about the fact that advertising
     companies can now reach us anywhere, anytime and the possible consequences of this.
     One or two examples will be given.

     A better answer will draw on appropriate examples in order to argue that advertising
     companies can now reach us anywhere, anytime and will offer a fuller discussion about the
     possible consequences of this. The essay will have a coherent structure.

     The best answers will demonstrate a range of reasons for the arguments maintained and will
     support those arguments with examples that are pertinent, precise, and varied. The essays will
     be well organized.



This question invites the candidate to consider the Cultural Option “Future issues”.

5.   A barely satisfactory answer will offer a general discussion about whether future technology
     will ensure more equality between people or whether it might lead to further inequality. One
     or two examples will be given.

     A better answer will draw on appropriate examples in discussing whether future technology
     will lead to further equality or inequality. It will consider the reasons for this in more detail,
     and will have a coherent structure.

     The best answers will demonstrate a range of reasons for the arguments maintained and will
     support those arguments with examples that are pertinent, precise, and varied. The essays will
     be well organized.



This question invites the candidate to consider the Cultural Option “Global issues”.

6.   A barely satisfactory answer will make a general argument about whether problems affecting
     humans or those affecting animals and the natural world demand more immediate attention.
     One or two examples will be given.

     A better answer will draw on appropriate examples in discussing whether problems affecting
     humans or those affecting animals and the natural world demand more immediate attention.
     The essay will have a coherent structure.

     The best answers will provide a range of reasons for the arguments made and will support
     them with examples that are pertinent, precise, and varied. Instead of taking an either/or
     stance, these essays may show how the human and natural worlds are inter-related. They will
     be persuasive and well organized.
                                                –5–            M12/2/A2ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


This question invites the candidate to consider the Cultural Option “Social issues”.

7.   A barely satisfactory answer will take a position on the question posed and provide some
     reasons for its argument.

     A better answer will draw on appropriate examples to make an argument about whether or not
     there is a widening gap between the young and old. The essay will have a coherent structure.

     The best answers will use a range of precise and pertinent examples to support
     their arguments, and they will be well organized and persuasive.



These questions invite the candidate to consider a Literary Option.

8.   A barely satisfactory answer will offer a general discussion about the ways in which
     characters try to escape their problems in at least two works studied. It will use at least one
     supporting example from each text.

     A better answer will draw on appropriate examples to offer a reasonable discussion of the
     ways in which characters try to escape their problems in at least two works studied. The
     essay will demonstrate a good understanding of the texts and will have a coherent structure.

     The best answers will use a range of precise and pertinent examples to discuss the ways
     in which characters try to escape their problems and will make comparisons within and
     between works. They will draw on at least two texts, and will be well organized
     and persuasive.


9.   A barely satisfactory answer will offer a general discussion of the relationship between
     children and their parent(s) in at least two works studied. It will use at least one supporting
     example from each work.

     A better answer will draw on appropriate examples to offer a reasonable discussion of the
     relationship between children and their parent(s) in at least two works studied. The essay will
     demonstrate a good understanding of the texts and will have a coherent structure.

     The best answers will use a range of precise and pertinent examples to discuss the relationship
     between children and their parent(s) in at least two works studied. They will go beyond plot
     summary to convincingly address questions of characterization or theme. The essays will
     demonstrate a thorough understanding of the texts cited. They will be well organized
     and persuasive.
                                                –6–           M12/2/A2ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


10.   A barely satisfactory answer will offer a general discussion about the significance of urban
      and/or rural settings in literature in at least two works studied.

      A better answer will draw on appropriate examples to make its argument about the
      significance of urban and/or rural settings in literature in at least two works. The essay will
      include some detailed references to the texts and will demonstrate a good understanding
      of them. It will have a coherent structure.

      The best answers will use a range of pertinent and precise examples to discuss the
      significance of the urban and/or rural settings in two or more works. If the candidate looks at
      both the urban and rural in one text, the relationship between these settings may be discussed.
      Analysis will be thoughtful. The essays will be well organized and persuasive.
