M12/2/A2ENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




     22122015

ENGLISH A2 – STANDARD LEVEL – PAPER 1
ANGLAIS A2 – NIVEAU MOYEN – ÉPREUVE 1
INGLÉS A2 – NIVEL MEDIO – PRUEBA 1

Wednesday 2 May 2012 (morning)
Mercredi 2 mai 2012 (matin)
Miércoles 2 de mayo de 2012 (mañana)

1 hour 30 minutes / 1 heure 30 minutes / 1 hora 30 minutos


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

 Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Section A consists of two passages for comparative commentary.
 Section B consists of two passages for comparative commentary.
 Choose either Section A or Section B. Write one comparative commentary.
 It is not compulsory for you to respond directly to the guiding questions provided. However,
  you may use them if you wish.
 The maximum mark for this examination paper is [30 marks].

INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS

 N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
 La section A comporte deux passages à commenter.
 La section B comporte deux passages à commenter.
 Choisissez soit la section A, soit la section B. Écrivez un commentaire comparatif.
 Vous n’êtes pas obligé(e) de répondre directement aux questions d’orientation fournies.
  Vous pouvez toutefois les utiliser si vous le souhaitez.
 Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est [30 points].

INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS

 No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
 En la Sección A hay dos fragmentos para comentar.
 En la Sección B hay dos fragmentos para comentar.
 Elija la Sección A o la Sección B. Escriba un comentario comparativo.
 No es obligatorio responder directamente a las preguntas de orientación que se incluyen,
  pero puede utilizarlas si lo desea.
 La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [30 puntos].




2212-2015                                                                                   5 pages/páginas
                                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2012
                                                               –2–             M12/2/A2ENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Choose either Section A or Section B.

                                                           SECTION A

Analyse and compare the following two texts.

Discuss the similarities and differences between the texts and their theme(s). Include comments on the
ways the authors use elements such as structure, tone, images and other stylistic devices to communicate
their purposes. It is not compulsory for you to respond directly to the guiding questions provided.
However, you are encouraged to use them as starting points for your comparative commentary.

Text 1

                 I’m not a vengeful man, but I wouldn’t mind running into Dr. Goldfarb in a dark alley some
            evening – preferably with a pair of heavy-duty Vise-Grips1 in my mitt2.

                    Goldfarb was my dentist back when I was a kid. Correction: he was my yanker.
            “Extractionist”3 is the term I believe he used. Dr. Goldfarb did not straighten, brace, bridge, drill
      5     or fill his customers’ teeth, he just pulled them out.

                  It was a dentally backward age to say the least, and I came from a relatively large family
            living on a relatively small weekly paycheque. Hence, there was no mollycoddling4 of cavities.
            “Got a toothache? We know how to deal with that, my lad. Plenty more where that one came from
            (well, a couple of dozen, anyway). Open wide. Hold on. There. Keep that cotton wadding in your
    10      mouth until the bleeding stops. Next.”

                  Dr. Goldfarb had the forearms of a longshoreman5 and the compassion of a Nazi. He instilled
            in me a mortal fear of reclining chairs, white coats and anyone operating metal tools anywhere
            close to my mouth. For a time I couldn’t even bear the thought of my own dinner fork touching
            (what was left of) my teeth.

    15            And for about twenty years, I never arrived for a dental appointment without being dazed
            and confused with painkillers. But I’m okay with dentists now. I go to my appointments
            un-self-medicated and clear of eye. Dentists don’t scare me anymore.

                                                                     Arthur Black, from the autobiographical essay
                                                                                      This Won’t Hurt a Bit (2005)
                                                                                       [Used with the author’s permission].



1
    Vise-Grips: brand of locking pliers
2
    Mitt: slang: hand
3
    Extractionist: person who removes or pulls something out
4
    mollycoddling: pampering, indulging
5
    longshoreman: person who loads and unloads ships’ cargo




2212-2015
                                                      –3–                     M12/2/A2ENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Text 2

                                           SIGNATURE DENTAL

                                  … the gentle art of remarkable smiles …

                  Make time to meet with us to discuss your dental health needs and we’ll give you something
            to smile about. Our aim is to give you confidence that lasts a lifetime.

                  We provide unique and individualized treatment to each and every patient that seeks it,
            communicating our genuine commitment to deliver exceptional, first-class attention with warmth
     5      and sincerity.

            Patients

                  Every patient is treated with the care and respect we would give to our own loved ones.
            We offer ideal care, ensuring we provide ample, appropriate information to empower our patients
            to choose the treatment that is right for them.

            Methodology

                   We ensure that all of our patients’ requirements are taken into consideration when
    10      recommending treatment. We respect their needs and expect the same from them. Where we can
            assist in managing financial, emotional or other constraints, we make every effort to ensure no
            patient will have to compromise their care.

                  We know our patients by name, and welcome them and their families into our care.

            Our Team

                  We have an excellent team who continually strive for the highest. We choose to employ
    15      only the best people for the job. Our staff are committed and caring, and we have a working
            environment that is enjoyable, safe and secure, and encourages ongoing learning for life. We enjoy
            each other’s successes as our own and are always seeking the best ways to achieve excellence.

                  The measure of our success as a business is the radiating* smiles.

                                                       From the website www.signaturedental.com.au (2009)
                                                        [“Kindly supported by Signature Dental www.signaturedental.com.au”]


*0 radiating: glowing


       – How does tone differ in these texts?

       – What is the attitude expressed towards dentistry in these two texts?

       – What is the purpose of each text?


2212-2015                                                       Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                      –4–                  M12/2/A2ENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                                  SECTION B

Analyse and compare the following two texts.

Discuss the similarities and differences between the texts and their theme(s). Include comments on the
ways the authors use elements such as structure, tone, images and other stylistic devices to communicate
their purposes. It is not compulsory for you to respond directly to the guiding questions provided.
However, you are encouraged to use them as starting points for your comparative commentary.

Text 3

                   We’ve all been there.
                   All your life you wonder if you’ll find her. Does she even exist?
                   You see friends in marriages bound by love and others who tied the knot1 under a cloud of
            self-deception, resulting in failed marriages. Meanwhile, everyone with an opinion tells you the
     5      same thing: “Your standards are too high. You spend too much time on your career. You don’t put
            yourself in situations where you can meet someone of quality.”
                   So you do as any single man would – you date. You know the drill2 … You tell yourself she’s
            good for now. You stay together because of convenience, companionship, or because flying solo
            lost its appeal.
    10             So now what? You settle3.
                   Wrong answer. I know from experience that success doesn’t happen by chance, and settling
            is the quickest road to misery, chaos and a divorce attorney on speed dial.
                   I was a top executive recruiter retained by Fortune 500 companies4 to identify and handpick
            the most seasoned and well-suited candidates to join their corporate empires … If the vetting
    15      process5 is so effective and efficient in corporate America, why wouldn’t I apply the same
            methodology to personal lives?
                   My answer: Executive Recruiting meets Personal Matchmaking.
                   Imagine having your own executive recruiter focused solely on your personal life, acting
            as your “personal recruiter,” scouting, screening and weeding out the inappropriate candidates,
    20      interviewing the must-meet individuals in person, and introducing you to your future.
                   You are strategic and savvy6 in everything you do; it’s time to apply the same wisdom to the
            most important search of your life.
                   Selective Search: let us take the labor out of finding love.

                                      From a promotional article for the matchmaking firm Selective Search,
                                                 featured in Continental Airlines in-flight magazine (2007)



1
    tied the knot: slang: got married
2
    drill: routine
3
    settle: give in
4
    Fortune 500 companies: top-earning companies in the United States			
5
    vetting process: process of selecting the best candidate
6
    savvy: shrewd; well-informed




2212-2015
                                                                –5–                       M12/2/A2ENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Text 4

                   Is it better to be alone, or to settle?

                  My advice is this: settle! That’s right. Don’t worry about passion or intense connection.
            Don’t nix1 a guy based on his annoying habit of yelling “Bravo!” in movie theaters.
            Overlook his bad breath or awful sense of aesthetics2. Because if you want to have the framework
      5     in place to have a family, settling is the way to go. Based on my observations, in fact, settling will
            probably make you happier in the long run, since many of those who marry with great expectations
            become more disillusioned with each passing year. (It’s hard to maintain that level of zing
            when the conversation moves into discussions about who’s changing the diapers3 or paying the
            phone bill.)

    10            Our culture tells us to keep our eyes on the prize (while our mothers, who know better, tell
            us not to be so picky), and the theme of holding out for true love (whatever that is – look at the
            divorce rate) runs through our collective imagination.

                   When we’re holding out for deep romantic love, we have the fantasy that this level of
            passionate intensity will make us happier. But marrying Mr. Good Enough might be an equally
    15      attractive option, especially if you’re looking for a stable, reliable life companion.

                  What makes for a good marriage isn’t necessarily what makes for a good romantic relationship.
            Marriage isn’t a passion-fest; it’s more like a partnership formed to run a very small, mundane4,
            and often boring nonprofit business. And I mean this in a good way.

                   All marriages, of course, involve compromise, but where’s the cutoff?

    20            Take the date I went on last night. The guy was substantially older. He had a long history
            of major depression, and mentioned in conversation, “I’m fascinated by comas5,” and “I have
            a strong interest in the criminal mind.” He’d never been married. He was rude to the waiter.
            But he very much wanted a family, and he was successful, handsome, and smart. As I looked at
            him from across the table, I thought, “Yeah, I’ll see him again. Maybe I can settle for that.”

                                                              Lori Gottlieb, adapted from the magazine article
                          Marry Him! The Case for Settling for Mr. Good Enough The Atlantic Monthly (2008)
          [Gottlieb, Lori. “Marry Him!”, The Atlantic, March 2008. http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2008/03/marry-him/6651/]

1
    nix: reject				
2
    aesthetics: that which one finds beautiful
3
    diapers: nappies
4
    mundane: ordinary, common
5
    comas: states of prolonged unconsciousness

       – Comment on the attitudes towards relationships in the two texts.

       – Comment on the use of narrative in these two texts.

       – Compare the effect of point-of-view in each text.



2212-2015
