M12/2/ABENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


                    May / mai / mayo 2012

         ENGLISH / ANGLAIS / INGLÉS B

                       Standard Level
                       Niveau Moyen
                        Nivel Medio

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2




4 pages/páginas
                              –2–         M12/2/ABENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                                 –3–            M12/2/ABENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


These notes are not intended to replace the published criteria but to supplement them in some instances.

These notes are intended to define the top mark of the scale in this examination. The phrase,
“a good answer”, is intended to refer to scripts which are likely to be placed in the 9 to 10 band
of descriptors. Scripts should be marked proportionately lower to the degree to which they fail to
meet these requirements.

In each case, good answers will meet most, though not necessarily all, of the following requirements.


1.    Recently you were unsuccessful at something that was important to you and your parents.
      You want to share what you have learned from this experience with your classmates.
      Write a letter to the editor of your school newspaper explaining why you failed, what you
      learned from the experience and what you plan to do the next time you face a similar situation.

      Written interaction – semi-formal to formal – letter to the editor

      A good answer
      • will clearly describe the failure that the candidate has experienced
      • will address all parts of the task (why the candidate failed, what he/she learned from this
        experience and what he/she plans to do for similar situations in the future). If only two parts
        of the answer are covered, then no more than 6 marks should be awarded in Criterion C; if
        only one part is covered, no more than 4 marks
      • will adopt a semi-formal to formal register
      • will have a format appropriate for a letter to the editor of a school newspaper. This format
        is flexible, however, and is less important than a serious tone and treatment.


2.    You are participating in a school debate on the motion: “Students learn better while listening
      to music or watching TV”. Write the text of your speech, either agreeing or disagreeing with
      this motion.

      Argument – semi-formal to formal – text of a speech

      A good answer
      • will clearly support one side of the argument as to whether distraction helps study or not,
        and may devote some space to the opposing viewpoint for rebuttal purposes. (A possible
        interpretation is to debate which helps students better, music or TV; this should be
        accepted. Another interpretation is that TV and music are learning aids, an example is the
        educational TV programme; this should also be accepted.) Failure to take a clear position
        will result in no more than 6 marks for Criterion C
      • will back up the position taken with reasons and examples
      • will address the audience and keep contact with them throughout the speech; this should
        be rewarded
      • will adopt a semi-formal to formal register which may, however, be enlivened by flashes of
        informality; this should be rewarded.
                                                –4–          M12/2/ABENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   As a member of your school’s Technology Club, you have learned about a new piece of
     technology or software which you think your school needs to buy in order to improve lessons.
     Write an article for the school magazine describing this technology/software and stating how
     it will benefit students.

     Description, factual – semi-formal to formal – article for school magazine

     A good answer
     • will clearly describe how the new technology or software works (a physical description is
       not required)
     • will clearly explain the benefits of this new technology/software for students
     • will deal with both parts of the task (description and benefits). If only one part of the task
       is covered, then no more than 6 marks should be awarded in Criterion C
     • will have a title
     • will adopt a lively style appropriate for a magazine
     • may state specifically how this new technology or software will improve lessons.


4.   Write a diary or blog entry about the person who is your role model in life. It should be clear
     what you admire in this person and how you would like to change yourself to be more like
     this person. Start your entry with the words, “I wish I were more like …”.

     Reflection – informal – diary/blog entry

     A good answer
     • will identify the role model, who may be a real person or a fictional character
     • will address both parts of the task (what characteristics of the role model are admired, and
       what the candidate would like to change about him/herself to be more like the role model).
       If only one part of the answer is covered, then no more than 6 marks should be awarded in
       Criterion C
     • will adopt an informal register and tone
     • should include the words “I wish I were more like…” at the beginning of the script. If
       these words do not appear, 1 mark should be deducted from Criterion C.
