M12/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T




     22122844

ENGLISH AB INITIO – STANDARD LEVEL – PAPER 1
ANGLAIS AB INITIO – NIVEAU Moyen – épreuve 1
INGLÉS AB INITIO – NIVEL MEDIO – PRUEBA 1

Wednesday 9 May 2012 (afternoon)
Mercredi 9 mai 2012 (après-midi)
Miércoles 9 de mayo de 2012 (tarde)

1 h 30 m


TEXT BOOKLET – INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES
• Do not open this booklet until instructed to do so.
• This booklet contains all of the texts required for Paper 1.
• Answer the questions in the Question and Answer Booklet provided.

LIVRET DE TEXTES – INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS
• N’ouvrez pas ce livret avant d’y être autorisé(e).
• Ce livret contient tous les textes nécessaires à l’Épreuve 1.
• Répondez à toutes les questions dans le livret de questions et réponses fourni.

CUADERNO DE TEXTOS – INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS
• No abra este cuaderno hasta que se lo autoricen.
• Este cuaderno contiene todos los textos para la Prueba 1.
• Conteste todas las preguntas en el cuaderno de preguntas y respuestas.




2212-2844                                                                                       6 pages/páginas
                                                                 © International Baccalaureate Organization 2012
                                                –2–                M12/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

TEXT A




   St Fagans:
   National History Museum
   St Fagans is one of Europe’s biggest and            When you visit this museum you can
    most exciting open-air museums. Here                 see how Wales has changed from a
    you find centuries of Welsh tradition in 100         rural to an industrial country.
    acres of beautiful countryside.
                                                           You can watch craftsmen make pots
       There are more than 40 buildings on this            or weave cloth. You can buy Welsh
       site. Welsh craftsmen took them stone               products in the busy store or shop in
       by stone from all over Wales. They have             the wonderful smelling bakery.
       rebuilt them to recreate 500 years of
       history.                                            Take time to explore the gardens: there
                                                           are magnificent terraces and also the
                                                           first organic gardens to feed a growing
    In this museum you can:                                family.
   • walk from a recreated, 2000 year old
       Welsh village to the House for the Future.
       This house is specially built for the 21st       • Open 7 days a week and most public
       century family living in a technological            holidays.
       and environmentally friendly world                • Opening times vary: please ring to
    • visit St Fagans Castle with its magnificent          confirm.
       rose gardens                                      • Free entry for all.
    • visit a 17th century farmhouse painted
       to keep bad spirits away
    • visit the workers’ houses, each one
       decorated from a different period in
       history.




                                                    St Fagans:
                                                    National
                                                    History



                                                        www.museumwales.ac.uk. Used with permission.

2212-2844
                                            –3–              M12/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

TEXT B



                     School gardeners are more successful
                               in the classroom

       Students who work in a school garden eat more fruit and vegetables and
       are healthier and happier.

       Briony Coolledge is a student at a school in Yorkshire, England, where the school
       garden has become part of the academic program. She is enthusiastic about maths
 5     these days. If you ask her about her new-found enthusiasm for this subject, she will
       talk about the fun she had measuring the seed beds in her school garden.

    The school’s head teacher says “When the students started to work outside, we found
    they were much more interested in their subjects. For example, teaching English is
    very important and we have made a lot of use of the garden, especially with creative
 10 writing. The students have indeed improved their writing skills by keeping a diary of
    their activities there.”

    A new study this week supports these opinions. Research shows that school gardens
    help students’ development. Students do better in the classroom. They learn life skills.
    They are healthier and they are happier. The study of 1,300 school teachers and 10
 15 schools shows that students eat a wider variety of vegetables and fruit if they work in
    school gardens.

       The study also said that “Gardening improves students’ confidence.”

    Over the next three years, 4,500 teachers will receive training on how to integrate
    gardening into the school programme. At present, only one in four teachers uses
 20 gardening to teach.




                                               Text: Used with the permission of The Independent.
                                              Image: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Parterre2.jpg




2212-2844                                           Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                              –4–            M12/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

TEXT C




			Cool Kids!
                                                                     Image from: http://commons.wikimedia.org/
                                                                   wiki/File:Africa_land_cover_location_map.jpg



       Meet Eriya, Yves, Roger, Sanyu and Sherrie, the stars of the brilliant new film
       “Africa United”. Our reporter spoke to the teenagers about how they became involved
       in the film, what it was like to make a movie and how they like their new fame!


       Reporter: Tell us about Africa United.

       Yves: Africa United is about a team of children who travel across Africa to try and go
5      to the opening ceremony of the World Cup in South Africa. They are Africa United,
       the team with a dream!

       Reporter: [ – X – ]

       Eriya: My character is Dudu. He loves football, people and the World Cup!

       Yves: I play Foreman George. He is a child soldier and he wants to change and be a
10     good person.

       Roger: Fabrice, my character, is not quite what the Western world would imagine an
       African boy to be. He’s middle class, quite snobby in the beginning but he changes by
       the end of the film, thanks to his friends.

       Sherrie: I play a girl called Celeste. She is 15 and works as a barmaid when you first
15     meet her. She has had quite a hard life, but she meets the rest of the team who help her
       to achieve her dream.

       Sanyu: I play Dudu’s sister Beatrice. She is very humble and she loves her brother
       very much. Her dream is to become a doctor but she does not have enough money to
       go to school.
20




2212-2844
                                                 –5–              M12/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T


       Reporter: [ – 23 – ]

       Roger: The producer saw my face in a magazine and he just rang me up! I was shocked!
       My mum thought that it was a joke!

       Yves: My headmaster chose me. I thought I was in trouble again! He called me to his
25     office and then I had to show him that I could act!

       Reporter: [ – 24 – ]

       Roger: I liked the day we went swimming at the bar where Celeste worked. It was like
       being on holiday for a day!

       Reporter: [ – 25 – ]

30     Sherrie: Yes, definitely. But talking to reporters is fun too! Yesterday we had our
       first experience of being famous. We had a crowd of people following us. People were
       asking for autographs.

       Reporter: [ – 26 – ]

       Sherrie: If you have a dream, you have to try to achieve it. You must never doubt
35     yourself.

       Yves: A team with a dream can achieve anything.


                              Extract: First News, issue 230, 20–28 October 2010. Used with permission.




2212-2844                                                Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                           –6–                    M12/2/ANENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

TEXT D



            Making final preparations before
                      school starts

            Many people are going to be very busy this weekend. One of the things students will do
            this weekend is the final preparation before they go back to school. Some students do not
            look forward to returning to class. Others look forward to meeting old friends and facing
            new challenges.

    5       This weekend is the perfect time to get ready for school
            and sort out all the last minute details. You must get
            ready physically, mentally and emotionally for the
            academic world. To start the school year well, make sure
            that all the things on your “back to school shopping list”
    10      are done.

            No one wants to go back to class in the wrong uniform
            or with shoes that do not fit or, even worse, with the
            wrong books. Here are some things you can do to
            prepare yourself well for the school term.

    15      First, if you have bought new shoes (sports shoes or sandals) you should wear them this
            weekend. Walk around in them and wear them to go to town. Your feet will not hurt when
            you wear them to school. Try to organize your text books so that you only take the books
            you need to school each day. If you do not, your bag will be extremely heavy. Check that
            your bag is big enough and strong enough.

    20      Make sure that you have bought all the equipment you need: exercise books, pens,
            pencils etc. Remember you will need a good calculator. Do you need equipment for
            some specific subjects? For example, if you are taking Technical Drawing you will need a
            mathematical set.

            Take out your uniform this weekend to check if you need to repair it. For example, are there
    25      holes in the pockets? Do not forget to check your sports uniform too!

            Getting ready for secondary school can take time and seems like a lot of work but it is
            worth the effort to start the term well.


                            [Photo from: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Japanese_high_school_classroom.jpg by Aria Belli.
                                                                                     Text used with the permission of the Fiji Sun.]




2212-2844
