N11/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX




     88110084

ENGLISH A1 – STANDARD LEVEL – PAPER 2
ANGLAIS A1 – NIVEAU MOYEN – ÉPREUVE 2
INGLÉS A1 – NIVEL MEDIO – PRUEBA 2

Tuesday 8 November 2011 (afternoon)
Mardi 8 novembre 2011 (après-midi)
Martes 8 de noviembre de 2011 (tarde)

1 hour 30 minutes / 1 heure 30 minutes / 1 hora 30 minutos


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

 Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on at least two of the Part 3 works
  you have studied. You may include in your answer a discussion of a Part 2 work of the same
  genre if relevant. Answers which are not based on a discussion of at least two Part 3 works will
  not score high marks.
 You are not permitted to bring copies of the works you have studied into the examination room.

INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS

 N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
 Traitez un seul sujet de composition. Vous devez baser votre réponse sur au moins deux des
  œuvres de la 3e partie que vous avez étudiées. Le cas échéant, vous pouvez inclure dans votre
  réponse une discussion sur une œuvre du même genre littéraire étudiée dans la 2e partie
  du programme. Les réponses qui ne sont pas basées sur au moins deux des œuvres de
  la 3e partie n’obtiendront pas une note élevée.
 Vous n’êtes pas autorisé(e) à amener des exemplaires des œuvres que vous avez étudiées dans
  la salle d’examen.

INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS

 No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
 Elija un tema de redacción. Su respuesta deberá basarse en al menos dos de las obras
  estudiadas en la Parte 3. Se podrán hacer comentarios sobre una obra de la Parte 2 del
  mismo género, si fuera necesario. Las respuestas que no incluyan una discusión sobre al
  menos dos obras de la Parte 3 no recibirán notas altas.
 No se permite traer a la sala de examen copias de las obras estudiadas.




8811-0084                                                                                   3 pages/páginas
                                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2011
                                                   –2–                 N11/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on at least two of the Part 3 works you
have studied. You may include in your answer a discussion of a Part 2 work of the same genre if relevant.
Answers which are not based on a discussion of at least two Part 3 works will not score high marks.

Drama

1.    How are verbal disputes used by playwrights in at least two plays you have studied and how do
      these disputes influence your response to characters and the unfolding action?


2.    Often what remains in the minds and memories of audiences well after emotional or intellectual
      responses have been forgotten is a single strong image. How has your experience of at least two
      plays you have studied left you with such images and what might they contribute to the emotional or
      intellectual aspects of the plays?



Poetry

3.    Discuss the use of contrast to clarify the poets’ various purposes in at least two works you have
      studied.


4.    Poems are frequently set in physical places which have a significant role to play in the whole effect
      of the poem. In what ways have at least two poets you have studied used place as an important
      element in their poems?



Prose: The Novel and Short Story

5.    How has anxiety featured and how has it been presented in at least two of the works you have
      studied?


6.    Some characters in fiction are somehow familiar and naturally believable; others are unlike anyone
      we have ever encountered. How have at least two writers in your study made exotic or even
      previously unimaginable characters both interesting and credible?




8811-0084
                                                  –3–                  N11/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Prose: Other than the Novel and Short Story

7.    Travel narratives, autobiographies, letters and essays are all likely to include a constant focus on
      the writer, but in fact many other people are likely to be included in these forms. In what ways
      have the writers of at least two works you have studied included such people so that they have a
      strong effect on the readers?


8.    Defining carefully what you mean by “corruption”, discuss how at least two writers you have
      studied have explored its influences and effects.



General Questions on Literature

9.    An intense degree of admiration or disgust for a person, object or situation can produce new angles
      or insight about the subjects of literary works. In works by at least two writers you have studied,
      show how such intensity may have played a role in the writing.


10.   Solidarity with the dispossessed or outcast can often provide writers with material that moves
      or provokes. In what ways have at least two writers you have studied used such situations?


11.   How has failed communication been used as a subject that enriches the works of at least two
      writers you have studied?


12.   Every writer wants in some way to provide an occasional surprise for the reader. How have
      at least two writers in your study provided the “occasional surprise” and what is its effect?




8811-0084
