N14/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN

  November / novembre / noviembre 2014

         ENGLISH / ANGLAIS / INGLÉS B

                        Higher Level
                      Niveau Supérieur
                       Nivel Superior

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2




9 pages/páginas
                              –2–         N14/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.



Ces remarques pour la notation sont confidentielles. Leur usage
est réservé exclusivement aux examinateurs participant à cette
session.

Ces remarques sont la propriété de l’Organisation du
Baccalauréat International. Toute reproduction ou distribution
à de tierces personnes sans l’autorisation préalable du centre de
l’évaluation de l’IB est interdite.



Estas notas para la corrección son confidenciales y para el uso
exclusivo de los examinadores en esta convocatoria de exámenes.

Son propiedad del Bachillerato Internacional y no se pueden
reproducir ni distribuir a ninguna otra persona sin la
autorización previa del centro de evaluación del IB.
                                                –3–           N14/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


These marking notes give additional information for marking paper 2. When marking both
sections, keep in mind that neither subject specific knowledge nor candidates’ personal opinions, as
such, should be assessed, although Criterion B marks may be influenced by how successfully
knowledge or opinions are handled in the message.

These notes are intended to define the top mark of the scale in this examination. The phrase,
“a good answer”, is intended to refer to scripts which are likely to be placed in the 9 to 10 band
(5 for criterion C) of descriptors. Scripts should be marked proportionately lower to the degree to
which they fail to meet these requirements.

In each case, good answers will meet most, though not necessarily all, of the following requirements.

Word count

At HL, students are required to write a minimum of 250 words in Section A and 150 words in
Section B. Failure to write the minimum number of words will result in a [1 mark] penalty under
criterion A. There is no penalty for exceeding 400 words in Section A or 250 words in Section B:
the whole text should be taken into consideration in the award of marks.

Criterion A – Language

A good answer will have very few language gaps, if any, and slips or flaws very rarely affect
meaning.


 Language
 Not all errors have the same importance, and examiners should bear this in mind. Some errors
 affect the communication of meaning significantly, and others do not. Also, some errors indicate a
 fundamental lack of command of the language, while others may simply indicate a moment of
 forgetfulness.
 SLIPS – mistakes at all levels of difficulty, but erratic and occasional – eg the candidate normally
 forms past tenses well, but occasionally forgets “-ed”
 FLAWS – errors occur more regularly, particularly in certain structures – eg past tenses are
 formed correctly quite often, but are not really reliable, and there may be basic confusions
 (eg past simple versus present perfect)
 GAPS – some structures are rarely correct, or simply don’t appear – eg the past tenses are needed,
 but do not appear.
                                              –4–           N14/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                          SECTION A

1.   Cultural diversity

     Your school recently organized a social event where international students cooked and
     presented samples of food from their countries. You found the range of the dishes
     impressive and the information about them interesting. Using both of these aspects,
     write a review of the event to be published in your school magazine.

     A good answer:

     Criterion B – Message
      will describe the social event (eg when and where it took place, interest evoked)
      will cover both aspects: the range of the dishes and the information; if the script fails to
       cover (where “cover” means more than a couple of sentences) one of the requirements,
       it may achieve the 5–6 band if the ideas that are developed are reasonably “coherent”
       with supporting details that are “mostly appropriate”. Accept a range of information
       (eg ingredients, appearance of the dishes, when they are traditionally served, taste)
      will express opinion which covers “impressive” and “interesting”
      will use paragraphing and cohesive devices which structure the development of ideas
       effectively
      may also mention intercultural understanding resulting from the event.

     Criterion C – Format
      will adopt a semi-formal register with occasional informal comments
      will use a lively, direct style aimed to interest readers
      will have a title
      will have an engaging introduction and clear conclusion
      may use other formal features, eg name of author, subheadings.
                                               –5–            N14/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   Customs and traditions

     Visitors to other countries are often advised to find out about the local customs in order
     to fit in well and not to give offence unintentionally. To help foreign students in your
     school to achieve both aims, write a set of guidelines about customs in your country.

     A good answer:

     Criterion B – Message
      will give guidance that is clear and specific; and relevant to a particular country
      will cover both aspects: the fitting in well and the not giving offence; if the script fails to
       cover (where “cover” means more than a couple of sentences) one of the requirements,
       it may achieve the 5–6 band if the ideas that are developed are reasonably “coherent” with
       supporting details that are “mostly appropriate”
      will support the advice with examples
      will have an evident overall structure, with a clear introduction and conclusion.

     Criterion C – Format
      will adopt a semi-formal register possibly with informal touches
      will adopt a supportive tone, relevant to student audience
      will have a title
      will set out the guidelines clearly eg sub-headings, bullet points, numbering etc
      may incorporate flashes of humour
      may set the conventions of guidelines within- e.g. a letter.
                                             –6–           N14/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   Health

     You feel that many students have an unbalanced diet. Write an article to be published
     in your school magazine on how this may affect their performance at school and make
     suggestions for improvements.

     A good answer:

     Criterion B – Message
      will cover both aspects: the performance and the suggestions; if the script fails to cover
       (where “cover” means more than a couple of sentences) one of the requirements, it may
       achieve the 5–6 band if the ideas that are developed are reasonably “coherent” with
       supporting details that are “mostly appropriate”
      will present coherent arguments, linking performance and suggestions; with relevant
       examples (perhaps including personal experience)
      will use paragraphing and cohesive devices which structure the development of ideas
       effectively.

     Criterion C – Format
      will adopt a semi-formal to informal register
      will engage the reader with persuasive tone and direct style
      will have a relevant heading/title
      will have a distinct introduction, development and conclusion
      may use other formal features, eg name of author, subheadings, quotes.
                                               –7–           N14/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   Leisure

     You recently interviewed a disabled athlete who won a medal at an international
     sporting event, and you asked about his/her achievements and opinions on sport for the
     disabled. Write an article based on this interview to be published in the newsletter of
     your local sports club. Do not simply write the exact words (transcript) of the interview.

     A good answer:

     Criterion B – Message
      will give the context of the interview (e.g. setting, background of athlete etc.)
      will cover both aspects: the achievements and the opinions of the athlete; if the script fails
       to cover (where “cover” means more than a couple of sentences) one of the requirements, it
       may achieve the 5–6 band if the ideas that are developed are reasonably “coherent” with
       supporting details that are “mostly appropriate”
      will give examples of achievements
      will indicate an overall message from the interview
      will use paragraphing and cohesive devices which structure the development of ideas
       effectively.

     Criterion C – Format
      will adopt a semi-formal to formal register
      will have a tone and style that engage the reader
      will have a headline/title (and possibly a byline: author’s name, date, etc.)
      will refer to the interview but not be a verbatim transcript. A verbatim transcript would
       result in a maximum [2 marks] for Criterion C
      may use other formal features, eg subheadings
      may incorporate direct quotations.
                                               –8–           N14/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


5.   Science and technology

     In order to use more renewable energy in your country, there is a plan to build a dam to
     provide electricity. However, the resulting lake would cover a village, and all the people
     living there would have to be moved. You decide to give a speech at a public meeting
     called to discuss the project. Write your speech either for or against the plan.

     A good answer:

     Criterion B – Message
      will be either for or against the building of the dam. If the script fails to take a clear
       position, it may achieve the 5-6 band if the ideas that are developed are reasonably
       “coherent” with supporting details that are “mostly appropriate”
      will at least mention both sides of the issue: the advantages of renewable energy and the
       disadvantages of flooding the village
      will present coherent arguments with relevant examples
      will have a clear overall structure, demonstrating a progression of ideas
      will use paragraphing and cohesive devices which structure the development of ideas
       effectively
      may effectively use opposing arguments for rebuttal purposes.

     Criterion C – Format
      will adopt a semi-formal to formal register
      will include speech rhetoric eg rhetorical questions, repetition
      will address the audience and keep contact with them throughout (eg use of “we” and
       “you” etc)
      will set out to catch the audience’s attention at the beginning, and leave a clear impression
       at the end
      may also give an early preview and a final review of the arguments.
                                               –9–           N14/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                          SECTION B

6.   Personal response

     Many people claim that watching television is educational, but others feel it can never be
     more than a way of passing the time.

     A good answer:

     Criterion B – Argument
      will concentrate on the central issue of whether television is educational or not; scripts
       which do not address this issue should be marked down under “relevance”
      will make the candidate’s viewpoint clear: the candidate may write a balanced argument,
       defend one point of view, use an analytic approach etc
      will provide clearly explained and supported reasons for the candidate’s viewpoint/s
      may personalise the issue by providing relevant examples drawn from the candidate’s own
       experience; this should be rewarded if relevance is made clear
      may adopt unexpected or unconventional approaches (eg argument presented within an
       invented or fictional context) provided that there is a link to the key ideas in the stimulus
      may mention other functions of television, (eg entertainment, company for the old),
       provided that the central issue is covered.
