No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de
tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris,
sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de
tutorat ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement
supérieur, des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes
d’études, des gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des
développeurs d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la
procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse suivante :
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios
de apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores
de aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u
ofrezcan recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este
enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia:
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.
English A: language and literature – Higher level – Paper 1
Anglais A : langue et littérature – Niveau supérieur – Épreuve 1
Inglés A: Lengua y Literatura – Nivel Superior – Prueba 1
Monday 9 November 2020 (afternoon)
Lundi 9 novembre 2020 (après-midi)
Lunes 9 de noviembre de 2020 (tarde)

2 hours / 2 heures / 2 horas


Instructions to candidates
y   Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y   Question 1 consists of two texts for comparative analysis.
y   Question 2 consists of two texts for comparative analysis.
y   Choose either question 1 or question 2. Write one comparative textual analysis.
y   The maximum mark for this examination paper is [20 marks].

Instructions destinées aux candidats
y   N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
y   La question 1 comporte deux textes pour l’analyse comparative.
y   La question 2 comporte deux textes pour l’analyse comparative.
y   Choisissez soit la question 1, soit la question 2. Rédigez une analyse comparative de textes.
y   Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est de [20 points].

Instrucciones para los alumnos
y   No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
y   En la pregunta 1 hay dos textos para el análisis comparativo.
y   En la pregunta 2 hay dos textos para el análisis comparativo.
y   Elija la pregunta 1 o la pregunta 2. Escriba un análisis comparativo de los textos.
y   La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [20 puntos].




                                                                                                 8820 – 2013
       9 pages/páginas                                       © International Baccalaureate Organization 2020
     –2–           8820 – 2013




  Blank page
  Page vierge
Página en blanco
                                                   –3–                                          8820 – 2013


Choose either question 1 or question 2.

1.     Analyse, compare and contrast the following two texts. Include comments on the similarities and
       differences between the texts and the significance of context, audience, purpose and formal and
       stylistic features.

Text A




               Bulova Accutron advertisement (1973), originally printed in magazines in the United States.
1
     tuning fork: two-pronged metal device used by musicians to gauge pitch


                                                               Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                    –4–                                             8820 – 2013


Text B

             INDEPENDENT News Voices Sports Culture Indy/Life                 Video Daily Edition




               INDY/LIFE


                THE STRANGE REASON WHY MEN
                ARE WEARING BROKEN WATCHES
         Do you believe style should be prioritised over substance?
          SABRINA BARR
          @fabsab5                                                       473      Like     CLICK TO FOLLOW
                                                                         shares            INDY/LIFE
          Thursday 19 July 2018 15:55

         Wearing a sleek watch isn’t just about donning a fashionable accessory to complete an equally
         chic outfit.

         It’s also about having a practical device close at hand that will help you keep track of the time as
         you go about your day… right?

    5    Well, there’s now a trend among watch collectors to purchase stylish timepieces that don’t
         actually work, making them void of any useful function altogether.

         So, what is the point of wearing a watch that, to put it frankly, is broken?

         According to The Wall Street Journal, it’s all about prioritising style over substance.

         Men’s fashion editor Jacob Gallagher explains that men who follow this trend may have
  10     been inspired by artist Andy Warhol*, who often wore a Cartier Tank watch that didn’t tell the
         correct time.

         “I don’t wear a Tank watch to tell the time,” Warhol stated in 1973. “Actually I never even wind it.
         I wear a Tank because it is the watch to wear!”
                                                    –5–                                              8820 – 2013




        While some may view the practice of wearing an inoperative watch as strange, others would
   15   argue that there is logic in keeping up appearances.

        Stephen Viscusi, author of On the Job: How to Make it in the Real World of Work, is of the
        opinion that wearing a wristwatch could be a make or break decision when applying for a job.

        “My advice to you millennials who use your phones as timepieces is simple: cut it out! Go buy a
        wristwatch!” Viscusi wrote for Huffington Post.

   20   “It may be a gimmick, but believe me, it will separate you from everyone else your own age
        interviewing for the same job.”

        While the notion of wearing a luxurious wristwatch may not be feasible for those unwilling to
        dish out thousands of pounds on a gadget that has no function, others may work around this by
        renting watches for a fraction of the price.

   25   Shlomo Gelernter, a real estate broker from Manhattan, explained to The Independent that he
        wears flashy watches every single day by leasing them temporarily.

        “It’s just like having a nice car, or a nice house. People’s perception of who you are changes
        instantaneously, without even speaking a word to you, when they notice a luxury timepiece on
        your wrist,” he said.

   30   Whether you think wearing a broken watch that looks the part is worth the price or you’re of the
        opinion that it’s completely illogical, one thing’s for certain: it definitely is an expensive pastime.

                                  Adapted from an online article by Sabrina Barr from the“Indy/Life” link of
                                                      The Independent, an online UK newspaper (2018).



* Andy Warhol: American artist who was a leading figure in the “pop art” movement




                                                                  Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                      –6–                                             8820 – 2013


2.        Analyse, compare and contrast the following two texts. Include comments on the similarities and
          differences between the texts and the significance of context, audience, purpose and formal and
          stylistic features.

Text C


               Helen Clark’s Eulogy for Sir Edmund Hillary1
            On 29 May 1953 a young New Zealander stood on top of Mount Everest with his climbing
            companion Tenzing Norgay.

            That young man was Edmund Hillary, soon to be knighted2, and to become the most famous
            New Zealander of our time.

      5     Sir Ed’s achievement on that day cannot be underestimated.

            He went to a height and a place no man had gone before.

            He went there with 1950s, not 21st Century, technology.

            He went there with well-honed climbing skills, developed in New Zealand, Europe, and
            Nepal itself.

     10     But above all, he went there with attitude, with a clear goal, with courage, and with a
            determination to succeed.

            That attitude, Sir Ed’s can-do pragmatism, and his humility as the praise flowed for him over
            the decades, endeared Sir Ed to our nation and made him an inspiration and a role model for
            generations of New Zealanders.

     15     Today we all mourn with Lady Hillary, with Peter and Sarah and all Sir Ed’s extended family,
            knowing that their loss is personal and profound, and valuing their willingness to share this
            farewell with us all.

            We mourn as a nation, because we know we are saying goodbye to a friend.

            Whether we knew Sir Ed personally a lot, a little, or not at all, he was a central part of our New
     20     Zealand family.

            My parents and grandparents’ generation followed Ed’s adventures.

            Those of us who cannot remember the news of that great climb grew up knowing of the man
            and the legend, as today’s children do.

            And how privileged we were to have that living legend with us for 88 years.

     25     Prior to Sir Ed’s conquest of Everest, the mountain had often been described as the Third Pole.
            It had defeated fifteen previous expeditions. Reaching the summit seemed to be beyond mere
            mortals. It was considered one of our world’s last great challenges.

            So when the news broke of the ascent by Ed Hillary, a beekeeper from New Zealand, and
            Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa3 from Nepal, it made headlines around the world. This was one of
     30     the defining moments of the twentieth century, and earned these two brave men their place
            in history.
                                                     –7–                                           8820 – 2013


         There then followed many other achievements of note.

         Earlier this month, the fiftieth anniversary was observed of Sir Ed’s journey to the South Pole
         when he became the first person to make the land crossing since Amundsen and Scott.

    35   In Kiwi4 style, Sir Ed did the crossing on a tractor.

         From the early 1960s, Sir Ed began the work which is his living legacy, founding the Himalayan
         Trust dedicated to the wellbeing of the Sherpa people in the high mountain valleys of Nepal, and
         supporting the education of their children and the development of health services.

         Sir Ed lent his prestige as patron to so many good causes. Schools and other institutions,
    40   organisations and facilities bear his name with great pride.

         And Sir Ed also served our country with distinction as High Commissioner to India, based in
         New Delhi with accreditation to his much-loved Nepal.

         Sir Ed described himself as a person of modest abilities. In reality he was a colossus. He
         was our hero. He brought fame to our country. We admired his achievements and the great
    45   international respect in which he was held.

         But above all, we loved Sir Ed for what he represented: a determination to succeed against
         the odds, humility, an innate sense of fair play, and a tremendous sense of service to the
         community, at home and abroad.

         Sir Edmund Hillary’s extraordinary life has been an inspiration to our small nation and to many
    50   beyond our shores.

         As individuals, we may not be able to match Sir Ed’s abilities or strength, but we can all strive to
         match his humanity and compassion for others.

         His values were strong; they are timeless; and they will endure.

         May Sir Edmund Hillary rest in peace.

                                Adapted from Prime Minister Helen Clark’s tribute to Sir Edmund Hillary at
                                his state funeral. Published in the New Zealand Herald (22 January 2008).



1
    Sir Edmund Hillary: a New Zealand mountaineer, explorer and philanthropist (1919–2008)
2
    knighted: honour bestowed by the monarch of the United Kingdom
3
    Sherpa: local Himalayan guide
4
    Kiwi: colloquial term for a New Zealander




                                                                 Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                        –8–                                8820 – 2013


Text D

 NEW ZEALAND                   The Ballad of Sir Edmund Hillary
                                    Willow Macky 1960

             0:00
                                                         1:42


                                    Ed Hillary kept an apiary
                                    Out Papakura1 way;
                                    He hived his bees
                                    Beneath the trees
                                    And dreamed about the day
                                    When he would climb Mt Everest
                                    And proudly stand upon it:
                                    His neighbours jeered
                                    And said they feared
                                    A bee was in his bonnet2.


         When Hillary was a tiny tot
         He scaled the garden wall;
         And he would dare
         The steepest stair
         As soon as he could crawl;
         At school he climbed the flagpole high
         And hung his cap upon it –
         Not knowing yet
         That he would get
         A halo round his bonnet.

                                          When Hillary grew to man’s estate
                                          He still pursued his dream;
                                          One summer day
                                          He sailed away
                                          With a mountaineering team.
                                          The world has hailed his conquest bold
                                          So I’ll make no comment on it –
                                          Except that he
                                          Got a KCB3
                                          And a feather in his bonnet.
                                               –9–                                         8820 – 2013


           Sir Edmund, he got married and
           Assumed a parent’s role;
           But he could not rest
           So went in quest
           Of adventure to the Pole.
           With death across Antarctic snows
           He ran a race and won it,
           And brought to fame
           New Zealand’s name
           In his fur-lined leather bonnet


                                                      And a posthumous 2008 verse by John Archer:

                                                      Sir Ed so loved the Sherpa folk
                                                      that for twenty years he toiled
                                                      To build them schools
                                                      And hospitals
                                                      On their steep mountain soil.
                                                      In every shrine an image hangs
                                                      With Ed displayed upon it.
                                                      It’s not thought odd
                                                      That he’s a god
                                                      In a flower-draped silken bonnet

Willow Macky

Katherine Faith (Willow) Macky (b. 1921, d. 2006) was one of New Zealand’s leading composers of
folk‑style music and songs about New Zealand’s towns, history and heroes.

                                Folksong written by Willow Macky in 1960 and modified by John Archer
                                          in 2008. Taken from New Zealand Folk-Song website (2018)



1
    Papakura: suburb of Auckland, a city in northern New Zealand
2
    bonnet: headgear, usually a brimless hat of some kind
3
    KCB: Knight Commander of Bath, honour bestowed by the monarch of the United
    Kingdom
Disclaimer:

Texts used in IB language assessments are taken from authentic, third-party sources. The views expressed within
them belong to their individual authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the IB.



References:

A.       Bulova ®. Used with permission.

B.       © Sabrina Barr/The Independent.

         Photo: iStock.com/Pekic.

C.       Clark, H, 2008. Eulogy for Sir Edmund Hillary.

D.       Adapted from John Archer www.folksong.org.nz. The Ballad of Sir Edmund Hillary by Willow Macky.
         By kind permission the Alexander Turnbull Library.

         Photo 1: https://pixabay.com/photos/man-beekeeper-beekeeping-apiarist-3404451/.

         Photo 2: iStock.com/NNehring.

         Photo 3: Jamling Tenzing Norgay, https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/.

         Photo 4: Popperfoto via Getty Images.

         Photo 5: ZUMA/Alamy Stock Photo.
