No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de
tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris,
sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de
tutorat ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement
supérieur, des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes
d’études, des gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des
développeurs d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la
procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse suivante :
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios
de apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores
de aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u
ofrezcan recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este
enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia:
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.
English A: literature – Higher level – Paper 2
Anglais A : littérature – Niveau supérieur – Épreuve 2
Inglés A: Literatura – Nivel Superior – Prueba 2
Tuesday 10 November 2020 (morning)
Mardi 10 novembre 2020 (matin)
Martes 10 de noviembre de 2020 (mañana)

2h


Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on at least two of the part 3 works
  you have studied and compare and contrast these works in response to the question.
  Answers which are not based on a discussion of at least two part 3 works will not score
  high marks.
y You are not permitted to bring copies of the works you have studied into the examination room.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [25 marks].

Instructions destinées aux candidats
y N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
y Traitez un seul sujet de composition. En basant votre réponse sur au moins deux des œuvres
  de la troisième partie que vous avez étudiées, vous devez comparer et opposer ces œuvres
  dans le cadre du sujet. Les réponses qui ne sont pas basées sur au moins deux des œuvres
  de la troisième partie n’obtiendront pas une note élevée.
y Vous n’êtes pas autorisé(e) à apporter des exemplaires des œuvres que vous avez étudiées
  dans la salle d’examen.
y Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est de [25 points].

Instrucciones para los alumnos
y No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
y Conteste una sola pregunta de redacción. Base su respuesta en al menos dos de las obras
  estudiadas de la parte 3, comparándolas y contrastándolas en relación con la pregunta.
  Las respuestas que no se basen en al menos dos obras de la parte 3 no recibirán una
  puntuación alta.
y No está permitido traer copias de las obras estudiadas a la sala de examen.
y La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [25 puntos].




                                                                                             8820 – 0058
     3 pages/páginas                                     © International Baccalaureate Organization 2020
                                                  –2–                                            8820 – 0058


Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on at least two of the part 3 works you
have studied and compare and contrast these works in response to the question. Answers which are
not based on a discussion of at least two part 3 works will not score high marks.

Drama

1.   Explore the techniques used by at least two playwrights you have studied to portray characters
     constrained by social expectations, and the effects created.


2.   In the works of at least two playwrights you have studied, compare the ways in which plot and
     structure are used to engage the audience.


3.   Explore the techniques used to interweave elements of comedy and tragedy in the work of at least
     two playwrights you have studied.



Poetry

4.   In the work of at least two poets you have studied, compare the techniques used to reveal the
     speaker, and the effects achieved.


5.   With reference to the work of at least two poets you have studied, compare in what ways and to
     what effect language has been used to create intense and/or unforgettable moments.


6.   Some poets shine a light on particular issues, while others criticize explicitly. Compare these
     different approaches in the work of at least two poets you have studied.
                                                   –3–                                           8820 – 0058


Prose: novel and short story

7.    Compare the different approaches to narrative that are used to create suspense in the works of at
      least two authors you have studied.


8.    Some works end with a neat resolution; others are less clear cut. With reference to the work of at
      least two authors you have studied, compare the techniques used to create such endings and the
      effects achieved.


9.    With reference to the works of at least two authors you have studied, compare the ways in which
      trapped or confined characters are used to highlight social issues.



Prose other than fiction

10.   How and to what effect are seemingly minor details resulting in major consequences presented in
      the work of at least two authors of prose other than fiction you have studied?


11.   With reference to the works of at least two authors of prose other than fiction you have studied,
      compare the techniques used to portray misunderstanding and its effects.


12.   In the works of at least two authors of prose other than fiction you have studied, discuss the
      creation of setting and its role in providing an emotional landscape for the reader.
