N14/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


  November / novembre / noviembre 2014

         ENGLISH / ANGLAIS / INGLÉS A:
          LITERATURE / LITTÉRATURE /
                 LITERATURA

                       Standard Level
                       Niveau Moyen
                        Nivel Medio

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1



3 pages/páginas
                              –2–         N14/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.



Ces remarques pour la notation sont confidentielles. Leur usage
est réservé exclusivement aux examinateurs participant à cette
session.

Ces remarques sont la propriété de l’Organisation du
Baccalauréat International. Toute reproduction ou distribution
à de tierces personnes sans l’autorisation préalable du centre de
l’évaluation de l’IB est interdite.



Estas notas para la corrección son confidenciales y para el uso
exclusivo de los examinadores en esta convocatoria de
exámenes.

Son propiedad del Bachillerato Internacional y no se pueden
reproducir ni distribuir a ninguna otra persona sin la
autorización previa del centro de evaluación del IB.
                                               –3–            N14/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking and as a supplement to
the published external assessment criteria for written paper 1. They are not offered as an exhaustive
and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must rigidly adhere. Good ideas or
angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate. Similarly, answers
which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here may still be very good answers.

Of course, some of the points listed below will appear in weaker papers, but are unlikely to
be developed.

1.

     An adequate to good guided literary analysis will:

        show some awareness of audience
        explore the presentation of Murad’s self definition
        comment on the diction, such as the use of synonyms and analogies
        show understanding of the argument.

     A very good to excellent guided literary analysis may also:

        note the effect on the passage of an implied sense of an audience
        explore the complexity of the argument and use of counter argument
        discuss the effect of the rhetorical devices
        convey some sense of the difference between the high rhetorical stance and the
         actual subject.


2.

     An adequate to good guided literary analysis will:

      show understanding of the situation described and the father’s motivation for fire watching
      show awareness that the mother and father respond to the fire watching differently
      comment on the effect of the narrative voice.

     A very good to excellent guided literary analysis may also:

      offer some more perceptive comment on the dimension of class implied in the poem
      show a more subtle appreciation of the subtext of the family relationships, eg how details
       of setting and behaviour indicate these
      explore the way the use of contrast helps to develop mood.
