N14/1/AXENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


  November / novembre / noviembre 2014

         ENGLISH / ANGLAIS / INGLÉS A:
          LITERATURE / LITTÉRATURE /
                 LITERATURA

                        Higher Level
                      Niveau Supérieur
                       Nivel Superior

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2



6 pages/páginas
                              –2–         N14/1/AXENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.



Ces remarques pour la notation sont confidentielles. Leur usage
est réservé exclusivement aux examinateurs participant à cette
session.

Ces remarques sont la propriété de l’Organisation du
Baccalauréat International. Toute reproduction ou distribution
à de tierces personnes sans l’autorisation préalable du centre de
l’évaluation de l’IB est interdite.



Estas notas para la corrección son confidenciales y para el uso
exclusivo de los examinadores en esta convocatoria de exámenes.

Son propiedad del Bachillerato Internacional y no se pueden
reproducir ni distribuir a ninguna otra persona sin la
autorización previa del centro de evaluación del IB.
                                              –3–           N14/1/AXENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Examiners: please note that the term “comparison”, both in the descriptors and in the
marking notes, includes the discussion of relevant “contrasts” as well.

The features of the “very good to excellent” answers assume that those for “adequate to good”
are included.

Drama

1.   An adequate to good answer will identify some suitable examples of opposing motivations
     and offer some discussion of how these forces give shape to the works, eg, setting up conflict
     and driving the plot forward. The response will attempt to compare their usage and effects.

     A very good to excellent answer may also discuss in more detail the presentation of
     motivations and their effects on the plays’ structure. The comparison will offer an evaluation
     of the relationship between motivational forces and the direction the plays take.


2.   An adequate to good answer will explore the possible meaning of the prompt and compare the
     ways in which playwrights have either exemplified this view or disputed it, commenting on
     the effects of the approach on the plays as a whole, eg character, plot, structure, theme.

     A very good to excellent answer may, in addition to the above, explore in greater detail the
     ideas suggested by the prompt. The comparison will include evaluation of the impact of this
     notion on the content and form of these works.


3.   An adequate to good answer will select relevant examples of turning points in the plays and
     offer some consideration of unexpected causes and consequences. There will be an attempt to
     offer meaningful comparison of how different playwrights handle this element in the plays.

     A very good to excellent answer may also discuss the presentation of turning points in more
     detail, showing a more subtle understanding of the effects created. The comparison will offer
     an evaluation of the relative effectiveness of these turning points in the plays as a whole.
                                               –4–          N14/1/AXENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Poetry

4.   A good to adequate answer will define “pleasure” in the course of giving an answer and be
     able to identify particular elements of content and form that contribute to the pleasure of the
     reader and appear to show the poet enjoying the challenge of poetic construction.

     A very good to excellent answer may also speak more convincingly of the ways in which
     particular elements of poems provide pleasure and be able to connect the reception and the
     construction of particular poems in an imaginative way. The comparison will include
     evaluation of the ways in which poets have so formed their work as to provide pleasure for the
     ear, the mind or the spirit.

     NB: Realising the relative difficulty of a candidate to comment with any certainty on the
     pleasure experienced by the poet, this element of the prompt should not be given too much
     weight.


5.   An adequate to good answer will first show a grasp of the attitude defined as “elegiac” then
     select and analyse examples of this feeling or convention (longing, loss, remembrance,
     regret). The response will compare the ways in which the elegiac appears in individual
     poems.

     A very good to excellent answer may also explore in greater detail how emotions distinguish
     different stances included under elegiac. The techniques of the poems may be explored in
     greater detail. The comparison will offer some form of evaluation of each poet’s approach to
     this convention.


6.   An adequate to good answer will make a judicious selection of poems and the usage of titles
     (or their absence), going on to show the role of titles in the interpretation of meaning.
     The answer will go beyond merely listing of titles to compare the way poets have employed
     this convention.

     A very good to excellent answer may also show in greater detail how poems interact with and
     develop from their titles. The comparison will provide some evaluative comment about the
     degree of inventiveness and aptness of the titles of individual poems or groups of poems.
                                              –5–          N14/1/AXENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Prose: novel and short story

7.   An adequate to good answer will discuss the ways in which either flashback and/or
     foreshadowing are incorporated by writers into the handling of time in their fictional
     materials, speaking about these in some detail and comparing their usage and effect.
     Some leeway should be given in the interpretation of flashback which could include
     recollection, dreams, reflection.

     A very good to excellent answer may also explore more deeply for what reasons and with
     what effects writers have handled temporal matters in the narratives through the two
     techniques. The comparison will offer some evaluative comment about the degree of
     effectiveness with which these techniques have been included in the narrative.


8.   An adequate to good answer will reveal a sense of this purposeful ambiguity and its impact on
     the works. Additionally the answer will compare examples of its role in the two works.

     A very good to excellent answer may also make finer distinctions about how ambiguity can
     add complexity to narration, and what effects writers are seeking by the use of such an
     approach. The comparison will offer some evaluative comment about the relative impact of
     such strategies.


9.   An adequate to good answer will identify appropriate characters in novels and short stories
     whose violation of social norms plays a role in generating suspense. Additionally the answer
     will compare the roles of such characters in creating tension or suspense.

     A very good to excellent answer may also probe more deeply the relationship between the
     way characters are presented and the creation of suspense in the narration. The comparison
     will offer some evaluation of the effectiveness of the writers’ narrative strategies.
                                                –6–          N14/1/AXENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Prose other than fiction

10.   An adequate to good answer will select some suitable examples of individual portraits and
      explore how they are used to create interest and entertainment. There will be some attempt at
      a meaningful comparison of what such portraiture adds to the works.

      A very good to excellent answer may also discuss the techniques of portraiture in greater
      detail with a more subtle understanding of effects. The comparison will offer some evaluation
      of the relative effectiveness of these portrayals and their importance to the works as a whole.


11.   An adequate to good answer will identify and examine some relevant examples of digressions
      and offer some comparative discussion of how writers employ this technique and to what
      effect.

      A very good to excellent answer may also explore such digressions in greater detail with a
      more subtle understanding of what they add to the works overall. The comparison will offer
      an evaluation of how successfully this device has been used.


12.   An adequate to good answer will offer some relevant examples of personal flaws and failings
      and explore the effects created by these self-revelations. There will be an attempt to offer
      meaningful comparison of how different writers handle such revelations.

      A very good to excellent answer may also show more subtle consideration of style and effect,
      perhaps with conjecture about the possible intentions of the writers. The comparison will
      offer an evaluation of the effectiveness of this stylistic choice.
