N14/1/AXENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




      88140057

ENGLISH A: LITERATURE – HIGHER LEVEL – PAPER 1
ANGLAIS A : LITTÉRATURE – NIVEAU SUPÉRIEUR – ÉPREUVE 1
INGLÉS A: LITERATURA – NIVEL SUPERIOR – PRUEBA 1

Tuesday 4 November 2014 (morning)
Mardi 4 novembre 2014 (matin)
Martes 4 de noviembre de 2014 (mañana)

2 hours / 2 heures / 2 horas


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES
Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
Write a literary commentary on one passage only.
 The maximum mark for this examination paper is [20 marks].

INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS
N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
Rédigez un commentaire littéraire sur un seul des passages.
 Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est [20 points].

INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS
No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
Escriba un comentario literario sobre un solo pasaje.
 La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [20 puntos].




8814-0057                                                                                 5 pages/páginas
                                                           © International Baccalaureate Organization 2014
                                                       –2–                  N14/1/AXENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Write a literary commentary on one of the following:

1.

            Her mother had given her the name Agnes, believing that a good-looking woman was even more
            striking when her name was a homely one. Her mother was named Cyrena and was beautiful to
            match but had always imagined her life would have been more interesting, that she herself would
            have had a more dramatic, arresting effect on the world and not ended up in Cassell, Iowa1, if she
      5     had been named Enid or Hagar or Maude. And so she named her first daughter Agnes, and when
            Agnes turned out not to be attractive at all but puffy and prone to a rash between her eyebrows, her
            hair a flat and bilious2 hue, her mother back-pedaled and named her second daughter Linnea Elise
            (who turned out to be a lovely, sleepy child with excellent bones, a sweet, full mouth and a rubbery
            mole above her lip which later in life could be removed without difficulty, everyone was sure).
     10            Agnes herself had always been a bit at odds with her name. There was a brief period in
            her life, in her mid-twenties, when she had tried to pass it off as French—she had put in the
            accent grave3 and encouraged people to call her “On-yez”. This was when she was living in
            New York City and often getting together with her cousin, a painter who took her to parties in
            TriBeCa4 lofts or at beach houses or at mansions on lakes upstate. She would meet a lot of not
     15     very bright rich people who found the pronunciation of her name intriguing. It was the rest of her
            they were unclear on. “On-yez, where are you from, dear?” asked a black-slacked, frosted-haired
            woman whose skin was papery and melanomic with suntan. “Originally.” She eyed Agnes’s outfit
            as if it might be what in fact it was: a couple of blue things purchased in a department store in
            Cedar Rapids.
     20            “Where am I from?” Agnes said it softly. “Iowa.” She had a tendency not to speak up.
                   “Where?” the woman scowled, bewildered.
                   “Iowa.” Agnes repeated loudly.
                   The woman in black touched Agnes’s wrist and leaned in confidentially. She moved her
            mouth in a concerned and exaggerated way, like an exercise. “No, dear,” she said. “Here we
     25     say 0-hi-o.”
                   That had been in Agnes’s mishmash decade, after college. She had lived improvisationally
            then, getting this job or that, in restaurants or offices, taking a class or two, not thinking too far
            ahead, negotiating the precariousness and subway flus and scrimping for an occasional facial or
            a play. Such a life required much expendable self-esteem. It engaged gross quantities of hope
     30     and despair and set them wildly side by side, like a Third World country of the heart. Her days
            grew messy with contradictions. When she went for walks, for her health, cinders would spot
            her cheeks, and soot would settle in the furled leaf of each ear. Her shoes became unspeakable.
            Her blouses darkened in a breeze, and a blast of bus exhaust might linger in her hair for hours.
            Finally her old asthma returned and, with a hacking, incessant cough, she gave up. “I feel like I’ve
     35     got five years to live,” she told people, “so I’m moving back to Iowa so that it’ll feel like fifty.”
                   When she packed up to leave she knew she was saying goodbye to something important,
            which was not that bad in a way because it meant that at least you had said hello to it to begin with,
            which most people in Cassell, Iowa could not claim to have done.




8814-0057
                                                                        –3–                N14/1/AXENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

            A year later she married a boyish man twelve years her senior, a Cassell realtor5 named Joe, and
    40      together they bought a house on a little street called Birch Court. She taught a night class at the
            Arts Hall and did volunteer work on the Transportation Commission in town. It was life like a
            glass of water: half-full, half-empty, half-full; oops, half-empty. Over the next six years she and
            Joe tried to have a baby, but one night at dinner, looking at each other in a lonely way over the
            meat loaf, they realized with a shock that they probably never would. Nonetheless they still tried,
    45      vandalizing what romance was left in their marriage.


                                                                                       Lorrie Moore, Birds of America (1998)



1
    Cassell, Iowa: Fictional small town in midwestern USA
2
    bilious: pale and sickly
3
    accent grave: French punctuation mark above the letter “e”, for example, Agnès, changing the pronunciation
4
    TriBeCa: fashionable New York City neighbourhood
5
    realtor: an agent for the purchase and sale of land and buildings




8814-0057                                                                     Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                          –4–                 N14/1/AXENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

2.

                                       The Hug

                 A woman is reading a poem on the street
                 and another woman stops to listen. We stop too,
                 with our arms around each other. The poem
                 is being read and listened to out here
             5   in the open. Behind us
                 no one is entering or leaving the houses.

                 Suddenly a hug comes over me and I’m
                 giving it to you, like a variable star shooting light
                 off to make itself comfortable, then
            10   subsiding. I finish but keep on holding
                 you. A man walks up to us and we know he hasn’t
                 come out of nowhere, but if he could, he
                 would have. He looks homeless because of how
                 he needs. “Can I have one of those?” he asks you,
            15   and I feel you nod. I’m surprised,
                 surprised you don’t tell him how
                 it is – that I’m yours, only
                 yours, etc., exclusive as a nose to
                 its face. Love – that’s what we’re talking about, love
            20   that nabs you with “for me
                 only” and holds on.

                 So I walk over to him and put my
                 arms around him and try to
                 hug him like I mean it. He’s got an overcoat on
            25   so thick I can’t feel
                 him past it. I’m starting the hug
                 and thinking, “How big a hug is this supposed to be?
                 How long shall I hold this hug?” Already
                 we could be eternal, his arms falling over my
            30   shoulders, my hands not
                 meeting behind his back, he is so big!

                 I put my head into his chest and snuggle
                 in. I lean into him. I lean my blood and my wishes
                 into him. He stands for it. This is his
            35   and he’s starting to give it back so well I know he’s
                 getting it. This hug. So truly, so tenderly
                 we stop having arms and I don’t know if
                 my lover has walked away or what, or
                 if the woman is still reading the poem, or the houses –
            40   what about them? – the houses.



8814-0057
                                         –5–                 N14/1/AXENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                 Clearly, a little permission is a dangerous thing.
                 But when you hug someone you want it
                 to be a masterpiece of connection, the way the button
                 on his coat will leave the imprint of
            45   a planet in my cheek
                 when I walk away. When I try to find some place
                 to go back to.

                               Tess Gallagher, My Black Horse: New and Selected Poems (1995)




8814-0057
