N14/1/TEXTP/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX




      88140302

LITERATURE AND PERFORMANCE
STANDARD LEVEL
PAPER 2 – POETRY

Tuesday 4 November 2014 (morning)

1 hour 30 minutes


Instructions to candidates

 Do not turn over this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Answer one question.
 The maximum mark for this paper is [25 marks].




8814-0302                                                                                           2 pages
                                                            © International Baccalaureate Organization 2014
                                                    –2–                   N14/1/TEXTP/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Answer one question. Refer closely to the works of at least two poets you have studied.

1.    “Carpe diem” or “seize the day” is a theme that runs through much poetry. Show how the idea of
      living fully in the moment has been represented by at least two poets you have studied through the
      content and form of their poems.


2.    The human body, its processes and its parts, often appear in poetry. It can also be treated with various
      attitudes. How have at least two poets you have studied included and presented the physical side of
      human beings in their poems?


3.    Conflicts of various kinds, both external and internal, can be found to form the interest of many
      poems. Referring to at least two poets you have studied, discuss their handling of conflict in poems,
      including the particular stylistic choices they have made.


4.    Poetry, whether rooted in the city or the countryside, may include similar stylistic features even
      though differing in content. Considering at least two poets you have studied, explore their attention
      to either one or both of these settings, showing the ways in which the poets have conveyed a sense of
      a particular environment.


5.    Memory is always a fruitful subject for poets. In the work of at least two poets you have studied,
      examine how memory itself or specific memories have been presented.


6.    Detailed description is a method that, when well handled, can produce both interest and pleasure for
      the reader. In the work of at least two poets you have studied, discuss instances in their poems where
      detailed description of such elements as places, people or things has played an important role in your
      response to the poems.




8814-0302
