Global politics guide
First assessment 2017

Global politics guide
First assessment 2017

Diploma Programme
Global politics guide

Published February 2015
Updated November 2015
Updated November 2016
Published by
International Baccalaureate Organization
15 Route des Morillons
1218 Le Grand-Saconnex
Geneva, Switzerland
Represented by
IB Publishing Ltd, Churchillplein 6, The Hague, 2517JW The Netherlands
© International Baccalaureate Organization 2015
The International Baccalaureate Organization (known as the IB) offers four high-quality
and challenging educational programmes for a worldwide community of schools, aiming
to create a better, more peaceful world. This publication is one of a range of materials
produced to support these programmes.
The IB may use a variety of sources in its work and checks information to verify accuracy
and authenticity, particularly when using community-based knowledge sources such as
Wikipedia. The IB respects the principles of intellectual property and makes strenuous
efforts to identify and obtain permission before publication from rights holders of all
copyright material used. The IB is grateful for permissions received for material used
in this publication and will be pleased to correct any errors or omissions at the earliest
opportunity.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior written permission
of the IB, or as expressly permitted by law or by the IB’s own rules and policy. See
www.ibo.org/copyright.
IB merchandise and publications can be purchased through the IB store at
store.ibo.org.
Email: sales@ibo.org

International Baccalaureate, Baccalauréat International and Bachillerato Internacional
are registered trademarks of the International Baccalaureate Organization.
DP0016

IB mission statement
The International Baccalaureate aims to develop inquiring, knowledgeable and caring young people who
help to create a better and more peaceful world through intercultural understanding and respect.
To this end the organization works with schools, governments and international organizations to develop
challenging programmes of international education and rigorous assessment.
These programmes encourage students across the world to become active, compassionate and lifelong
learners who understand that other people, with their differences, can also be right.

Contents

Introduction

1

Purpose of this document

1

The Diploma Programme

2

Nature of the subject

6

Aims

11

Assessment objectives

12

Assessment objectives in practice

13

Syllabus

14

Syllabus outline

14

Syllabus content

15

Assessment

47

Assessment in the Diploma Programme

47

Assessment outline—SL

50

Assessment outline—HL

51

External assessment

52

Internal assessment

57

Approaches to teaching and learning

65

Approaches to teaching and learning in the Diploma Programme global politics course

65

Appendices			

73

Glossary of command terms

73

Introductio
n

Global politics guide

Purpose of this document

This publication is intended to guide the planning, teaching and assessment of global politics in schools.
Global politics teachers are the primary audience, although it is expected that teachers will use the guide to
inform students and parents about the course.
This guide can be found on the global politics page of the online curriculum centre (OCC) at occ.ibo.org, a
password-protected IB website designed to support IB teachers. It can also be purchased from the IB store
at store.ibo.org.

Additional resources
Additional publications such as specimen papers and markschemes, teacher support materials, subject
reports and grade descriptors can also be found on the OCC. Past examination papers as well as
markschemes can be purchased from the IB store.
Teachers are encouraged to check the OCC for additional resources created or used by other teachers.
Teachers can provide details of useful resources, for example: websites, books, videos, journals or
teaching ideas.

Acknowledgment
The IB wishes to thank the educators and associated schools for generously contributing time and resources
to the production of this guide.

First assessment 2017

Global politics guide

1

Introduction

The Diploma Programme

The Diploma Programme is a rigorous pre-university course of study designed for students in the 16 to 19
age range. It is a broad-based two-year course that aims to encourage students to be knowledgeable and
inquiring, but also caring and compassionate. There is a strong emphasis on encouraging students to
develop intercultural understanding, open-mindedness, and the attitudes necessary for them to respect
and evaluate a range of points of view.

The Diploma Programme model
The course is presented as six academic areas enclosing a central core (see figure 1). It encourages the
concurrent study of a broad range of academic areas. Students study: two modern languages (or a modern
language and a classical language); a humanities or social science subject; an experimental science;
mathematics; one of the creative arts. It is this comprehensive range of subjects that makes the Diploma
Programme a demanding course of study designed to prepare students effectively for university entrance.
In each of the academic areas students have flexibility in making their choices, which means they can
choose subjects that particularly interest them and that they may wish to study further at university.

Figure 1
Diploma Programme model

2

Global politics guide

The Diploma Programme

Choosing the right combination
Students are required to choose one subject from each of the six academic areas, although they can,
instead of an arts subject, choose two subjects from another area. Normally, three subjects (and not more
than four) are taken at higher level (HL), and the others are taken at standard level (SL). The IB recommends
240 teaching hours for HL subjects and 150 hours for SL. Subjects at HL are studied in greater depth and
breadth than at SL.
At both levels, many skills are developed, especially those of critical thinking and analysis. At the end of
the course, students’ abilities are measured by means of external assessment. Many subjects contain some
element of coursework assessed by teachers.

The core of the Diploma Programme model
All Diploma Programme students participate in the three elements that make up the core of the model.
Theory of knowledge (TOK) is a course that is fundamentally about critical thinking and inquiry into the
process of knowing rather than about learning a specific body of knowledge. The TOK course examines
the nature of knowledge and how we know what we claim to know. It does this by encouraging students
to analyse knowledge claims and explore questions about the construction of knowledge. The task of TOK
is to emphasize connections between areas of shared knowledge and link them to personal knowledge
in such a way that an individual becomes more aware of his or her own perspectives and how they might
differ from others.
Creativity, activity, service (CAS) is at the heart of the Diploma Programme. CAS enables students to live
out the IB learner profile in real and practical ways, to grow as unique individuals and to recognize their
role in relation to others. Students develop skills, attitudes and dispositions through a variety of individual
and group experiences that provides students with opportunities to explore their interests and express
their passions, personalities and perspectives. CAS complements a challenging academic programme in a
holistic way, providing opportunities for self-determination, collaboration, accomplishment and enjoyment.
The three strands of CAS are as follows.
•

Creativity—exploring and extending ideas leading to an original or interpretive product or
performance

•

Activity—physical exertion contributing to a healthy lifestyle

•

Service—collaborative and reciprocal engagement with the community in response to an
authentic need

The extended essay, including the world studies extended essay, offers the opportunity for IB students to
investigate a topic of special interest, in the form of a 4,000-word piece of independent research. The area of
research undertaken is chosen from one of the students’ six Diploma Programme subjects, or in the case of
the interdisciplinary world studies essay, two subjects, and acquaints them with the independent research
and writing skills expected at university. This leads to a major piece of formally presented, structured
writing, in which ideas and findings are communicated in a reasoned and coherent manner, appropriate to
the subject or subjects chosen. It is intended to promote high-level research and writing skills, intellectual
discovery and creativity. An authentic learning experience, it provides students with an opportunity to
engage in personal research on a topic of choice, under the guidance of a supervisor.

Global politics guide

3

The Diploma Programme

Approaches to teaching and approaches to learning
Approaches to teaching and learning across the Diploma Programme refers to deliberate strategies, skills and
attitudes that permeate the teaching and learning environment. These approaches and tools, intrinsically
linked with the learner profile attributes, enhance student learning and assist student preparation for the
Diploma Programme assessment and beyond. The aims of approaches to teaching and learning in the
Diploma Programme are to:
•

empower teachers as teachers of learners as well as teachers of content

•

empower teachers to create clearer strategies for facilitating learning experiences in which students
are more meaningfully engaged in structured inquiry, and greater critical and creative thinking

•

promote both the aims of individual subjects (making them more than course aspirations) and linking
previously isolated knowledge (concurrency of learning)

•

encourage students to develop an explicit variety of skills that will equip them to continue to be
actively engaged in learning after they leave school, and to help them not only obtain university
admission through better grades but also prepare for success during tertiary education and beyond

•

enhance further the coherence and relevance of the students’ Diploma Programme experience

•

allow schools to identify the distinctive nature of an IB Diploma Programme education, with its blend
of idealism and practicality.

The five approaches to learning (developing thinking skills, social skills, communication skills, selfmanagement skills and research skills) along with the six approaches to teaching (teaching that is inquirybased, conceptually focused, contextualized, collaborative, differentiated and informed by assessment)
encompass the key values and principles that underpin the IB pedagogy.
For further guidance on approaches to teaching and approaches to learning in global politics please see
Guide>Approaches to teaching and learning of this guide.

Academic honesty
Academic honesty in the Diploma Programme is a set of values and behaviours informed by the attributes
of the learner profile. In teaching, learning and assessment, academic honesty serves to promote personal
integrity, engender respect for the integrity of others and their work, and ensure that all students have an
equal opportunity to demonstrate the knowledge and skills they acquire during their studies.
All coursework—including work submitted for assessment—is to be authentic, based on the student’s
individual and original ideas with the ideas and work of others fully acknowledged. Assessment tasks that
require teachers to provide guidance to students or that require students to work collaboratively must be
completed in full compliance with the detailed guidelines provided by the IB for the relevant subjects.
For further information on academic honesty in the IB and the Diploma Programme, please consult the
IB publications Academic honesty, The Diploma Programme: From principles into practice and General
regulations: Diploma Programme. Specific information regarding academic honesty as it pertains to external
and internal assessment components of global politics can be found in this guide.

4

Global politics guide

The Diploma Programme

Learning diversity and learning support
requirements
Schools must ensure that equal access arrangements and reasonable adjustments are provided to
candidates with learning support requirements that are in line with the IB documents Candidates with
assessment access requirements and Learning diversity within the International Baccalaureate programmes:
Special educational needs within the International Baccalaureate programmes.

Global politics guide

5

Introduction

Nature of the subject

Global politics
The 21st century is characterized by rapid change and increasing interconnectedness, impacting
individuals and societies in unprecedented ways and creating complex global political challenges. Global
politics is an exciting, dynamic subject that draws on a variety of disciplines in the social sciences and
humanities, reflecting the complex nature of many contemporary political issues. The study of global
politics enables students to critically engage with different and new perspectives and approaches to
politics in order to comprehend the challenges of the changing world and become aware of their role in it
as active global citizens.
The Diploma Programme global politics course explores fundamental political concepts such as power,
equality, sustainability and peace in a range of contexts. It allows students to develop an understanding
of the local, national, international and global dimensions of political activity and processes, as well as to
explore political issues affecting their own lives. The course helps students to understand abstract political
concepts by grounding them in real-world examples and case studies. It also invites comparison between
such examples and case studies to ensure a wider and transnational perspective.
The core units of the course together make up a central unifying theme of “people, power and politics”.
The emphasis on “people” reflects the fact that the course explores politics not only at a state level but also
explores the function and impact of non-state actors, communities, groups and individuals. The concept
of “power” is also emphasized as being particularly crucial to understanding the dynamics, tensions and
outcomes of global politics. Throughout the course, issues such as conflict, migration or climate change are
explored through an explicitly political lens: “politics” provide a uniquely rich context in which to explore
the relationship between people and power.

Distinction between SL and HL
Students of global politics at SL and HL are presented with a syllabus that has a common core. This common
core consists of four compulsory units under the central unifying theme of “people, power and politics”. All
SL and HL students are also required to undertake an engagement activity. In addition, HL students are also
required, through a case studies approach, to explore two HL extension topics (global political challenges).
In summary:
•

SL and HL students study the four core units and undertake an engagement activity

•

through a case studies approach, HL students also examine and evaluate two global political
challenges, which by their nature are complex, contestable and interlinked; this provides further
depth at HL.

Global politics and the core
As with all Diploma Programme courses, global politics should both support and be supported by the three
elements of the Diploma Programme core.

6

Global politics guide

Nature of the subject

Global politics and theory of knowledge
As with other areas of knowledge, there are a variety of ways of gaining knowledge in the social sciences.
For example, experimentation and observation, inductive and deductive reasoning, data and evidence
collection, and discussion can all be used to help to understand and explain patterns of human behaviour.
Students in individuals and societies subjects are required to evaluate the resulting knowledge claims by
exploring questions about their validity, reliability, credibility and certainty, as well as individual and cultural
perspectives on them. Having followed a course of study in an individuals and societies subject, students
should be able to reflect critically on the various ways of knowing and on the methods used in the social
sciences, and in so doing become inquiring, knowledgeable and caring young people, as set forth in the
IB learner profile.
The study of global politics makes use of the social scientific methods of gaining knowledge described
above. Political issues emerge and unfold in a variety of ways and contexts and tend to concern matters
about which people may care deeply. Consequently, a critical study of such issues requires students to
examine and reason about the observable, but also to investigate what lies behind political deliberations
and decisions. What are the motivations of the various actors? On which assumptions do these actors base
their beliefs, policies and behaviours? How do the power dynamics of a situation influence motivations,
assumptions and outcomes?
Diverse ways of knowing come into play when actors in global politics take positions and aim to affect
change: solid reasoning and skillful use of language matter, of course, but many messages are sent and
received through non-verbal communication, and emotions are heavily involved in political debates.
Studying political issues in this analytical, in-depth and engaged way, students also come to consider the role,
nature and origin of their own political beliefs and positions, and of knowledge claims about politics in their
own cultures, in the cultures of others and around the world. This way, students are encouraged to become
more aware of themselves as thinkers, to appreciate the complexity of knowledge in the human sphere, and
to recognize the need to act responsibly in an increasingly interconnected but unpredictable world.
Examples of questions related to theory of knowledge that global politics students might consider include
the following.
•

How does knowledge in the social sciences differ from knowledge in other areas?

•

How does knowledge in global politics differ from knowledge in some other social science
disciplines, such as history, economics and geography?

•

How do the often deeply held nature of political beliefs and biases affect the acquisition of
knowledge in global politics?

•

How is political science distinct from the practice of politics?

•

What are the benefits and difficulties of examining political issues against the backdrop of a certain
theoretical foundation or ideology?

•

Why might the value of case studies as a method of acquiring knowledge be considered
questionable?

•

Can we have political beliefs or knowledge that are independent of our cultures?

•

Why do some individuals believe that they know what is right for others?

•

How do we decide between the opinions of experts when they disagree? Who are the experts in
global politics?

•

What is the role of communication and media in shaping people’s perception of issues in global
politics?

•

Is it ever justifiable to act without having good grounds or evidence for doing so?

Global politics guide

7

Nature of the subject

Global politics and creativity, activity, service
An important characteristic of the global politics course is that students examine the complex political
issues of our time in a contextual way. Due to the interconnectedness of the 21st-century world, many global
challenges manifest themselves in students’ local or otherwise significant communities as powerfully as at
national and international levels. The ethos of the CAS programme is to engage students in experiential
learning in a similarly contextual way.
CAS and global politics can complement each other in a number of ways. Learning about significant local
and global issues in the global politics course may give students new ideas for CAS experiences and/or
CAS projects. As a result of the knowledge and understanding students develop about an issue and its
potential solutions in the global politics course, they might be able to investigate, plan, act, reflect on, and
demonstrate CAS experiences in a richer way. Similarly, CAS experiences can ignite students’ passion for
addressing a particular issue in global politics. Students may decide to examine the political dimension of
an issue and its potential solutions in their global politics class, or build an engagement activity on it, or
utilize it as a case study in their HL extension work. This cross-pollination of ideas between CAS and global
politics may improve students’ grasp of an issue and its political dimensions and may also stimulate further
CAS experiences.
While CAS activities can both be informed by academic subjects and inspire further learning in them, they
must be distinct from activities undertaken in the global politics course as part of Diploma Programme
assessment requirements. This is particularly important with respect to the potential overlap between
CAS experiences and the engagement activity undertaken for global politics. Where an activity is
very large and multifaceted it may be that there is one element that could constitute an appropriate
engagement activity for global politics, and other elements that could be appropriate as an activity for
CAS. However the same elements may not be counted for both global politics and CAS. For example, a
student participating in a Model United Nations (MUN) simulation could nominate one particular element,
such as researching various political debating techniques, as his or her global politics engagement, and
nominate other elements of the MUN participation, such as leading his or her school delegation, for CAS.
Similarly, a student involved in a youth initiative in the local community could count examining the role of
the community council in such initiatives and canvassing the council’s support for this particular project as
his or her global politics engagement, while documenting the participation in actual activities with youth
could count for CAS.

Global politics and the extended essay
An extended essay in global politics provides students with an opportunity to undertake an in-depth
analysis of a significant, contemporary global political issue. Students should choose a topic that will allow
them to demonstrate their knowledge, research skills and critical-thinking skills leading to a substantial
essay that utilizes relevant key concepts, theoretical foundations and approaches of global politics. The
outcome of the research should be a coherent and structured essay that effectively answers a specific
research question.
Given the complexity of contemporary political issues, extended essays in global politics are likely to draw
on the knowledge and methodologies of a range of social science subjects. Students must use relevant
secondary sources to substantiate their arguments and may supplement this with appropriate primary
sources. Various approaches to the research are possible (such as case studies, comparative studies, analyses
of discourse), with relevant techniques chosen for gathering and interpreting evidence (such as interviews,
literature or media reviews, quantitative data analysis).
As in their engagement activity and HL extension work, students examine political issues in their extended
essays. While this examination is primarily based on experiential learning in the engagement activity and
culminates in an oral analysis in the HL extension, the extended essay in global politics is a formal research
essay. For example, students interested in a more theoretical approach to political issues will find the
extended essay an excellent opportunity to examine the key concepts of global politics in a way that is

8

Global politics guide

Nature of the subject

more anchored in academic debates. Students with an interest in how quantitative data is used to underpin
decision-making or shape perceptions in global politics can undertake comprehensive data analysis for
their extended essay. The engagement activity and the HL extension can give students ideas and inspiration
for their extended essays. However, students may not examine the same political issue for their extended
essay as they have done for another assessment component.

Please note that provision for an extended essay in global politics will become available when
the new Extended essay guide is published in September 2016 (for first assessment in May 2018).
Until then, students interested in undertaking an extended essay in one of the areas of the global
politics course, such as on issues around human rights or peace and conflict, are advised to look at
the current three politics subjects available in the Extended essay guide (human rights, peace and
conflict studies, and politics) to see where their topic may best be placed. They must write their essay
according to these specifications.

Global politics and international-mindedness
Developing students’ awareness of multiple partial perspectives and approaches—including their own—is
at the heart of the global politics course. The course encourages dialogue, discussion and debate. Nurturing
students’ capacity to listen to themselves and to others in order to understand divergent opinions
is important not only for interpreting competing and contestable claims, but also for appreciating that
political beliefs and positions are contextual and deeply held by individuals. By engaging in respectful and
attentive dialogue, discussion and debate, it is hoped that students would progress towards forming their
own, well-informed provisional viewpoints. They would be better equipped to understand the hurdles of,
and opportunities for, political progress in the real world, to build relationships with others and to resolve
conflicts they may encounter in a peaceful way.
The global politics course aims to develop international-mindedness in students through an examination
of fundamental political concepts and debates that have global significance. The course considers and
encourages contemporary examples and case studies at a variety of levels, from local to global, while
facilitating comparison between the levels. Throughout the course, teachers have the opportunity to
choose relevant examples and case studies to ensure that the course appropriately meets their students’
needs and interests, regardless of their location or cultural context.
The course also enables students to reach an awareness and appreciation of both their own civic
responsibility at a local level and their shared responsibility as citizens of an increasingly interconnected
world. The inclusion of an engagement activity in the course reflects the importance given to not only
appreciating and understanding the complex issues facing the world today, but also to engaging with them
in an active and personal way.

Engaging with sensitive topics
Studying global politics allows the opportunity for students to engage with exciting, stimulating and
personally relevant topics and issues. However, it should be noted that often such topics and issues can
also be sensitive and personally or culturally challenging. Teachers should be aware of this and provide
guidance to students on how to approach and engage with such topics in a responsible manner, providing
due cognizance to questions and issues of identity. Teachers should also read carefully the ethical guidelines
for the engagement activity provided under Guide > Syllabus > Syllabus content >Engagement activity in
this subject guide.
Global politics guide

9

Nature of the subject

Prior learning
The global politics course requires no specific prior learning. No particular background in terms of specific
subjects studied for national or international qualifications is expected or required. The skills needed for the
global politics course are developed within the context of the course itself.

Links to the Middle Years Programme
The IB Middle Years Programme (MYP) individuals and societies subject group involves inquiry into historical,
contemporary, geographical, political, social, economic, religious, technological and cultural contexts
that influence and impact on people and communities’ lives and environments. The MYP individuals and
societies subject group therefore provides a very useful foundation for students who go on to study the
Diploma Programme global politics course.
Key concepts encountered in MYP social sciences and humanities, such as time, place and change are
also encountered within the global politics course, but treated in more advanced ways as described in
this subject guide. Thus, studying global politics naturally extends the skills developed in MYP individuals
and societies subjects. Equally, students’ organization, collaboration, research and presentation strategies
that began in MYP humanities and social sciences will become more sophisticated while undertaking the
Diploma Programme global politics course.

Links to the IB Career-related Programme
In the IB Career-related Programme (CP), students study at least two Diploma Programme subjects, a
core consisting of four components and a career-related study. The subject of global politics can assist
CP students planning careers in, for example, the hospitality industry, the technology industry, or
international business. Global politics helps students to understand the underlying mechanisms of the 21st
century world and to engage with current affairs. Students explore different political, social and economic
structures and practices leading to a greater understanding of the world around them. Global politics
encourages the development of strong communication skills, critical thinking, and ethical approaches that
will assist students in the global workplace.

10

Global politics guide

Introduction

Aims

Individuals and societies aims
The aims of all subjects in the individuals and societies subject group are to:
1.

encourage the systematic and critical study of: human experience and behaviour; physical, economic
and social environments; and the history and development of social and cultural institutions

2.

develop in the student the capacity to identify, to analyse critically and to evaluate theories, concepts
and arguments about the nature and activities of the individual and society

3.

enable the student to collect, describe and analyse data used in studies of society, to test hypotheses,
and to interpret complex data and source material

4.

promote the appreciation of the way in which learning is relevant both to the culture in which the
student lives, and the culture of other societies

5.

develop an awareness in the student that human attitudes and beliefs are widely diverse and that the
study of society requires an appreciation of such diversity

6.

enable the student to recognize that the content and methodologies of the individuals and societies
subjects are contestable and that their study requires the toleration of uncertainty.

Global politics aims
The aims of the global politics course at SL and HL are to enable students to:
1.

understand key political concepts and contemporary political issues in a range of contexts

2.

develop an understanding of the local, national, international and global dimensions of political
activity

3.

understand, appreciate and critically engage with a variety of perspectives and approaches in global
politics

4.

appreciate the complex and interconnected nature of many political issues, and develop the capacity
to interpret competing and contestable claims regarding those issues.

Global politics guide

11

Introduction

Assessment objectives

Assessment objective 1: Knowledge and understanding
•

Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of key political concepts and contemporary issues in
global politics

•

Demonstrate understanding of relevant source material

•

Demonstrate understanding of a political issue in a particular experiential situation (engagement
activity)

•

At HL only, demonstrate in-depth knowledge and understanding of political issues in two detailed
case studies

Assessment objective 2: Application and analysis
•

Apply knowledge of key political concepts to analyse contemporary political issues in a variety of
contexts

•

Identify and analyse relevant material and supporting examples

•

Use political concepts and examples to formulate, present and sustain an argument

•

Apply knowledge of global politics to inform and analyse experiential learning about a political issue
(engagement activity)

•

At HL only, apply knowledge of global politics to analyse political issues in two case studies

Assessment objective 3: Synthesis and evaluation
•

Compare, contrast, synthesize and evaluate evidence from sources and background knowledge

•

Compare, contrast, synthesize and evaluate a variety of perspectives and approaches to global
politics, and evaluate political beliefs, biases and prejudices, and their origin

•

Synthesize and evaluate results of experiential learning and more theoretical perspectives on a
political issue (engagement activity)

•

At HL only, demonstrate synthesis and evaluation of different approaches to and interpretations of
political issues in two case studies

Assessment objective 4: Use and application of appropriate skills
•

Produce well-structured written material that uses appropriate terminology

•

Organize material into a clear, logical, coherent and relevant response

•

Demonstrate evidence of research skills, organization and referencing (engagement activity and
HL extension in particular)

•

At HL only, present ideas orally with clarity

12

Global politics guide

Introduction

Assessment objectives in practice

Assessment objective

Which component addresses
this assessment objective?

How is the assessment
objective addressed?

Knowledge and understanding

•

Core units: people, power
and politics

•

Paper 1 (emphasized in the
first question)

•

Engagement activity

•

Paper 2

•

HL extension: global
political challenges

•

Engagement activity
written report
(emphasized in criterion A)

•

HL extension oral
presentations

Application and analysis

Synthesis and evaluation

Use and application of
appropriate skills

Global politics guide

•

Core units: people, power
and politics

•

Paper 1 (emphasized in the
second question)

•

Engagement activity

•

Paper 2

•

HL extension: global
political challenges

•

Engagement activity
written report
(emphasized in criteria B
and C)

•

HL extension oral
presentations

•

Core units: people, power
and politics

•

Paper 1 (emphasized in the
third and fourth questions)

•

Engagement activity

•

Paper 2

•

HL extension: global
political challenges

•

Engagement activity
written report
(emphasized in criterion D)

•

HL extension oral
presentations

•

Paper 1

•

Paper 2

•

Engagement activity
written report

•

HL extension oral
presentations

•

Core units: people, power
and politics

•

Engagement activity

•

HL extension: global
political challenges

13

Syllabus

Syllabus outline

Syllabus component

Core units: people, power and politics

Teaching hours
SL

HL

130

130

20

20

–

90

150

240

Four compulsory units:
1. Power, sovereignty and international relations
2. Human rights
3. Development
4. Peace and conflict

Engagement activity
An engagement on a political issue of personal interest, complemented with
research

HL extension: global political challenges
Political issues in two of the following six global political challenges
researched and presented through a case-study approach:
1. Environment
2. Poverty
3. Health
4. Identity
5. Borders
6. Security

Total teaching hours

The recommended teaching time is 240 hours to complete HL courses and 150 hours to complete
SL courses as stated in the document General regulations: Diploma Programme for students and their legal
guardians (article 8.2).

14

Global politics guide

Syllabus

Syllabus content

The Diploma Programme global politics course engages students with key political concepts and
contemporary political issues in a variety of contexts and through a variety of approaches. The following
diagram illustrates the elements of the course. Through teaching and learning in the subject, students
develop a holistic and nuanced understanding of global politics and acquire the skills needed to analyse,
evaluate and act on political issues they encounter inside and outside the classroom.

Figure 2
Working with political issues in the global politics course

Please note that examination questions are set on the (prescribed) key concepts, (prescribed)
learning outcomes and prescribed content, and should be answered with the help of any relevant
examples (the ones listed in the syllabus are merely possible examples). Suitable theoretical
foundations, individual and group perspectives, and levels of analysis should be brought in when
and where relevant to the answer.

Global politics guide

15

Syllabus content

Political issues
Politics are conventionally considered to be the actions taken in the formation and maintenance of the state
or other governing entity. Traditional definitions assume, for example, that there are no politics without
that governing entity—so by those definitions, hunter-gatherer societies do not have internal politics. With
state formation, politics play the role of maintaining the power of the state by the inclusion and exclusion of
peoples and competing formations that look to gain access to resources and power. The goal of the state is
to produce hegemony, a stable agreement between ruling entities and civil society. A political issue, under
such a definition, would be any event or action that is in the arena of state power and its maintenance.
More recently, however, and particularly with the onset of comprehensive globalization, the terms “political”
and “political issues” have taken on a broader and more inclusive meaning. Over the last few decades, broad
transformations in global social organization and trends in scholarship have contributed to a more nuanced
understanding of the complexity of real-world politics. Phenomena such as population growth, climate
change, developments in communication technology and changes in production patterns all transcend the
state and have facilitated the entry of new actors at various levels of social organization. Research on the role
of social movements, multinational corporations and international institutions, to name just three examples,
have emphasized the profoundly political intent and impact of their actions. Alongside states, communities
and international bodies compete for resources and are often confronted with new forms of power and
influence from within and outside their boundaries. The world around us has evolved in unimaginable ways
and academic scholarship provides us with the tools to grapple with the myriad of ways in which politics
are part of our everyday lives. Consequently, the central unifying theme of the Diploma Programme global
politics course is “people, power and politics”.
In the global politics course, a political issue is any question that deals with how power is distributed and
how it operates within social organization, and how people think about, and engage in, their communities
and the wider world on matters that affect their lives. Political issues are researched in social science
departments and think tanks; they populate the agendas of politicians and policymakers; they occupy
the minds of executives of global corporations and local social entrepreneurs; they affect how people
participate in and resist change; they are discussed in media and over coffee; they inspire oratory and art;
they are deeply rooted in history and culture. Political issues are part of our daily lives.
Political issues can be found at various levels. Taking the example of the issue of climate change, at the
global level, the discussion could focus on the degree to which the limited ability to enforce legally binding
action by the United Nations (UN) on its member nations inhibits the world as a whole to make progress
towards combating climate change. At the international level, the debate could centre on the fact that
many developing countries have already experienced the impact of climate change, and delineate how this
affects their positions in international climate negotiations. A political issue at the regional level could be
the challenges a regional association of nations faces in formulating a common climate policy. A political
issue at the national level could be the impact of a particularly strong typhoon on the central government’s
decisions and policies on disaster prevention. A political issue at the local level could be the ways in which
a typhoon on a particular island has changed people’s dependency on outside assistance and the society’s
resulting power dynamics. A political issue at the community level could be the mechanisms and the
degree to which migrant workers and emigrants are able to help support their families and relatives in a
post-disaster community.
Defining an interesting political issue in the wider, real-world situation they are studying is often an early
and key step for students to make progress with their understanding of global politics. This is particularly
important in order to see the connections between the key concepts and examples in the core units, to
determine an appropriate reflective focus for the engagement activity and to select a well-defined aspect
of the HL case studies for oral presentation.

16

Global politics guide

Syllabus content

Key concepts
The following 16 key concepts weave a conceptual thread through the course. They should be explored both
when working with the four core units, the engagement activity and the HL extension, in order to equip
students with a conceptual framework with which to access and understand the political issues examined.
Brief explanations of the key concepts are given in the table below to provide teachers and students with a
starting point for their conceptual journey of global politics. However, a few sentences could never capture
the different and contested interpretations of these big, important and organizing ideas of the theory and
practice of politics. A rich and balanced understanding of the key concepts is a key aim and assessment
objective of the course and requires their examination from multiple approaches and perspectives in a
variety of contexts.
The concepts below are listed in the order in which they appear in the core units, with four concepts
attached to each unit. This unit affiliation indicates where the concepts are most likely to surface, but the
intention is that any of them can and should be addressed at any point of the course where they add value
to the discussion.
Concept

Explanation

Power

Power is a central concept in the study of global politics and a key focus of the
course. Power can be seen as ability to effect change and, rather than being
viewed as a unitary or independent force, is as an aspect of relations among
people functioning within a social organization. Contested relationships between
people and groups of people dominate politics, particularly in this era of increased
globalization, and so understanding the dynamics of power plays a prominent role
in understanding global politics.

Sovereignty

Sovereignty characterizes a state’s independence, its control over territory and
its ability to govern itself. How states use their sovereign power is at the heart
of many important issues in global politics. Some theorists argue that sovereign
power is increasingly being eroded by aspects of globalization such as global
communication and trade, which states cannot always fully control. Others argue
that sovereign states exercise a great deal of power when acting in their national
interest and that this is unlikely to change.

Legitimacy

Legitimacy refers to an actor or an action being commonly considered acceptable
and provides the fundamental basis or rationale for all forms of governance and
other ways of exercising power over others. The most accepted contemporary
source of legitimacy in a state is some form of democracy or constitutionalism
whereby the governed have a defined and periodical opportunity to choose who
they wish to exercise power over them. Other sources of legitimacy are suggested
in states in which such an opportunity does not exist. Within any proposed overall
framework of legitimacy, individual actions by a state can be considered more
or less legitimate. Other actors of global politics and their actions can also be
evaluated from the perspective of legitimacy.

Interdependence

In global politics, the concept of interdependence most often refers to the mutual
reliance between and among groups, organizations, geographic areas and/or states
for access to resources that sustain living arrangements. Often, this mutual reliance
is economic (such as trade), but can also have a security dimension (such as defence
arrangements) and, increasingly, a sustainability dimension (such as environmental
treaties). Globalization has increased interdependence, while often changing the
relationships of power among the various actors engaged in global politics.

Global politics guide

17

Syllabus content

Concept

Explanation

Human rights

Human rights are basic claims and entitlements that, many argue, one should be
able to exercise simply by virtue of being a human being. Many contemporary
thinkers argue they are essential for living a life of dignity, are inalienable, and
should be accepted as universal. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights
adopted by the UN in 1948 is recognized as the beginning of the formal discussion
of human rights around the world. Critics argue that human rights are a Western,
or at least culturally relative, concept.

Justice

There are a number of different interpretations of the concept of justice. It is often
closely associated with the idea of fairness and with individuals getting what they
deserve, although what is meant by deserve is also contested. One avenue is to
approach justice through the idea of rights, and what individuals can legitimately
expect of one another or of their government. Some theorists also argue that
equality not only in the institutions and procedures of a society but also in
capabilities or well-being outcomes is required for justice to be realized.

Liberty

The concept of liberty refers to having freedom and autonomy. It is often divided
into positive and negative liberty, with negative liberty defined as individuals
having the freedom from external coercion and positive liberty defined as
individuals having the autonomy to carry out their own rational will. Some
scholars reject this distinction and argue that in practice, one form of liberty
cannot exist without the other. It is also questioned if such an understanding of
liberty is sufficient for an interdependent world, in which the seeming freedom
and autonomy of some may depend on lack of some forms of liberty for others.
Hence, debates on equality inform our understanding of liberty as well.

Equality

Egalitarian theories are based on a concept of equality that all people, or groups
of people, are seen as having the same intrinsic value. Equality is therefore closely
linked to justice and fairness, as egalitarians argue that justice can only exist if
there is equality. Increasingly, with growing polarization within societies, equality
is also linked to liberty, as different people have differing possibilities to be free
and autonomous.

Development

Development is a sustained increase in the standard of living and well-being of a
level of social organization. Many consider it to involve increased income; better
access to basic goods and services; improvements in education, health care and
public health; well-functioning institutions; decreased inequality; reduced poverty
and unemployment; and more sustainable production and consumption patterns.
The focus of development debates in contemporary global politics is on issues
faced by developing countries, and on the imperative of shifting the focus from
modernization (seen as Westernization). However, all societies and communities
face questions about how to best promote well-being and reduce ill-being.

Globalization

Globalization is a process by which the world’s local, national and regional
economies, societies and cultures are becoming increasingly integrated and
connected. The term refers to the reduction of barriers and borders, as people,
goods, services and ideas flow more freely between different parts of the world.
Globalization is a process that has been taking place for centuries but the pace
has quickened in recent decades, facilitated by developments in transportation
and communication technology, and powered by cheap energy. It is now widely
acknowledged that globalization has both benefits and drawbacks and that its
benefits are not evenly distributed.

18

Global politics guide

Syllabus content

Concept

Explanation

Inequality

Inequality refers to a state of affairs where equality between people or groups
of people is not realized and the consequent potential compromises of justice
and liberty. Inequality often manifests itself through unequal access to resources
that are needed to sustain life and develop individuals and communities.
Consequently, the concept is closely connected to discussions of power and of
who holds the rights to these resources and their proceeds. Inequality can be
examined both as a phenomenon within and between societies.

Sustainability

Definitions of sustainability begin with the idea that development should
meet the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future
generations to meet their needs. Sustainability today has three fields of debate—
environmental, sociopolitical and economic. In global politics, mechanisms and
incentives required for political institutions, economic actors and individuals to
take a longer term and more inclusive well-being perspective in their decisionmaking are particularly important.

Peace

Peace is often defined as both the absence of conflict and violence as well as a
state of harmonious relations. Many also refer to peace as a personal state of nonconflict, particularly with oneself and with one’s relationship to others. Peace is the
ultimate goal of many organizations that monitor and regulate social relationships.

Conflict

Conflict is the dynamic process of actual or perceived opposition between
individuals or groups. This could be opposition over positions, interests or values.
Most theorists would distinguish between non-violent and violent conflict. In this
distinction, non-violent conflict can be a useful mechanism for social change and
transformation, while violent conflict is harmful and requires conflict resolution.

Violence

Violence is often defined as physical or psychological force afflicted upon another
being. In the context of global politics, it could be seen as anything someone does
that prevents others from reaching their full potential. This broader definition
would encompass unequal distribution of power that excludes entire groups
from accessing resources essential for improved living standards or well-being,
and discriminatory practices that exclude entire groups of people from accessing
certain resources.

Non-violence

Non-violence is the practice of advocating one’s own or others’ rights without
physically harming the opponent. It often involves actively opposing the system
that is deemed to be unjust, through for example boycotts, demonstrations and
civil disobedience. Theorists argue that non-violence can often draw attention
to a conflict situation and that it could provide a fertile basis for post-conflict
transformation.

Learning outcomes
Four learning outcomes are specified for each of the four core units. The learning outcomes summarize the
most important themes that SL and HL students should be able to understand, analyse and evaluate once the
core units have been covered. For the HL extension, the learning outcomes are the same for each of the six
possible global political challenges students may study; it is expected that for each of their two chosen topics,
students research and present orally a specific detailed case study and in the process, acquire an understanding
of why the topic presents a global political challenge and how it links to the core units of the course.

Global politics guide

19

Syllabus content

Prescribed content
Prescribed content is specified for each learning outcome in the core units. These are the topics that must
be covered in the course. The topics are purposefully defined in quite an open-ended way to give teachers
and students an opportunity to be guided by their interests, location, and current political events and
debates. There is no additional prescribed content for the HL extension.

Examples and case studies
Examples are an integral part of the course and should be interwoven throughout the teaching of the core
units. They are particularly useful in helping students to ground abstract concepts and to appreciate that
political issues are contextual.
Possible examples are listed for each topic in the core units. They are intended as a starting point and as
support and inspiration for teachers and students; for many topics, local and current examples will be
more appropriate than the ones suggested in this guide, and many more possible examples are listed than
are expected to be covered during the course. Teachers should exercise their judgment on when enough
examples have been examined for students to have gained a rich and balanced understanding of the
relevant prescribed content and key concepts. Some of the suggested examples may become more relevant
elsewhere in the course than where they are listed in the syllabus.
Many of the possible examples are formulated as sub-topics through which the prescribed content might
be approached, and some examples additionally refer to specific theorists, actors, events etc. The examples
chosen illustrate a breadth of possibilities and are intended to point towards some directions in which to
take the inquiry. Again, it is emphasized that any examples that bring to life the prescribed content and key
concepts are legitimate.
In the HL extension, students select two case studies through which they explore global political challenges.
Case studies provide an opportunity for a much more in-depth study than the examples used throughout
the rest of the course. Please refer to Guide > Syllabus > Syllabus content > HL extension: Global politics
challenges in this guide for further guidance.
In their choice of examples and case studies, teachers should consider that these need to be contemporary.
Contemporary, in the context of the global politics course, is understood to refer to events during the students’
lifetime. Historical examples can be used if they provide useful background context, if they are necessary for
understanding a topic and when they have clear implications for the present—but the emphasis of the
course should be on current affairs and recent examples and case studies. Where historical examples are
used, they should only be mentioned and teaching should quickly move to contemporary issues.

Theoretical foundations
The Diploma Programme global politics course draws on multiple disciplines in the social sciences.
Many theories and analytical approaches have been put forward to further debates in these disciplines.
Consequently, the course is rich in potential theoretical foundations. Some examples of theoretical
foundations that are likely to be helpful throughout the course are provided below; however, different or
additional foundations may be relevant depending on the issue at stake.
While the key concepts help students understand interrelated big ideas behind specific political issues,
theoretical foundations give students some alternative interpretations of these big ideas advocated by
various camps of political debate across time and space. Theoretical foundations, perhaps more so than the
key concepts (which aim to capture the essence of a particular aspect of political life) are contextual: they
20

Global politics guide

Syllabus content

are a product of the circumstances in which, and purposes for which, they were developed, and they evolve.
Consequently, only the very central elements of each suggested theoretical foundation are given below.
Theoretical
foundation

Explanation

Realism

Realists in global politics view the world in competitive terms. In a realist view, global
politics is dominated by states acting in their own self-interest, prioritizing, first and
foremost, national security. Relations between states are heavily influenced by the
amount of power they have.

Liberalism

Liberals in global politics have a more cooperative view of the world. In a liberalist
view, a host of actors influence outcomes in global politics and share a primary
concern for justice, liberty and equality.

Capitalism

The economic theory of capitalism is the dominant ideology of production,
exchange, distribution and consumption in the modern world, according to which
the basis of resource allocation is the generation of profit. Although there are various
interpretations of how political decision-making should be involved in regulating
the operation of the profit motive, all models of capitalism agree that the generation
of profit is necessary for economic growth and maintenance of the global system,
and generally conducive to development. Neoliberalism is a strand of capitalism that
advocates minimum political interference in the market mechanism.

Critical
theories

Critical theories is an umbrella term for theoretical foundations that critique one or
more major aspects of other theoretical foundations, the current world order and/
or ways of organizing life. Examples of critical theories include communitarianism,
constructivism, feminism, Marxism, post-colonialism and environmentalism.

Relativism

In the context of global politics, the ethical theory of relativism suggests values to be
culturally and individually determined. In a relativist view, global agreements on the
most fundamental aspects of human life are hence difficult to achieve.

Universalism

In the context of global politics, the ethical theory of universalism puts forward
the notion of a universal human nature that transcends traditional boundaries of
identity. In a universalist view, universal values are therefore possible.

Different theoretical foundations offer competing interpretations of reality. Consequently, the list above and
any other potential theoretical foundations are much more complex constructs than what can be summarized
in brief explanations. When using theoretical foundations to help frame debates in global politics, the
following kinds of questions might be helpful in understanding, comparing and contrasting them.
•

Which key concepts are central to this theoretical foundation?

•

According to this theoretical foundation, who are the most important actors in global politics?

•

Through the lens of this theoretical foundation, what would a “good” society look like?

•

According to this theoretical foundation, what motivates human behaviour?

•

What view of progress does this theoretical foundation propose?

Given the breadth and depth of any particular theoretical foundation, it needs to be emphasized that
theoretical foundations are intended, first and foremost, to structure learning and to contextualize, and
offer historical background on, the key concepts and political issues discussed. Teachers should be wary of
overdoing this aspect of the course.

Global politics guide

21

Syllabus content

Levels of analysis
It is a central element of the global politics course that the key political concepts and contemporary political
issues are studied at a number of levels: global, international, regional, national, local and community. These
levels help students to appreciate that what may initially appear to be a global issue actually has many local
implications and vice versa, and that decision-making on the same phenomenon may look quite different
depending on whether it is analysed on a systemic or sub-systemic level. The appropriate level of analysis
depends on the issue at stake and students’ objectives in a task. Brief explanations of the various levels are
given below.

Level of analysis

Explanation

Global

In the context of the global politics course, the term global refers to events and
trends that have far-reaching and long-term impact across the world, cutting
across national identities and interests. Examples include, but are not limited to,
climate change, migration, terrorism, epidemics, etc.

International

In the context of the global politics course, the term international refers to
events and trends that have a narrower impact than global events and trends,
but nonetheless have implications for several countries. Examples include,
but are not limited to, the operation of various international organizations,
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), multinational corporations (MNCs),
international law, etc.

Regional

In the context of the global politics course, the term regional refers to events and
trends that have implications limited to a particular geographic region, such as
the Middle East, Latin America, Eastern Europe, Western Europe, etc. Examples
include, but are not limited to, the operation of the European Union (EU), the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN), The Arab League, etc.

National

In the context of the global politics course, the term national refers to events
and trends that have a limited impact within the geographical boundaries of a
particular country. Examples include, but are not limited to, economic crises or
economic change in a particular state, political and legal reforms in a particular
state, changes in the governance of a particular state, etc.

Local

In the context of the global politics course, the term local is used to refer to the
geographic area in which social organization is created and in which culture is
transmitted from one generation to the next. Local is defined by its inhabitants
and their practices, and so can represent a geographic space as small as a gated
community or as large as a city or region.

Community

The idea of community is one of the most debated concepts in the social
sciences. Communities were once thought of as geographically based groups
of people with similar interests, mutual support and cultural traits. The most
commonly held view was that communities must include not only spatial
and ecological definitions, but institutional and emotional ones. Recently,
however, processes of globalization have led social scientists to rethink standard
definitions. Advances in communication technologies allow similar interests to
be nurtured beyond physical boundaries, and the definition of community has
become intertwined with debates about globalization and the role and place of
people within it.

22

Global politics guide

Syllabus content

Individual and group perspectives
Throughout the course, it is also necessary to approach the key political concepts and contemporary
political issues through various individual and group perspectives. These help students to develop an
appreciation for multiple points of view and to deepen their understanding of the complexity of many
issues encountered in the study of global politics: our unique personalities, life experiences and the social
and cultural environments of which we are a part influence how we act in global politics. Three examples of
important perspectives are gender, ethnicity and religion; additional individual and group perspectives will
be relevant depending on the issue at stake.

Gender
Gender is an important form of identity that can be socially constructed as well as biologically determined.
Gender values can also change dramatically over time. In the 20th century, feminist movements successfully
drew attention to women’s inequality in education, employment, the home and in politics, and these issues
remain ever pertinent. Today, gender relations in global politics refers to contested and changing power
relations between men and women in which constructions of masculinity are often privileged. Many key
aspects of global politics such as human rights, development and conflict remain highly gendered, and
issues such as literacy, migration, sexual violence and disease continue to impact on men, women and
children differently.

Ethnicity
Ethnicity is a form of identity in terms of membership of an ethnic group. Individuals within an ethnic group
share common characteristics including cultural and societal similarities such as language, beliefs and
history. Although there may be no formal agreement about what makes each ethnic identity unique, many
people describe themselves as descendents of a particular ethnic group and wish to preserve this status and
their rights. Categories based on ethnicity may or may not overlap with national identities.

Religion
Religion refers to a diverse set of belief systems. Religious identity usually has both a personal and a social
dimension. On one hand, religion provides answers to questions about life, death, origins of the world
and so on, and is a way for individuals to find or generate meaning in their own lives. On the other hand,
members of a religion share narratives, rituals and, often, social norms and a moral code; being a member
of the religious community is an important aspect of most religions. The potency of both the personal
and social dimensions of religion combined with the fact that religions assert authority from supernatural
sources serves to strengthen the influence of religious identities and communities in global politics.

Core units: people, power and politics
The common core for SL and HL students consists of four units. The first unit can be perceived as the
foundational unit for the other units, and some treatment of it is likely to be desirable at the start of the
course. However, there is no expectation of a linear progression, and topics within the course can be studied
in any order.
Specific key concepts are tied to specific units to aid course planning and to help create focus. However,
given the connections between political issues discussed in the different units, these concepts should be
addressed as natural in the progression of the course.

Global politics guide

23

Syllabus content

For more guidance on how to plan the sequencing of the core units, please refer to In practice > Planning
the course.

Foundational unit: power, sovereignty and international relations
Recommended teaching time: 40–55 hours
Key concepts: power, sovereignty, legitimacy, interdependence
Learning outcomes:
•

Nature of power

•

Operation of state power in global politics

•

Function and impact of international organizations and non-state actors in global politics

•

Nature and extent of interactions in global politics

Human rights unit

Development unit

Peace and conflict unit

Recommended teaching time:
25–30 hours

Recommended teaching time:
25–30 hours

Recommended teaching time:
25–30 hours

Key concepts: human rights,
justice, liberty, equality

Key concepts: development,
globalization, inequality,
sustainability

Key concepts: peace, conflict,
violence, non-violence

Learning outcomes:
•

Nature and evolution of
human rights

Learning outcomes:

Learning outcomes:
•

Contested meanings
of peace, conflict and
violence

•

Codification, protection
and monitoring of human
rights

Contested meanings of
development

•

Factors that may promote
or inhibit development

•

Causes and parties to
conflict

•

Practice of human rights

•

•

Evolution of conflict

•

Debates surrounding
human rights and their
application: differing
interpretations of justice,
liberty and equality

Pathways towards
development

•

•

Debates surrounding
development: challenges
of globalization, inequality
and sustainability

Conflict resolution
and post-conflict
transformation

•

24

Global politics guide

Syllabus content

Foundational unit: power, sovereignty and international relations
This unit focuses on the dynamics of power and how it is manifested and legitimized at various levels. The
roles of state and non-state actors are examined, their interactions in global politics are discussed and their
success in achieving their aims and objectives is evaluated.

Key concepts: power, sovereignty, legitimacy, interdependence
Learning
outcome

Prescribed content

Possible examples
(Intended as a starting point only: for many topics, local
and current examples will be more appropriate than the
ones listed, and many more examples are listed than are
expected to be covered during the course)

Nature of power

Definitions and
theories of power

•

John Mearsheimer, Joseph Nye, Antonio Gramsci,
Steven Lukes

Types of power

•

Hard versus soft; economic, military, social, cultural;
individual versus collective; unilateral versus
multilateral

The evolving nature
of state sovereignty

•

Terminology, eg state, nation, nation-state, stateless
nation

•

The Westphalian conception of state sovereignty

•

Present-day status of sources of state sovereignty,
eg possession and use of force, international law and
norms, recognition by other states due to economic
and balance of power considerations, consent (or
lack thereof ) of the governed through political
participation

•

Present-day challenges to state sovereignty, eg
globalization, supranationality, humanitarian
intervention, indigenous rights

•

Democratic states, eg unitary states, federal states

•

Authoritarian states

•

Fragile/failed states

The United Nations
(UN)

•

The UN, eg Charter of the United Nations, UN principal
organs (General Assembly, Security Council, etc) and
subsidiary organs and agencies

Intergovernmental
organizations (IGOs)

•

World Trade Organization (WTO), International
Monetary Fund (IMF), European Union (EU), African
Union, Arab League, Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN)

Non-governmental
organizations
(NGOs), multinational
corporations (MNCs)
and trade unions

•

NGOs, eg International Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement, Amnesty International (AI), Human Rights
Watch (HRW), Greenpeace, BRAC

•

MNCs, eg Unilever, Philips, IKEA, Lenovo, Tata

•

Trade unions, eg International Trade Union
Confederation (ITUC)

Operation of
state power in
global politics

Legitimacy of state
power

Function and
impact of
international
organizations
and non-state
actors in global
politics

Global politics guide

25

Syllabus content

Learning
outcome

Nature and
extent of
interactions in
global politics

Prescribed content

Possible examples
(Intended as a starting point only: for many topics, local
and current examples will be more appropriate than the
ones listed, and many more examples are listed than are
expected to be covered during the course)

Social movements,
resistance
movements and
violent protest
movements

•

Social movements, eg Occupy, Avaaz

•

Resistance movements, eg Arab Spring, Orange
Revolution in Ukraine

•

Violent protest movements, eg Revolutionary Armed
Forces of Colombia (FARC), Hezbollah, Naxalites

Political parties

•

USA’s Republican and Democratic parties, Germany’s
Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and Social
Democratic Party (SPD), Communist Party of China
(CPC)

Informal forums

•

G20, The Group of Seven (G7), The Group of Eight (G8),
G2, World Economic Forum (WEF), World Social Forum
(WSF)

Legitimacy of nonstate actors

•

Representativeness

•

Means of exerting influence

•

Efficacy

Global governance

•

UN Security Council resolutions, climate change
agenda, Basel accords on financial regulation, WTO
trade agreements, regional decision-making

Cooperation:
treaties, collective
security, strategic
alliances, economic
cooperation, informal
cooperation

•

Treaties, eg Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), Montreal
Protocol

•

Collective security, eg North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), Organization of American States
(OAS)

•

Strategic alliances, eg China’s alliances in Latin
America and Africa, USA–Taiwan, USA–Israel, India–
Afghanistan

•

Economic cooperation, eg bilateral and multilateral
trade agreements, regional economic integration,
facilitation and regulation of international production

•

Informal cooperation, eg extraordinary rendition,
technology harmonization, cultural exchange

•

Interstate war, eg Iraq, Afghanistan, Sudan, South
Sudan

•

Intrastate war, eg Syria, Ukraine, Democratic Republic
of the Congo (DRC), Central African Republic

•

Terrorism, eg Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS),
Euskadi Ta Askatasuna (ETA), Revolutionary Armed
Forces of Colombia (FARC), Boko Haram

•

Strikes and demonstrations: local examples

Conflict: interstate
war, intrastate war,
terrorism, strikes,
demonstrations

26

Global politics guide

Syllabus content

Human rights unit
This unit focuses on the nature and practice of human rights. Debates surrounding human rights are
examined.

Key concepts: human rights, justice, liberty, equality
Learning outcome

Prescribed content

Possible examples
(Intended as a starting point only: for many
topics, local and current examples will be more
appropriate than the ones listed, and many
more examples are listed than are expected to
be covered during the course)

Nature and
evolution of human
rights

Definitions of human rights

•

Notions such as inalienability, universality,
indivisibility, equality, justice, liberty

•

Human rights milestones, eg civil and
political rights, economic, social and
cultural rights, gender rights, children’s
rights, indigenous people’s rights, refugee
rights

•

Internationalization of human rights,
eg universal jurisdiction, international
humanitarian law

•

Role of custom

•

Human rights in constitutions, eg South
Africa, Brazil

•

International examples, eg International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(ICCPR) and International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
(ICESCR), Convention on the Protection
of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families, Rome Statute

Protection and enforcement
of human rights at different
levels

•

National courts and police, International
Court of Justice (ICJ), International Criminal
Court (ICC), Inter-American Commission on
Human Rights (IACHR), Cambodia Tribunal

Monitoring human rights
agreements

•

Ombudsmen, Human Rights Watch (HRW),
Amnesty International (AI), International
Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement,
monitoring elections

The UN’s The Universal
Declaration of Human Rights
(1948)
Developments in human
rights over time and space

Codification,
protection and
monitoring of
human rights

Global politics guide

Human rights laws and
treaties

27

Syllabus content

Learning outcome

Prescribed content

Possible examples
(Intended as a starting point only: for many
topics, local and current examples will be more
appropriate than the ones listed, and many
more examples are listed than are expected to
be covered during the course)

Practice of human
rights

Claims on human rights

•

Labour rights, indigenous land claims,
movements for gender equality, debates
about same-sex marriage

Violations of human rights

•

Child soldiers, human trafficking, forced
labour, forced relocation, denial of
prisoners of war rights, violations of
freedom of speech, violations in the
name of prevention of terrorism, gender
discrimination

Individual versus collective
rights

•

Western, Asian and African conceptions;
indigenous conceptions

Universal rights versus
cultural relativism

•

Sharia law, honour killings, hate crime laws,
consumer rights

Politicization of human
rights

•

Use of human rights for political gain,
humanitarian arguments, responsibility to
protect, use of sanctions

Debates
surrounding human
rights: differing
interpretations of
justice, liberty and
equality

Development unit
This unit focuses on what development means, how it can be pursued and what may help or stand in
the way of people, communities and countries becoming better off in a comprehensive sense. Debates
surrounding development are examined.

Key concepts: development, globalization, inequality, sustainability

Learning
outcome

Prescribed content

Possible examples
(Intended as a starting point only: for many topics, local
and current examples will be more appropriate than the
ones listed, and many more examples are listed than are
expected to be covered during the course)

Contested
meanings of
development

Different definitions
of development,
including sustainable
development and
well-being

•

Economic growth, fairer income distribution, reduction
in poverty, meeting basic needs, improved capabilities,
achievement of political and social freedoms, wellfunctioning institutions, lifestyles that respect the
ecological constraints of the environment

Measuring
development

•

Gross national product (GNP), Human Development
Index (HDI), Genuine Progress Indicator (GPI), Inclusive
Wealth Index (IWI), Happy Planet Index (also HPI),
corruption indices, trust indices

28

Global politics guide

Syllabus content

Learning
outcome

Prescribed content

Possible examples
(Intended as a starting point only: for many topics, local
and current examples will be more appropriate than the
ones listed, and many more examples are listed than are
expected to be covered during the course)

Factors that
may promote
or inhibit
development

Political factors

•

Ideologies, history of and persistence of conflict,
stability, accountability, transparency, legal frameworks,
political consequences of different development paths,
decisions about the allocation of aid, political culture,
culture of bureaucracy, vested interests

Economic factors

•

Access to resources, increasing resource constraints,
infrastructure, debt, access to capital and credit,
aid, trade, foreign direct investment (FDI), income
distribution, informal economy, vested interests

Social factors

•

Values, cultures, traditions, gender relations, migration

Institutional factors

•

The UN, IMF, World Bank, WTO, partnerships between
developing countries, efficacy of national and local
institutions

Environmental factors

•

Geography, resource endowment, consequences of
climate change on people and communities’ lives

Models of
development

•

Neoliberal theories (eg Washington Consensus), state
capitalism (eg China, Russia), capability theories (eg
Sen, Nussbaum)

Approaches for
developing the
economy

•

Trade liberalization, export orientation, commodityled growth, tourism, entrepreneurship, knowledge
economy, circular economy, complementary currencies

Approaches for
developing society

•

Concern for citizenship skills and engagement,
improving education and health care, changing
roles of women, more ecological living, indigenous
revitalization movements

Globalization: wins
and losses

•

Facts about development of standard of living and
assessment of realization of human rights, well-being
and opportunity for different groups of people within
and between societies

•

Environmental impacts of globalization

•

Various perspectives, eg North, South, rising powers

Inequality and
development: role of
politics

•

Opportunities for and limits of state, IGO and NGO
action, eg global regulation of MNCs and cross-border
financial flows, role of local regulation of conditions of
work, power of lobbies

Sustainable
development: role of
politics

•

Opportunities for and limits of state, IGO and
NGO action, eg progress in global climate change
negotiations, role of regional, national and local policies
for sustainable development

Pathways
towards
development

Debates
surrounding
development:
challenges of
globalization,
inequality
and
sustainability

Global politics guide

29

Syllabus content

Peace and conflict unit
This unit focuses on what peace, conflict and violence mean, how conflicts emerge and develop, and what
can be done to build a lasting peace.

Key concepts: peace, conflict, violence, non-violence
Learning outcome

Prescribed content

Possible examples
(Intended as a starting point only: for many
topics, local and current examples will be
more appropriate than the ones listed, and
many more examples are listed than are
expected to be covered during the course)

Contested meanings
of peace, conflict and
violence

Different definitions of
peace, conflict and violence,
including positive peace and
structural violence

•

Peace, eg negative peace, peace as
balance of power, peace in different
political traditions and religions, feminist
peace

•

Conflict, eg through scale of conflict from
disenfranchisement through to interstate
war

•

Violence, eg direct violence, cultural
violence

•

Territorial conflict, eg Russian claims,
disputes in the South China Sea

•

Interest-based conflict, eg weapon sales,
positive discrimination on the factory
floor

•

Ideological conflict, eg political
ideologies, free market versus state-led
economy

•

Identity conflict, eg indigenous
populations, more heterogeneous
populations in previously homogeneous
states

Justifications of violence,
including just war theory

•

Humanitarian intervention, self-defence,
religiously or culturally condoned
violence

Causes of conflict

•

Greed versus grievance (eg Colombia,
Sierra Leone), territorial control, material
interest, resource scarcity, ideology,
threatened identity, perception

Parties to conflict

•

States, intrastate groups, protest groups,
individuals

Types of conflict

Causes and parties to
conflict

30

Global politics guide

Syllabus content

Learning outcome

Prescribed content

Possible examples
(Intended as a starting point only: for many
topics, local and current examples will be
more appropriate than the ones listed, and
many more examples are listed than are
expected to be covered during the course)

Evolution of conflict

Manifestations of conflict,
including non-violence

•

Demonstrations, civil disobedience,
violent protests, guerrilla warfare,
terrorism, genocide, intrastate war,
interstate war, arms proliferation, nuclear
deterrence

Conflict dynamics

•

Galtung’s conflict triangle, positions–
interests–needs, conflict cycles

Third-party involvement
in conflict, including
humanitarian intervention

•

Weapon embargoes, financial freezes,
trade limitations, NATO involvement,
UN peace enforcement, election
observers

Peacemaking, including
negotiations and treaties

•

Military victory, imposed settlement,
ceasefires, truces, arbitration, mediation,
peace treaties, peacekeeping

Peacebuilding, including
reconciliation and work of
justice institutions

•

Truth and reconciliation commissions
(eg Sierra Leone), courts (eg Cambodia,
International Criminal Court), forgiveness

Conflict resolution
and post-conflict
transformation

Engagement activity
The engagement activity provides students with an opportunity to explore the central unifying theme
of the course—people, power and politics—in practice and outside the classroom. In the course of their
engagement activity, students may, for example, learn about the local manifestations of a global issue,
engage with primary sources and experience the dynamics and consequences of decision-making on
individuals and communities. Although the emphasis of the task is on active engagement rather than
primarily on research, it is expected that students make use of the key concepts, theories and ideas they
are learning in the classroom and undertake further reading to inform their planning and actions, and
their discussion of the political issue raised in their activities. In brief, the task aims at active and reflective
engagement. The engagement activity work culminates in a 2,000-word written report. More information
on the assessment of the written report is given in Guide > Internal assessment.
There are three parts to the engagement activity work: undertaking an engagement, doing complementary
research and writing a report. Although the written report is the assessed component of the engagement
activity, students’ planning, actions, further reading and discussion are interconnected; all are required for a
good end result. Moreover, students can expect to go back and forth between the different elements of the
work: for example, they should do some preliminary research on the context of their activities before they
engage, and while writing their report, they may discover areas for which additional research is needed to
balance the perspectives acquired through the engagement.

Global politics guide

31

Syllabus content

Figure 3
Possible engagement activity workflow

Selecting appropriate engagements
When selecting their engagements, it is central that students are able to identify a clear political issue that
the engagement allows them to explore and that they develop an interest in this issue. The political issue
should be authentically embedded in the engagement, and students’ role in the engagement should
be such that they truly learn about this political issue through what they do. For example, if a student
suggests engaging in a beach clean-up, what they do is largely apolitical; any political issues are likely to be
artificially or remotely connected to the activity. However, if a student proposes to organize an awareness
raising campaign for beach clean-ups, including actually cleaning up a beach, many political issues are
authentically embedded in the engagement, such as comparison of the opportunities for and limitations
of citizen activism versus governmental responsibility for such tasks. Furthermore, through selecting
campaign means, discussing these with the local council, executing the campaign and organizing activities
on the ground, the student learns about his or her selected political issue first hand.
In other words, students should choose an engagement that helps them gain an experiential perspective on
a political issue that they are genuinely interested in. Often, this is likely to happen if:
•

the engagement allows students to experience the dynamics of real-world politics and do so in a
participatory way

•

the political issue focused upon affects a community or a society that the student has some stake and
experiences in

•

the engagement involves contact with others who are also interested in, or have a stake in, the
political issue.

Using the example of the beach clean-up, organizing an awareness raising campaign for beach clean-ups is
likely to help the student gain an experiential perspective on the opportunities for and limitations of citizen
activism versus governmental responsibility for such tasks and to be of genuine interest to the student
because the engagement is a collective effort around a real problem in the student’s own locality.

32

Global politics guide

Syllabus content

This is not to say other kinds of engagements, such as political simulations or activities centred on the
lives of far-away people, communities or societies, could not form the basis of a meaningful and successful
engagement activity as long as there is a significant experiential element involved and as long as this
element allows students to gain an experiential perspective on a political issue they are interested in. For
example, a student interested in the political issue of which techniques can be employed by parties with
less power versus those with more power in a negotiation situation can learn about this effectively through
a simulation. Similarly, a student interested in the political issue of women’s rights in a different part of the
world can learn about this meaningfully through activities such as becoming involved with a human rights
NGO working with immigrant women from that part of the world.
For reasons of possible bias, it is recommended that the engagement should not consist of interviewing
only one person.
The following are some further examples of the kinds of engagements and political issues embedded in
them that are likely to lend themselves well to meaningful and successful engagement activities in global
politics. Teachers and students are free to choose their own topics and the ones listed here should only
serve as examples.
Engagement
Note: Each engagement consists of all the activities
described
•

Attendance at the full meeting of a city council,
followed by interviews with two of its female
councillors

•

Campaigning with a city councillor in support of a
female candidate running for the national parliament

•

Attendance at a conference to hear a speech by a
female member of parliament opposed to quotas for
women in politics

•

Participation in a group discussion with a female
government minister

•

Preparation and performance of street theatre on the
theme of women’s rights in country A for NGO B

•

Interviews with women from country A involved in
NGO B’s work

•

Three-week stay and work at a “voluntarism” school in
country C

•

Interviews with the school’s representatives and other
local stakeholders

•

Discussions with students and parents

•

Participation in a question and answer session at
international criminal courts D and E

•

Observation of a trial against a war criminal at court D

•

Preparation and participation in a mock war crime trial
in the role of a prosecutor

Global politics guide

Political issue
How does the nature of democracy
impact upon representation of women
in politics?

How legitimate and effective are
the strategies employed by NGOs in
improving women’s rights in country
A compared to the legitimacy and
effectiveness of an outside military
intervention?
What are the impacts of “voluntarism” on
the local and national development of
country C?

What are the strengths and weaknesses
of international law, when applied to
personal responsibility for war crimes
and crimes against humanity?

33

Syllabus content

Engagement
Note: Each engagement consists of all the activities
described
•

Investigation into the value chain of select three
products in a local store: a locally sourced vegetable,
a nationally sourced drink and an internationally
sourced toy, including interviews with the store
purchasing manager, the local farmer selling the
vegetable, the drink company and an NGO working
with consumer awareness issues

Political issue
How do processes of global politics
influence where the products we need
in daily life come from and how they are
made?

In the course of their global politics studies, students may be involved with several activities that could
qualify as engagements, and then choose the most interesting and suitable activity to research and write a
report on. However, teachers should be mindful of directing students and their time commitments so that
other elements of their Diploma Programme do not suffer.
HL students may tie their engagement activity to a global political challenge, an aspect of which they have
examined in their HL case studies, but must not study the same political issue.

Complementary research
The role of research in the engagement activity is to complement what students learn through their
engagement, including their own evolving beliefs and perspectives. A helpful way of thinking about research
is to ask: in addition to the experiential learning students gain and on which they critically reflect, what else
do they need to know and understand to be able to write a good, evaluative analysis of their selected
political issue? Often, background information on actors, organizations, events and so on is required for
understanding the context in which the engagement takes place. Some additional reading to establish
links between their activities, chosen political issue and the key concepts, theories and ideas studied in
the core units of the course is called for. Also, the perspectives students gain through their engagement
are partial and limited. Research is needed to establish which other perspectives on the political issue and
the organization(s) with which students have been engaging are possible, and what the strengths and
limitations of various perspectives are.
Following through with the example of organizing an awareness raising campaign for beach clean-ups, the
role of research in this engagement activity could be to compare the results of the student’s campaign with
other similar clean-up campaigns, read up on what political factors might explain the success of citizenship
activism in the culture and society in question, and study the effectiveness (or lack thereof) of citizen
activism versus governmental measures in achieving collective goods like clean beaches.
Students’ complementary research can be based on primary and secondary material, though the emphasis
is likely to be on secondary sources, as any primary research is likely to be a part of the engagement itself.
During their experiential learning, students may collect items such as photos, responses to questionnaires
and extracts of interviews. Newspaper, magazine and journal articles, textbooks, carefully selected websites,
images and audio-visual material are all legitimate secondary sources. It is expected that students will
include in-text citations or references of the supporting documents and a bibliography, which should be
structured in a recognized academic format. Primary sources significant to the students’ discussion should
be included in an appendix, where appropriate.
Teachers should be mindful that the main focus of the task is on active engagement rather than the type
of extensive research students conduct for, say, their extended essay. Again, the role of the research is to
enhance students’ understanding of the political issue raised by their engagement and help them answer
questions that emerge as a result of their planning, actions and discussion.

34

Global politics guide

Syllabus content

Written report
The written report is an opportunity for students to bring together the lessons they have learned about
their chosen political issue through their engagement and complementary research. As for many other
larger writing projects, it is likely to be highly helpful for students to formulate a question, tightly linked
to the political issue, which they attempt to answer through their experiences and reading, and refine this
question throughout the engagement activity process.
In their reports, students must identify a political issue they decided to explore through the engagement
and explain their reasons why they wanted to get involved with this specific engagement and issue. If
the engagement is large and multifaceted—perhaps consisting of several tasks or with the student
having several roles in the course of the engagement—they need to focus their report on aspects of the
engagement that are most relevant for their treatment of the political issue. Instead of describing at length
what they did, the key aspect about the engagement in the written report is what it taught students about
their selected political issue. The lessons from experiential learning, combined with insights from research,
inform students’ analysis of the political issue. They are expected to synthesize their insights and evaluate
the political issue from multiple perspectives.
There is no specific format required of the written report, but is it expected that the report is a structured
piece of well-presented writing.

Word count
The written report must not exceed 2,000 words. Work that falls significantly below 2,000 words is unlikely
to fully meet the stated requirements of the task, and is likely to receive low marks. A word count must be
included as part of the report. If the word limit is exceeded, the teacher’s assessment must be based on the
first 2,000 words.

Note: Moderators will not read beyond 2,000 words of the report.
The following are not included in the word count.
•

Acknowledgments

•

Contents page

•

Tables of statistical data

•

Diagrams or figures

•

Equations, formulae and calculations

•

Citations (which, if used, must be in the body of the written report*)

•

References (which, if used, must be in the footnotes/endnotes**)

•

Bibliography

•

Appendices

*Please note that citation is a shorthand method of making a reference in the body of the report, which is
then linked to the full reference in the bibliography.
**Please note that footnotes/endnotes may be used for references only. Definitions of terms and quotations,
if used, must be in the body of the work and are included in the word count.

Global politics guide

35

Syllabus content

Teacher guidance
With the teacher’s support, students should choose an engagement.
The teacher should approve the students’ engagement and political issue before work is started, to ensure
that these are suitable and allow access to all levels of the assessment criteria. It is highly advisable that
every student is supplied with a copy of the assessment criteria.
It is particularly important for teachers to take an active role in guiding students’ choice of engagement in
order to ensure that they are able to identify a political issue that can be explored through what students
suggest to do and that they are genuinely interested in this political issue.
The teacher should also guide students in the relevance and sufficiency of their research.
Throughout the engagement activity process, students and the teacher should engage in dialogue
supportive of the students’ work. The teacher may comment on students’ plans, including the scope of their
research, and the first draft of the written report as part of the learning process.

Ethical guidelines for the engagement activity
Students must adhere to the following global politics course ethical guidelines when undertaking their
engagement activity. They must show tact and sensitivity, respect confidentiality and acknowledge all
sources used.
•

Students and teachers must exercise judgment on which engagements may be suitable. This will
vary from one location to another. Under no conditions must the safety of the student or any other
participants in the activities be compromised.

•

Any data collected must be kept in a confidential and responsible manner and not divulged to any
other person.

•

Any activity that involves deception, involuntary participation or invasion of privacy, including the
inappropriate use of information and communication technology (ICT), email and the internet, must
be avoided.

•

Young children should not be used as participants. Interviews involving children need the written
consent of parent(s) or guardian(s), and students must ensure that parents are fully informed about
the nature of the activity. Where an activity is conducted with children in a school, the written
consent of the teachers concerned must also be obtained.

•

Students must avoid conducting research with any adult who is not in a fit state of mind and cannot
respond freely and independently.

•

Any activity that creates anxiety, stress, pain or discomfort for participants must not be permitted.

•

Participants and interviewees must be debriefed and given the right to withdraw their own personal
data and responses. Anonymity for each participant must be guaranteed, except for interviewees in
an elected or appointed government role or in a formal non-state actor role.

•

Acknowledging that some interviewees may not be in a position to or may not choose to respond
to questions freely and independently, students should, when suspecting this to be the case,
complement their primary research with other opinions.

•

Using relatives as a source in the engagement activity is not advisable, but if students should choose
to do so, this must be declared.

•

Teachers and students should exercise sensitivity to local and international cultures.

•

Students must not falsify or make up data.

36

Global politics guide

Syllabus content

Activities that are conducted online are subject to the same guidelines. Any data collected online must
be deleted once the research is complete. Such data must not be used for any purpose other than the
completion of the engagement activity.
Students found to have carried out unethical work will be awarded no marks for the engagement activity
component.

Links to creativity, activity, service
It is possible that there may be links between the engagement activity chosen by students and an activity
undertaken by them for CAS. This is an ideal opportunity for students to make such links between CAS
and their academic studies. However, it should be noted that although CAS activities can be both inspired
and informed by components of academic subjects, CAS activities must still be distinct from activities
undertaken as part of Diploma Programme assessment requirements.
Where an activity is very large and multifaceted, it may be that there is one element which could constitute
an appropriate engagement for global politics, and other elements which could be appropriate as activity
for CAS. However, the same elements may not be counted for both global politics and CAS. For example, a
student participating in a Model United Nations (MUN) simulation could nominate one particular element,
such as researching various political debating techniques, as his or her global politics engagement, and
nominate other elements of their MUN participation, such as leading their school delegation, for CAS.
Similarly, a student involved in a youth initiative in the local community could count examining the role of
the community council in empowering youth and canvassing their support for this particular project as his or
her global politics engagement, while documenting the participation in actual activities with youth for CAS.

HL extension: global political challenges
The HL extension gives students the opportunity to explore important global political challenges through a
case studies approach. HL students must study two of the following six topics.
1.

Environment

2.

Poverty

3.

Health

4.

Identity

5.

Borders

6.

Security

There is no additional prescribed content for the HL extension. For each of the two topics chosen students
must undertake a detailed case study, culminating in a 10-minute video recorded oral presentation. These
case studies provide an opportunity for students to conduct an in-depth analysis of complex political issues
in real-life situations. The approach also familiarizes students with the case study as an important method
of gaining knowledge in the social sciences and allows them to practise skills considered important for
students of the politics subject area, such as research and presentation skills. More information on the
assessment of the oral presentation is given in Guide > Internal assessment.
There are three components to the HL extension work: researching the case studies, preparing to present
them and actually presenting them. While students’ research may start from broad ideas related to the
selected global political challenges, students should gradually narrow down their focus on particular case
studies and political issues that can be effectively explored in the course of 10-minute presentations. Ten
minutes per case study is a short time, and it is the quality of the preceding research and presentation
preparation that determines how well this time is utilized.

Global politics guide

37

Syllabus content

Figure 4
Possible HL extension workflow

Researching the case study
The case study selected for each chosen topic should allow for a thorough and detailed exploration of a
global political challenge, in a particular real-life situation. The free choice of case studies is intended to
allow students to explore political issues that they find particularly interesting or particularly revealing. It
may be that students wish to explore local cases, or cases that are otherwise of particular personal interest.
Each case study selected and the political issue investigated therein should be contemporary, clearly
relevant and explicitly linked to one of the global challenges listed as well as to the core units of the course.
Students should ask themselves how each case they suggest to investigate relates to the wider context of
global politics and how they can bring the knowledge and understanding they have gained elsewhere in
the course to bear on the cases. The political issue selected for exploration should be focused and specific.
For example:
•

rather than a broad topic such as “water supply”, an appropriate case study and political issue would
be “the 2011 drought and the Yangtze river in China—viability of China’s water diversion plans”

•

rather than a broad topic such as “terrorism”, an appropriate case study and political issue would be
“the 2008 Mumbai bombings—motivations for terrorism in India”.

38

Global politics guide

Syllabus content

The following list indicates questions students should explore during their research. While researching, they
should already be thinking about connections between the discrete pieces of information they collect so as
to build towards an oral presentation.
1.

2.

3.

Data, background and political issues
•

What data exist on the case, how valid is the data analysed and to what extent is the data
contestable?

•

Who are the principal actors and stakeholders?

•

What is happening?

•

Which terms are central to understanding the case?

•

What are the indicators that this case is a global political challenge?

•

Which other similar cases are relevant for understanding this case?

•

Which political issues manifest themselves in the case? On which issue should I focus my
presentation?

Causes, impact and responses to the political issue
•

What factors are causing this situation?

•

What are the political, social and economic impacts of the issue at various levels of global politics
on various actors and stakeholders?

•

What are the responses to the issue at various levels of global politics by various actors and
stakeholders?

•

How do interpretations of the issue vary by actor and stakeholder?

•

What considerations influence how the issue will play out?

Reflection
•

How can I use the key concepts, theories, ideas and examples I have learned in the core units to
analyse this case and political issue?

•

In what ways is this case a manifestation of the chosen global political challenge?

•

Which wider issues or developments in global politics are relevant in understanding this case?

•

What is the particular significance of this case?

•

What other interpretations of or points of view on the case are possible?

Students’ research can be based on primary and secondary material, though the emphasis is likely to be
on secondary sources. Newspaper, magazine and journal articles, textbooks, carefully selected websites,
images and audio-visual materials are all legitimate secondary sources. Good research practice requires that
the sources represent a balance of views.
A coversheet for each presentation must be submitted along with the recording. The coversheet includes a
bibliography. All sources used in preparation of the presentation must be included in the bibliography.

Preparing for presenting the case study
Once they have completed sufficient research into the case and their selected political issue, students
should think about how they are going to present their case study. For each case study, a 10-minute oral
presentation, which is recorded as a video, is prepared.
The structure and format of the presentation are not prescribed. Therefore, students should plan carefully
and creatively how they will best engage their audience. In planning their presentations, students should

Global politics guide

39

Syllabus content

bear in mind that in addition to research skills, the HL extension aims to develop their skills to deliver a
thought-provoking and informative presentation to a professional audience. In the real world, professionals
may not base their presentations around a set of research prompts such as those given above; rather, they
would attempt to create an original and creative delivery of their arguments. With this in mind, students are
encouraged not to use the given questions for research as a set structure for their presentation. Clearly the
presentation needs to address the more factual aspects of the case, but this should occur when pertinent
to understanding the political issue rather than as a list at the beginning of the presentation. Given the
objectives of the task and the assessment criteria, the structure and format chosen should be such that
the presentation is centred on analysis and evaluation of the case and the political issue. This includes
establishing clear links to the core units and reflecting on the wider implications of the case.
Students should be particularly wary of the pitfall of focusing on the historical aspects of the case; the
analysis and evaluation should concentrate on contemporary aspects of the political issue.
The following general questions are likely to be helpful for students’ preparations.
•

How will I set the stage?

•

Which points and perspectives do I want to communicate?

•

How will I conclude?

As for many other larger pieces of work, it is likely to be helpful for them to formulate a central question,
closely linked to their chosen political issue that they attempt to answer in the course of their presentation.
A coversheet for each presentation must be submitted along with the recording. The coversheet includes a
written outline of the presentation.
Visual aids, such as PowerPoint® slides, are only permitted for showing visual information (for example,
tables, diagrams, maps, photos) and should be carefully employed only when they enhance the argument or
audience engagement. Students may use limited notes or prompt cards when delivering their presentations,
but the content may not be written out and read aloud.

Teacher guidance
Although it is recognized that the teacher and students are likely to have several one-to-one interactions
during the HL extension work, two individual meetings on each of students’ case studies are prescribed: one
before students start researching their case study and another before they start preparing for presenting it.
Students note down the outcomes of these meetings on a coversheet submitted along with the recording of
each presentation. The content of these individual meetings is flexible, but the following teacher guidance
is expected.
With the teacher’s support, students should choose two case studies of two global political challenges.
The teacher should approve students’ choice of case studies before work is started, to ensure that they are
suitable for investigation and allow access to all levels of the marking rubric. It is highly advisable that every
student is supplied with a copy of the marking rubric. Teacher help is particularly valuable at this early stage,
when students identify their political issues, the ways in which the cases they suggest to investigate are
instances of global political challenges and how they tie into the core units. The teacher should also guide
students in selection of appropriate sources.
Throughout the case study work, students and the teacher should engage in dialogue supportive of
students’ work. The teacher should help students in, and provide feedback on, development of their
presentation skills and discuss with students their ideas for how to present their case studies.
The teacher may comment once on students’ written outline for each presentation but may not edit it.
Each presentation may only be performed once for the video recording.

40

Global politics guide

Syllabus content

Topic 1: Environment
This topic provides an opportunity to explore political issues connected to the environment through a case
studies approach.
Many of the topics, political issues and key concepts encountered in the core units of the course are also
central to discussions of the environment. Many environmental problems transcend national boundaries,
and the activities of one country can have direct impact on multiple countries. Mitigation of, and responses
to, climate change and other such global environmental challenges involve and require international
political cooperation and action. The use of natural resources in the face of growing populations and
increasingly resource-heavy lifestyles across the globe raises many political issues—and is increasingly a
source of political tensions. The compatibility of economic growth and sustainable development is debated
at all levels of politics.

Learning outcomes
•

Knowledge and understanding of a specific case study and a specific political issue related to the
environment

•

Application of relevant key concepts, theories and ideas from the core units to analysis of the case

•

Evaluation of the case study from different perspectives and in the wider context of global politics

•

An experience of having carried out a self-directed, teacher-supported research process and
communicating the conclusions of this process through an oral presentation

Suggested examples
Students must undertake a detailed case study relating to the global political challenge presented by the
environment, and deliver an oral presentation focused on a political issue embedded in the case. The case
studies and political issues below are examples only.
•

Arctic melt—opportunities of and threats to regional political cooperation between Russia and
Northern European states

•

The 2011 drought and the Yangtze river in China—viability of China’s water diversion plans

•

Deforestation in the Gadchiroli district of India—constraints on correcting for an environmental
failure in a developing country

•

Shale gas production in the USA—influence of environmental NGOs on congressional decisionmaking

•

The carbon offsetting policy of airline A—the role of political decisions at different levels of global
politics to bring about such a policy

Global politics guide

41

Syllabus content

Topic 2: Poverty
This topic provides an opportunity to explore political issues connected to poverty through a case studies
approach.
Many of the topics, political issues and key concepts encountered in the four core units of the course are
also central to discussions of poverty; for example, the impact of globalization and economic integration
on poverty, or cooperation between states and non-state actors in initiatives to address poverty. There
are particularly strong links to the unit on development, with its emphasis on the concept of inequality.
However, experience of poverty can also be approached from a human rights perspective, and poverty
plays a significant role in some conflicts.

Learning outcomes
•

Knowledge and understanding of a specific case study and a specific political issue related to poverty

•

Application of relevant key concepts, theories and ideas from the core units to analysis of the case

•

Evaluation of the case study from different perspectives and in the wider context of global politics

•

An experience of having carried out a self-directed, teacher-supported research process and
communicating the conclusions of this process through an oral presentation

Suggested examples
Students must undertake a detailed case study relating to the global political challenge presented by
poverty, and deliver an oral presentation focused on a political issue embedded in the case. The case studies
and political issues below are examples only.
•

Child labour in the “Smokey Mountain” rubbish dump in Manila, the Philippines—effectiveness of a
local versus national political approach

•

Boko Haram and child soldiers—role of poverty in driving the phenomenon

•

Poverty within the Aboriginal community in Queensland, Australia—why do the state’s policies
continually fail?

•

“Relative poverty” in the UK—at which level of politics is this most effectively tackled?

•

The Global Poverty Project and the campaign “Live Below the Line”—the role of empathy in the fight
against poverty

42

Global politics guide

Syllabus content

Topic 3: Health
This topic provides an opportunity to explore political issues connected to health through a case studies
approach.
Many of the topics, political issues and key concepts encountered in the four core units of this course are
also central to discussions of health; for example, the function and impact of local and national initiatives
to improve public health compared with the role of global actors such as the World Health Organization
or international NGOs. Epidemics travel across borders and require international cooperation. Health is an
important determinant of quality of life, and the health issues from which people suffer in different parts of
the world are indicative of wider socio-economic developments.

Learning outcomes
•

Knowledge and understanding of a specific case study and a specific political issue related to health

•

Application of relevant key concepts, theories and ideas from the core units to analysis of the case

•

Evaluation of the case study from different perspectives and in the wider context of global politics

•

An experience of having carried out a self-directed, teacher-supported research process and
communicating the conclusions of this process through an oral presentation

Suggested examples
Students must undertake a detailed case study relating to the global political challenge presented by
health, and deliver an oral presentation focused on a political issue embedded in the case. The case studies
and political issues below are examples only.
•

Syrian refugees in Jordan—the role of different political actors in arranging health care provision in
refugee camps

•

HIV/AIDS in rural South Africa—to what extent are poverty and the spread/contamination of the
epidemic linked?

•

Drug addiction and access to health care in Florida—how are “quiet voices” heard in American
politics?

•

Leprosy in Nepal—efficacy of international NGOs versus governmental health care

•

Ebola outbreak in Liberia—the state’s consideration (or lack thereof) of civil liberties

Global politics guide

43

Syllabus content

Topic 4: Identity
This topic provides an opportunity to explore political issues connected to identity through a case studies
approach.
Many of the topics, political issues and key concepts encountered in the four core units of this course are
also central to discussions of identity. In a more interconnected, complex world, people become arguably
more conscious of, and interested in, their own identity, also in ways that have political implications. For
example, since 9/11 there has been increased attention on the significance of cultural and religious identity
in global politics. Women and ethnic minorities’ identity can be similarly political, with debates in many
societies about the appropriate line between the private and public spheres of life. The media coverage of
treatment of cases of genocide and ethnic violence in institutions of international justice point towards the
role identity can play in some of the most horrific conflicts of recent times. There are particularly strong links
between this topic and the unit on human rights.

Learning outcomes
•

Knowledge and understanding of a specific case study and a specific political issue related to identity

•

Application of relevant key concepts, theories and ideas from the core units to analysis of the case

•

Evaluation of the case study from different perspectives and in the wider context of global politics

•

An experience of having carried out a self-directed, teacher-supported research process and
communicating the conclusions of this process through an oral presentation

Suggested examples
Students must undertake a detailed case study relating to the global political challenge presented by
identity, and deliver an oral presentation focused on a political issue embedded in the case. The case studies
and political issues below are examples only.
•

Religion in Bhutan—role of identity politics in the peaceful evolution from absolutist monarchy to
democracy

•

Lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) marches in eastern Europe from Belgrade in 2010 to
present day—are attitudes changing? How and why?

•

Class identity in South Africa—how is the role of the working class changing in labour-related
politics?

•

Race and incarceration in the USA—what are the reasons for, and the effects of, racial profiling in
American policing?

•

National identity in Hungary—the Fidesz-led government’s use of national identity as a method to
rally public support for its policies

44

Global politics guide

Syllabus content

Topic 5: Borders
This topic provides an opportunity to explore political issues connected to borders through a case studies
approach.
Many of the topics, political issues and key concepts encountered in the four core units of this course are
also central to discussions of borders. Borders may be physical borders between countries, but they can
also be less concrete but equally influential borders of, say, social class, ethnicity or gender. Sometimes,
it is not the existence of borders that is problematic, but rather a lack thereof, such as could be argued
in the case of cross-border movement of capital or treatment of labour. Migration is closely linked to the
concept of globalization, as physical borders between nations are increasingly reduced. Immigration is a
controversial and topical issue in many countries, and political backlashes to immigration on the face of
changing and unstable economic conditions are widespread. Many conflicts have a dimension that has to
do with borders of various kinds, and often human rights are violated in crossing borders, as for example, in
human trafficking.

Learning outcomes
•

Knowledge and understanding of a specific case study and a specific political issue related to borders

•

Application of relevant key concepts, theories and ideas from the core units to analysis of the case

•

Evaluation of the case study from different perspectives and in the wider context of global politics

•

An experience of having carried out a self-directed, teacher-supported research process and
communicating the conclusions of this process through an oral presentation

Suggested examples
Students must undertake a detailed case study relating to the global political challenge presented by
borders, and deliver an oral presentation focused on a political issue embedded in the case. The case studies
and political issues below are examples only.
•

The 2014 Scottish referendum for independence—the role of various borders between England and
Scotland in strengthening the “yes” campaign

•

The USA–Mexico border fence—the effect of new migration legislation in the USA on the principles
and practice of operations on this border

•

Forced relocation and ancestral land conflict between the government and Bushmen in Botswana—
do claims emphasizing a different way of life hold any force in modern land conflicts?

•

Migration in Europe—the role of national versus regional (EU) policies in facilitating youth migration
from the south to the north

•

Gender borders—the role of Islam in shaping women’s rights in Egypt

Global politics guide

45

Syllabus content

Topic 6: Security
This topic provides an opportunity to explore political issues connected to security through a case studies
approach.
Many of the topics, political issues and key concepts encountered in the four core units of this course are also
central to discussions of security. For example, discussions of sovereignty, military power, wars between and
within states, arms proliferation and the activities of non-state actors all have clear links to security. There
are particularly strong links between this topic and the unit on peace and conflict. However, security also
has cultural, social and economic dimensions. Issues such as food, water and energy security are developing
increasingly concrete ramifications in global politics. Human rights violations can be viewed as attacks
on individuals’ fundamental sense of security. Furthermore, in an uncertain world, political actors may
sometimes try to benefit from people’s sense of insecurity.

Learning outcomes
•

Knowledge and understanding of a specific case study and a specific political issue related to security

•

Application of relevant key concepts, theories and ideas from the core units to analysis of the case

•

Evaluation of the case study from different perspectives and in the wider context of global politics

•

An experience of having carried out a self-directed, teacher-supported research process and
communicating the conclusions of this process through an oral presentation

Suggested examples
Students must undertake a detailed case study relating to the global political challenge presented by
security, and deliver an oral presentation focused on a political issue embedded in the case. The case studies
and political issues below are examples only.
•

Israel and Palestine—how has the acquisition of longer-range weapons by groups in the Gaza Strip
affected Israel’s security policy in the last 10 years?

•

The 2012 case of Joseph Kony in Uganda—to what extent can social media be a catalyst for social
change?

•

Counterterrorism legislation and civil liberties in the UK before and after the 2005 London
bombings—to what extent does breach of security “at home” affect security policies?

•

Territorial issues in Antarctica—why do far-away land areas matter?

•

The 2014 Hong Kong protests—what was at stake?

46

Global politics guide

Assessment

Assessment in the Diploma Programme

General
Assessment is an integral part of teaching and learning. The most important aims of assessment in the
Diploma Programme are that it should support curricular goals and encourage appropriate student
learning. Both external and internal assessments are used in the Diploma Programme. IB examiners mark
work produced for external assessment, while work produced for internal assessment is marked by teachers
and externally moderated by the IB.
There are two types of assessment identified by the IB.
•

Formative assessment informs both teaching and learning. It is concerned with providing accurate
and helpful feedback to students and teachers on the kind of learning taking place and the nature
of students’ strengths and weaknesses in order to help develop students’ understanding and
capabilities. Formative assessment can also help to improve teaching quality, as it can provide
information to monitor progress towards meeting the course aims and objectives.

•

Summative assessment gives an overview of previous learning and is concerned with measuring
student achievement.

The Diploma Programme primarily focuses on summative assessment designed to record student
achievement at, or towards the end of, the course of study. However, many of the assessment instruments
can also be used formatively during the course of teaching and learning, and teachers are encouraged
to do this. A comprehensive assessment plan is viewed as being integral with teaching, learning and
course organization. For further information, see the section “Programme standards and practices with
requirements for the Diploma Programme” in the IB document Programme standards and practices (2014).
The approach to assessment used by the IB is criterion-related, not norm-referenced. This approach to
assessment judges students’ work by their performance in relation to identified levels of attainment, and
not in relation to the work of other students. For further information on assessment within the Diploma
Programme, please refer to the publication Diploma Programme assessment: Principles and practice (2004,
updated 2010).
To support, teachers in the planning, delivery and assessment of the Diploma Programme courses, a
variety of resources can be found on the OCC or purchased from the IB store (store.ibo.org). Additional
publications such as specimen papers and markschemes, teacher support materials, subject reports and
grade descriptors can also be found on the OCC. Past examination papers as well as markschemes can be
purchased from the IB store.

Methods of assessment
The IB uses several methods to assess work produced by students.

Assessment criteria
Assessment criteria are used when the assessment task is open-ended. Each criterion concentrates on
a particular skill that students are expected to demonstrate. An assessment objective describes what

Global politics guide

47

Assessment in the Diploma Programme

students should be able to do, and assessment criteria describe how well they should be able to do it. Using
assessment criteria allows discrimination between different answers and encourages a variety of responses.
Each criterion comprises a set of hierarchically ordered level descriptors. Each level descriptor is worth one
or more marks. Each criterion is applied independently using a best-fit model. The maximum marks for each
criterion may differ according to the criterion’s importance. The marks awarded for each criterion are added
together to give the total mark for the piece of work.

Markbands
Markbands are a comprehensive statement of expected performance against which responses are judged.
They represent a single holistic criterion divided into level descriptors. Each level descriptor corresponds
to a range of marks to differentiate student performance. A best-fit approach is used to ascertain which
particular mark to use from the possible range for each level descriptor.

Analytic markschemes
Analytic markschemes are prepared for those examination questions that expect a particular kind of
response and/or a given final answer from students. They give detailed instructions to examiners on how to
break down the total mark for each question for different parts of the response.

Acknowledging the ideas or work of another
person
Coordinators and teachers are reminded that candidates must acknowledge all sources used in work
submitted for assessment. The following is intended as a clarification of this requirement.
Diploma Programme candidates submit work for assessment in a variety of media that may include audiovisual material, text, graphs, images and/or data published in print or electronic sources. If a candidate uses
the work or ideas of another person, the candidate must acknowledge the source using a standard style of
referencing in a consistent manner. A candidate’s failure to acknowledge a source will be investigated by the
IB as a potential breach of regulations that may result in a penalty imposed by the IB final award committee.
The IB does not prescribe which style(s) of referencing or in-text citation should be used by candidates; this
is left to the discretion of appropriate faculty/staff in the candidate’s school. The wide range of subjects,
three response languages and the diversity of referencing styles make it impractical and restrictive to insist
on particular styles. In practice, certain styles may prove most commonly used, but schools are free to
choose a style that is appropriate for the subject concerned and the language in which candidates’ work is
written. Regardless of the reference style adopted by the school for a given subject, it is expected that the
minimum information given includes: name of author, date of publication, title of source, and page numbers
as applicable.
Candidates are expected to use a standard style and use it consistently so that credit is given to all sources
used, including sources that have been paraphrased or summarized. When writing text a candidate must
clearly distinguish between his or her words and those of others by the use of quotation marks (or other
method, such as indentation) followed by an appropriate citation that denotes an entry in the bibliography.
If an electronic source is cited, the date of access must be indicated. Candidates are not expected to show
faultless expertise in referencing, but are expected to demonstrate that all sources have been acknowledged.
Candidates must be advised that for audio-visual material, text, graphs, images and/or data published in
print or in electronic sources that is not their own, they must also attribute the source. Again, an appropriate
style of referencing/citation must be used.

48

Global politics guide

Assessment in the Diploma Programme

Inclusive assessment arrangements
Inclusive assessment arrangements are available for candidates with assessment access requirements.
These arrangements enable candidates with diverse needs to access the examinations and demonstrate
their knowledge and understanding of the constructs being assessed.
The IB document Candidates with assessment access requirements (2009) provides details on all the inclusive
assessment arrangements available to candidates with learning support requirements. The IB document
Learning diversity within the International Baccalaureate programmes: Special educational needs within the
International Baccalaureate programmes (2010) outlines the position of the IB with regard to candidates
with diverse learning needs in the IB programmes. For candidates affected by adverse circumstances, the
IB documents General regulations: Diploma Programme (2014) and the Handbook of procedures for
the Diploma Programme provide details on access consideration.

Global politics guide

49

Assessment

Assessment outline—SL

First assessment 2017

Assessment component

Weighting

External assessment (3 hours)

75%

Paper 1 (1 h 15 min)

30%

Stimulus-based paper based on a topic from one of the four core units
Four compulsory short-answer/structured questions
(25 marks)
Paper 2 (1 h 45 min)

45%

Extended response paper based on the four core units
Students must write two essays from a choice of eight, each selected from a different
core unit.
(50 marks)

Internal assessment (20 hours)

25%

This component is internally assessed by the teacher and externally moderated by the
IB at the end of the course.
Engagement activity
A written report (2,000-word maximum) on a political issue explored through
engagement and research
(20 marks)

50

Global politics guide

Assessment

Assessment outline—HL

First assessment 2017

Assessment component

Weighting

External assessment (4 hours)

60%

Paper 1 (1 h 15 min)

20%

Stimulus-based paper on a topic from one of the four core units
Four compulsory short-answer/structured questions
(25 marks)
Paper 2 (2 h 45 min)

40%

Extended response paper based on the four core units
Students must write three essays from a choice of eight, each selected from a
different core unit.
(75 marks)

Internal assessment

40%

These components are internally assessed by the teacher and externally moderated
by the IB at the end of the course.
Engagement activity (20 hours)

20%

A written report (2,000-word maximum) on a political issue explored through
engagement and research
(20 marks)
HL extension: global political challenges (90 hours)

20%

Two video recorded oral presentations (10 minutes maximum each) of two case
studies chosen from two different HL extension topics
(20 marks)

Global politics guide

51

Assessment

External assessment

The following methods are used to assess students.
•

Detailed markschemes specific to each examination paper

•

Markbands

The markbands are published in this guide.
For paper 1, there are markbands and markschemes.
For paper 2, there are markbands and markschemes.
The markbands are related to the assessment objectives established for the global politics course and the
individuals and societies grade descriptors. The markschemes are specific to each examination.

Command terms
Command terms are used in examination questions to indicate depth of treatment. They are classified
according to assessment objective levels.
•

Assessment objective level 1 (AO1): Knowledge and understanding

•

Assessment objective level 2 (AO2): Application and analysis

•

Assessment objective level 3 (AO3): Synthesis and evaluation

•

Assessment objective level 4 (AO4): Use and application of appropriate skills

There is a progression in demand from AO1 to AO3, while AO4 terms are specific to particular skills.
Teachers and students must be familiar with these terms in order to understand the depth of treatment
required in examination questions.
Examination questions may use any command term from the assessment objective level specified in the
description of the assessment component, or a less demanding command term from a lower level. For
example, if the assessment objective level for a component is AO2, an examination question could contain
any of the command terms for AO2, such as “explain”, “distinguish”, “interpret” and so on. Alternatively,
the examination question could contain a command term from AO1, such as “describe”. However, a more
demanding command term such as “evaluate”, from a higher classification (AO3 in this case), cannot be used.
The command terms used in the global politics course within each assessment objective level are listed
in alphabetical order below. In the global politics course, the use and application of appropriate skills is
demonstrated as an integrated part of students’ answers and hence AO4 command terms are not used in
examination questions.

52

Global politics guide

External assessment

Definitions of these command terms are listed in Guide > Appendices > Glossary of command terms.
Assessment objective level

Command terms

Depth

AO1: Knowledge and
understanding

Define

These terms require students to learn
and comprehend the meaning of
information.

Describe
Identify
Outline

AO2: Application and analysis

Analyse
Distinguish
Explain
Suggest

AO3: Synthesis and evaluation

Compare
Compare and contrast
Contrast

These terms require students to use
their knowledge to explain actual
situations, and to break down ideas into
simpler parts and to see how the parts
relate.
These terms require students to
rearrange component ideas into a new
whole and make judgments based on
evidence or a set of criteria.

Discuss
Evaluate
Examine
Justify
To what extent

External assessment details
Paper 1
Duration: 1 hour 15 minutes at SL and HL
Weighting: 30% at SL; 20 % at HL
This paper is a stimulus-based paper on a topic taken from one of the four core units. Four stimuli are
presented, which may be written, pictorial or diagrammatic, and which link to one of the four core units.
Students must answer all four structured questions.
The same paper is set at both SL and HL.

Global politics guide

53

External assessment

The maximum mark for this paper is 25. The paper is marked using a paper-specific analytic markscheme
and for the fourth question, markbands are additionally used. The questions in this paper assess the
following objectives.
Question

Assessment objective
[number of marks]

The first question tests understanding of a source.
This can be demonstrated, for example, by identifying
the main political issue or viewpoint expressed in a
particular written source or by describing the political
information in a visual or table-based source.

AO1: Knowledge and understanding

The second question tests application of knowledge
to the context of a source/sources. This can be
demonstrated, for example, by explaining a term used
in a source or by explaining the topic dealt with in the
source. Students should primarily focus on the source/
sources but should also draw on other supporting
examples from their study of global politics, where
relevant.

AO2: Application and analysis

The third question tests comparison and/or
contrasting of the ideas/views expressed in two of the
sources. Students should focus on comparing and/or
contrasting points in the sources but may make use of
their wider study of global politics to provide context,
if relevant. Students should organize the material into
a clear, logical and coherent response. For the highest
marks, a detailed running comparison/contrast is
expected.

AO3: Synthesis and evaluation

The fourth question will test evaluation of sources and
contextual knowledge. Students should synthesize
and evaluate evidence from the sources and their
study of the prescribed content and key concepts of
the course. Students should organize the material into
a clear, logical and coherent response.

AO3: Synthesis and evaluation

54

[3 marks]

[4 marks]

AO4: Use and application of appropriate skills
[8 marks]

AO4: Use and application of appropriate skill
[10 marks]

Global politics guide

External assessment

Markbands for the fourth question
Marks
0

1–2

3–4

Level descriptor
The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
•

There is a very limited understanding of the demands of the question.

•

There is little relevant knowledge.

•

The response is mostly descriptive and may contain unsupported generalizations.

•

There is a limited understanding of the demands of the question, or the question is only
partially addressed.

•

Some knowledge is demonstrated, but this is not always relevant or accurate, and may
not be used appropriately or effectively.

•

Counterclaims, or different views on the question, are not identified.

•

The response shows an understanding of the demands of the question.

•

Knowledge is mostly accurate and relevant, and there is some limited synthesis of own
knowledge and source material.

•

Counterclaims, or different views on the question, are implicitly identified but are not
explored.

•

The response is focused and shows a good understanding of the demands of the
question.

•

Relevant and accurate knowledge is demonstrated, there is a synthesis of own
knowledge and source material, and appropriate examples are used.

•

Counterclaims, or different views on the question, are explored.

•

The response is clearly focused and shows a high degree of understanding of the
demands of the question.

•

Relevant and accurate knowledge is demonstrated, there is effective synthesis of own
knowledge and source material, with appropriate examples integrated.

•

Counterclaims, or different views on the question, are explored and evaluated.

5–6

7–8

9–10

Paper 2
Duration: 1 hour 45 minutes at SL; 2 hours and 45 minutes at HL
Weighting: 45% at SL; 40% at HL
This paper is an essay paper, with two questions set on each of the four core units. At least one of the
questions for each unit is firmly anchored in that unit, whereas the second question may open up for a more
cross-unit approach.
Conceptual understanding and ability to work with the key concepts of the course is particularly important
in this paper. Some questions use the key concepts of that particular unit. Still other questions draw on key
concepts from several units. Even where the key concepts are not explicitly mentioned in a question, students
should demonstrate a conceptual understanding of global politics. In their answers, students are invited to
draw on their understanding of any relevant political concepts, depending on the arguments they put forward.
Marks are awarded for demonstrating understanding of relevant political concepts and prescribed
content, making reference to specific relevant examples, justifying points and exploring and evaluating
counterclaims, or different views on the question.
The same paper is set at both SL and HL. SL students must answer two questions, each selected from a
different core unit. HL students must answer three questions, each selected from a different core unit.
Global politics guide

55

External assessment

The maximum mark for this paper is 50 marks at SL and 75 marks at HL. The paper is marked using generic
markbands and a paper-specific markscheme. The questions in this paper assess objectives AO1–AO4, and
questions are set using AO3 command terms.

Markbands for paper 2
Marks
0

The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

1–5

•

The response reveals limited understanding of the demands of the question.

•

The response is poorly structured, or where there is a recognizable essay structure
there is minimal focus on the task.

•

There is little relevant knowledge, and examples are either lacking or not relevant.

•

The response is mostly descriptive.

•

The response indicates some understanding of the demands of the question.

•

There is some evidence of an attempt to structure the response.

•

Some relevant knowledge is present, and some examples are mentioned but they are
not developed or their relevance to arguments is not clear.

•

The response demonstrates limited understanding of the key concepts of the course.

•

There is limited justification of main points.

•

Counterclaims, or different views on the question, are not considered.

•

The demands of the question are understood and mostly addressed but the
implications are not considered.

•

There is a clear attempt to structure the response.

•

The response is mostly based on relevant and accurate knowledge of global politics,
and relevant examples are given and support arguments.

•

The response demonstrates some understanding of the key concepts of the course.

•

Many of the main points are justified and arguments are largely coherent.

•

Some counterclaims, or different views on the question, are considered.

•

The demands of the questions are understood and addressed, and most implications
are considered.

•

The response is well-structured.

•

The response demonstrates relevant and accurate knowledge and understanding of
global politics, and relevant examples are used in a way that strengthens arguments.

•

The response demonstrates a good grasp of the key concepts of the course.

•

All or nearly all of the main points are justified and arguments are coherent.

•

Counterclaims, or different views on the question, are explored.

•

A very well-structured and balanced response that addresses the demands and
implications of the question.

•

Comprehensive knowledge and in-depth understanding of global politics is applied in
the response consistently and effectively, with examples integrated.

•

The response demonstrates a very good grasp of the key concepts of the course.

•

All of the main points are justified. Arguments are clear, coherent and compelling.

•

Counterclaims, or different views on the question, are explored and evaluated.

6–10

11–15

16–20

21–25

56

Level descriptor

Global politics guide

Assessment

Internal assessment

Purpose of internal assessment
Internal assessment is an integral part of the course and is compulsory for both SL and HL students. It
enables students to demonstrate the application of their skills and knowledge, and to pursue their personal
interests, without the time limitations and other constraints that are associated with written examinations.
The internal assessment requirements of global politics at SL and at HL are briefly as follows.
•

At SL and HL, students undertake an engagement through which they explore a political issue of
personal interest experientially. They then produce a written report, in which they explain what
they learned about the political issue through the engagement, and analyse and evaluate the issue,
supported by additional complementary research.

•

At HL, students additionally conduct in-depth research into two case studies of two global political
challenges and prepare an oral presentation on chosen political issues in the case studies. The
presentations are video recorded.

More information on the content of the internal assessment tasks is given in Guide > Syllabus > Syllabus
content.

Time allocation
Internal assessment is an integral part of the global politics course, contributing 25% to the final assessment
in the SL course and 40% to the final assessment in the HL course.
It is recommended that a total of approximately 20 hours of teaching time should be allocated to the
engagement activity at SL and HL. This should include time for:
•

the teacher to explain to students the requirements of the engagement activity and the ethical
guidelines for the engagement activity

•

students to work on the engagement activity and ask questions

•

consultation between the teacher and each student

•

reviewing and monitoring progress, and checking authenticity.

The teaching time allocated for the HL extension work is 90 hours. This includes time for:
•

the teacher to explain to students the requirements of the HL extension

•

the whole class to familiarize themselves with the six global political challenges

•

students to do their research

•

students to do practice presentations

•

the prescribed individual meetings between the teacher and students to review and monitor
progress, and to check authenticity

•

video recording and assessing the presentations.

Global politics guide

57

Internal assessment

Guidance and authenticity
The written report submitted for the engagement activity at SL and HL and the video recorded presentations
submitted for the HL extension must be the student’s own work. However, it is not the intention that
students should decide upon a title or topic and be left to work on the internal assessment components
without any further support from the teacher. The teacher should play an important role during both
the planning stage and the period when the student is working on the internally assessed work. It is the
responsibility of the teacher to ensure that students are familiar with:
•

the requirements of the type of work to be internally assessed

•

the ethical guidelines for the engagement activity at SL and HL

•

the assessment criteria for the engagement activity at SL and HL and the marking rubric for the
HL extension; students must understand that the work submitted for assessment must address
the criteria and the rubric effectively.

Teachers and students must discuss the internally assessed work. Students should be encouraged to initiate
discussions with the teacher to obtain advice and information, and students must not be penalized for
seeking guidance. As part of the learning process, teachers should read and give advice to students on
one draft of the written report for the engagement activity and on one draft of the written outline for each
HL presentation. The teacher should provide oral or written advice on how the work could be improved, but
not edit the draft or the outline. For the written report for the engagement activity, the next version handed
to the teacher must be the final version for submission; for the HL extension, each presentation must only
be performed once, for the video recording.
It is the responsibility of teachers to ensure that all students understand the basic meaning and significance
of concepts that relate to academic honesty, especially authenticity and intellectual property. Teachers
must ensure that all student work for assessment is prepared according to the requirements and must
explain clearly to students that the internally assessed work must be entirely their own. Where collaboration
between students is permitted, it must be clear to all students what the difference is between collaboration
and collusion.
All work submitted to the IB for moderation or assessment must be authenticated by a teacher, and must
not include any known instances of suspected or confirmed academic misconduct. Each student must
confirm that the work is his or her authentic work and constitutes the final version of that work. Once a
student has officially submitted the final version of the work, it cannot be retracted. The requirement to
confirm the authenticity of work applies to the work of all students, not just the sample work that will be
submitted to the IB for the purpose of moderation. For further details refer to the IB publications Academic
honesty, The Diploma Programme: From principles into practice and the relevant articles in General regulations:
Diploma Programme.
Authenticity may be checked by discussion with the student on the content of the work, and scrutiny of one
or more of the following.
•

The student’s initial proposals

•

The first draft of the written report for the engagement activity and the written outline of each
HL presentation

•

The references cited

•

The style of writing compared with work known to be that of the student

•

The analysis of the written work by a web-based plagiarism detection service

•

The style of delivery of the oral presentations compared with delivery known to be characteristic of
the student

58

Global politics guide

Internal assessment

Different political issues must be studied for the requirements of the engagement activity, the HL extension
and a potential extended essay students may choose to write in global politics.
Group engagements may be undertaken by students. However, each student must study a different
political issue and individually write up his or her own written report. Group work is not permitted for the
HL extension.

Engagement activity
Duration: 20 hours
Weighting: 25% at SL; 20% at HL

Written report on a political issue explored through engagement
and research
Students are required to write a maximum 2,000-word written report in which they explain what they
learned about their chosen political issue through their engagement, and analyse and evaluate the
issue, supported by additional complementary research. The requirements of the task are the same
at both SL and HL. The maximum mark for the written report is 20 marks and it is assessed using
assessment criteria.

Using assessment criteria
For the engagement activity, a number of assessment criteria have been identified. Each assessment
criterion has level descriptors describing specific achievement levels, together with an appropriate range
of marks. The level descriptors concentrate on positive achievement, although for the lower levels failure to
achieve may be included in the description.
Teachers must judge the written report at SL and at HL against the criteria using the level descriptors.
•

The same assessment criteria are provided for SL and HL.

•

The aim is to find, for each criterion, the descriptor that conveys most accurately the level attained by
the student, using the best-fit model. A best-fit approach means that compensation should be made
when a piece of work matches different aspects of a criterion at different levels. The mark awarded
should be one that most fairly reflects the balance of achievement against the criterion. It is not
necessary for every single aspect of a level descriptor to be met for that mark to be awarded.

•

When assessing a student’s work, teachers should read the level descriptors for each criterion until
they reach a descriptor that most appropriately describes the level of the work being assessed. If a
piece of work seems to fall between two descriptors, both descriptors should be read again and the
one that more appropriately describes the student’s work should be chosen.

•

Where there are two or more marks available within a level, teachers should award the upper marks
if the student’s work demonstrates the qualities described to a great extent; the work may be close
to achieving marks in the level above. Teachers should award the lower marks if the student’s work
demonstrates the qualities described to a lesser extent; the work may be close to achieving marks in
the level below.

•

Only whole numbers should be recorded; partial marks (fractions and decimals) are not acceptable.

•

Teachers should not think in terms of a pass or fail boundary, but should concentrate on identifying
the appropriate descriptor for each assessment criterion.

Global politics guide

59

Internal assessment

•

The highest level descriptors do not imply faultless performance but should be achievable by a
student. Teachers should not hesitate to use the extremes if they are appropriate descriptions of the
work being assessed.

•

A student who attains a high achievement level in relation to one criterion will not necessarily
attain high achievement levels in relation to the other criteria. Similarly, a student who attains a low
achievement level for one criterion will not necessarily attain low achievement levels for the other
criteria. Teachers should not assume that the overall assessment of the students will produce any
particular distribution of marks.

•

It is recommended that the assessment criteria be made available to students.

Assessment criteria for the written report
Criterion A: Identification of issue and justification (4 marks)
•

Is the political issue explored through the engagement identified?

•

Is there a clear explanation of why this particular engagement and political issue are of interest to the
student?

•

Is there a clear link between the engagement and political issue on one hand and course content on
the other hand?
Marks

Level descriptor

0

The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

1–2

The political issue raised by the engagement is implied but not explicitly identified.
There is some limited explanation of why the student chose this engagement. There is
some link between the engagement and course content.

3–4

The political issue explored through the engagement is clearly and explicitly identified.
There is a clear explanation of why this engagement and political issue are of interest
to the student. There is a clear link between the engagement and political issue on one
hand and course content on the other hand.

Criterion B: Explanation of the engagement (4 marks)
•

Is the description of the engagement and of what the student actually did clear and relevant for his or
her chosen political issue?

•

Is there a clear explanation of the ways in which the student’s experiences informed his or her
understanding of the political issue?
Marks

60

Level descriptor

0

The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

1–2

There is a description of the engagement and of what the student actually did. There
is some limited explanation of what the student learned about global politics from
undertaking the engagement.

3–4

The description of the engagement and of what the student actually did is clear and
relevant for his or her chosen political issue. There is a clear explanation of the ways in
which the student’s experiences informed his or her understanding of the political issue.

Global politics guide

Internal assessment

Criterion C: Analysis of issue (6 marks)
•

To what extent does the student analyse the political issue?

•

To what extent does the student justify his or her main points?
Marks

Level descriptor

0

The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

1–2

There is some attempt at analysis of the political issue but the response is largely
descriptive. Few of the main points are justified.

3–4

There is some critical analysis of the political issue but this analysis lacks depth. The
response is more descriptive than analytical. Some of the main points are justified.

5–6

The political issue is explored in depth, using the key concepts of the course where
relevant, and the response contains clear critical analysis. All, or nearly all, of the main
points are justified.

Criterion D: Synthesis and evaluation (6 marks)
•

To what extent does the student synthesize his or her experiences and research in the discussion of
the political issue?

•

To what extent does the student show evidence of evaluation, underpinned by his or her experiences
and adequate research, to allow multiple perspectives on the political issue?
Marks

Level descriptor

0

The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

1–2

There are limited links between ideas. There are no conclusions, or the conclusions are
not relevant.

3–4

There are some links between the student’s experiences and more theoretical
perspectives on the political issue. Conclusions are stated but are not entirely consistent
with the evidence presented. Multiple perspectives are acknowledged, where relevant.

5–6

The student’s experiences and more theoretical perspectives are synthesized so that an
integrated and rich treatment of the political issue ensues. Conclusions are clearly stated,
balanced and consistent with the evidence presented. There is evidence of evaluation of
the political issue from multiple perspectives.

Global politics guide

61

Internal assessment

HL extension
Duration: 90 hours
Weighting: 20%

Oral presentation of political issues in two case studies
HL students are required to present an oral analysis of selected political issues in two case studies of two global
political challenges that they have researched in depth. The two, maximum 10-minute-long presentations
are video recorded. The maximum mark for each presentation is 10 marks, and so the maximum mark for this
component is 20 marks. The presentations are assessed using a global impression marking rubric.

Please note:
The two case studies may not be from the same HL extension topic. There is no expectation of a link
between the case studies and any such link is not rewarded.
The maximum length of the presentations is 10 minutes per case study. Moderators will not watch
an analysis beyond 10 minutes.
The recording must focus on the student delivering the presentation.
The presentations must take place under teacher supervision, either in a separate session or in a
classroom setting. They may not be recorded outside of the school setting, for example at home.
Visual aids, such as PowerPoint® slides, are only permitted for showing visual information (for
example tables, diagrams, maps, photos) and should be carefully employed only when they enhance
the argument or audience engagement; such information, if used, must be clearly visible on the
video recording, as it is not submitted to the IB.
Students may use limited notes/prompt cards when delivering their presentation, but the content
may not be written out, whether on paper, digital devices or as part of any visual presentation on
screen, and may not be read aloud.
The teacher may comment once on students’ written outline for each presentation, but may not edit
this. Each presentation may only be performed once, for the video recording.
Each presentation must be recorded in one take: the camera may not be stopped in the middle of a
presentation and the presentation must not be edited in any way.

Using a global impression marking rubric
For the HL extension, a global impression marking rubric has been developed around the following
overarching question.
“Does the student present a clear, focused and balanced analysis of the case study, highlighting a global
political challenge?”
The assessment of the presentations is a process of holistic or global judgment around this overarching
question rather than an analytical process of totalling the assessment of separate criteria. The rubric has five
level descriptors describing specific achievement levels, allowing for variation in student performance across
different aspects of the presentations. Because of the requirement for a reasonable mark range along which
to differentiate student performance, each level descriptor corresponds to a range of two different marks.

62

Global politics guide

Internal assessment

Teachers must judge the presentations against the global impression marking rubric using the level
descriptors.
•

These level descriptors are designed to be used as a whole and operate at a global level.

•

Different levels suggest typical performance, and there are always exceptions requiring individual or
case by case judgments.

•

The aim is to find the level descriptor that conveys most accurately the level attained by the student,
using a best-fit approach. A best-fit approach in the case of global impression marking means that
the performance of students can be uneven across different aspects of the assessment, but it is the
overall impression that is most important.

•

Within a level descriptor, teachers should award the upper mark if the student’s work demonstrates
the qualities described to a great extent; the work may be close to achieving marks in the level above.
Teachers should award the lower marks if the student’s work demonstrates the qualities described to
a lesser extent; the work may be close to achieving marks in the level below.

•

Only whole numbers should be recorded; partial marks (fractions and decimals) are not acceptable.

•

The highest descriptor levels do not imply faultless performance and teachers should not hesitate to
use the extremes if they are appropriate descriptions of the work being assessed.

How teachers and moderators will make a judgment about the level of performance attained in a particular
student response will vary. They may make a decision in the course of watching a presentation and then
confirm this after the video ends, or they may register their observations as they watch and give the mark in
retrospect. In either case, the described levels are to be seen as global and holistic rather than a checklist of
necessary characteristics.
It is recommended that the global impression marking rubric be made available to students.
Moderators will check students’ coversheets carefully, although no marks are awarded for these.

Global politics guide

63

Internal assessment

Marking rubric for the oral presentations
Does the student present a clear, focused and balanced analysis of the case study, highlighting a
global political challenge?
Not level 1
0 marks
Level 1
Rudimentary
1–2 marks

The student demonstrates rudimentary knowledge of the case study.

Level 2
Basic
3–4 marks

The student demonstrates a basic understanding of the case study.

Level 3
Satisfactory
5–6 marks

The student demonstrates a satisfactory understanding of a political issue raised by
the case study, but the analysis lacks some clarity, focus and balance.

Level 4
Very good
7–8 marks

The student demonstrates a very good understanding of a political issue raised by
the case study, with a generally clear and focused analysis and an acknowledgement
of different perspectives on the issue.

The student treats the case study in isolation.

The student attempts to link the case study to the wider context of global politics,
but these links are not always effective.

The student makes effective connections between the case study and the wider
context of global politics.
Level 5
Excellent
9–10 marks

The student demonstrates an excellent understanding of a political issue raised by
the case study, with a clear and focused analysis and an exploration of different
perspectives on the issue.
The student analyses the case study within the wider context of global politics,
illustrating effectively the significance of the case.

64

Global politics guide

Approaches to teaching and learning

Approaches to teaching and learning in the Diploma
Programme global politics course

Approaches to teaching and learning in the Diploma Programme refer to deliberate strategies, skills and
attitudes that permeate the teaching and learning environment. These approaches and tools are intrinsically
linked with the IB learner profile attributes, enhance student learning and assist student preparation for the
Diploma Programme assessment and beyond.
The five approaches to learning (developing thinking skills, social skills, communication skills, selfmanagement skills and research skills) along with the six approaches to teaching (teaching that is inquirybased, conceptually focused, contextualized, collaborative, differentiated and informed by assessment)
encompass the key values and principles that underpin the IB pedagogy. More advice and support on
these approaches to teaching and learning can be found in this section of this subject guide, and also
under In practice. Additionally, a suite of materials on approaches to teaching and learning in the Diploma
Programme is available on the OCC. The guidance given below builds on these resources as well as on
experiences from global politics pilot classrooms.

Teaching based on inquiry
The idea behind inquiry-based teaching in IB programmes is to develop students’ natural curiosity together
with the skills of self-management, thinking, research and collaborative learning so that they can become
motivated and autonomous lifelong learners.
The most significant aspect of inquiry-based teaching is that students are actively engaged in their own
learning, constructing their own understandings of interesting issues and phenomena. In a classroom
where inquiry-based teaching is happening, there is much interaction between students and between
them and the teacher. The teacher’s primary role in such a setting is to promote questions and to facilitate
the learning process. Students have a degree of freedom to make decisions about how to proceed in their
learning process, which most often progresses from the concrete towards the abstract. Examples of forms
of inquiry-based teaching include structured inquiry, open inquiry, experiential learning, problem-based
learning and case-based learning.
In the global politics course, teachers have perhaps a greater opportunity to make room for inquiry-based
teaching than in many other DP subjects, given that content is prescribed in a more open-ended manner.
This is not coincidental: global politics is intended as a course where students are encouraged to examine
significant issues of our time and issues they personally care about in an in-depth and meaningful way.
Therefore, inquiry-based teaching suits global politics particularly well. Through their inquiries, students
can learn not only about the factual aspects of political issues but delve into the background, motivation,
assumptions and implications of political beliefs, reasoning and decisions. While doing so, they come
to appreciate that no one obvious right answer to their inquiry is likely but that political issues are
Global politics guide

65

Approaches to teaching and learning in the Diploma Programme global politics course

contentious, and different answers have different strengths and weaknesses based on the perspectives
and approaches chosen.
Examples of inquiry-based teaching approaches and activities in global politics include:
•

individual and group research tasks, case studies and presentations based on students’ own
questions and areas of interest

•

shorter inquiries stimulated by news and current events

•

games in which students pursue various strategies in order to make progress with respect to a
political issue but where the outcomes of the game are dependent on other players’ moves

•

role plays in which students act as political decision-makers, advisors or commentators, perhaps over
a period of time, treating different yet interdependent political issues

•

TOK-style thinking with students in order to develop their collective curiosity

•

readings and videos that emphasize the contested nature of knowledge and hence encourage
questioning

•

engagement with political actors through guest speakers and visits.

Teaching focused on conceptual understanding
An important motivation for conceptually focused teaching in IB programmes is to help students build the
ability to engage with significant ideas about human beings and the world. Equally valuably, discussion of
the “big ideas” behind a topic can help students get to the heart of why they are learning what they are
learning.
To appreciate the role of concepts in building lasting and significant understandings, it is helpful to think of
concepts as the building blocks of students’ cognitive frameworks. When they are learning at a conceptual
level, students are integrating new knowledge into their existing understandings. They see how seemingly
discrete topics are connected and are ready to transfer their learning to new contexts. A subject emerges
for them in a holistic light. In a classroom where conceptually focused teaching is happening, there is
continuous movement between facts and what they mean, with students being used to ask why the facts
matter as a natural part of their learning process.
In global politics, concepts are the main organizing elements of the course. Selected key concepts to which
instruction regularly returns can help students make sense of a rapidly changing, interconnected world.
When teachers approach the various political issues examined in the course from the perspective of what
they add to students’ understanding of, say, power, equality, sustainability or peace, students’ learning
becomes more meaningful. The issues as such are of interest. However, there is recognition that underlying
a specific issue is some wider and important phenomenon the issue says something about. With such an
aspiration, learning becomes connected, transferable and deeper.
Examples of conceptually focused teaching approaches and activities in global politics include:
•

thematic, regional or case study-based pathways through the course, integrating relevant key
concepts at appropriate points

•

explicit discussion of different, conflicting and complementary understandings of the key concepts as
a natural part of the study of examples, case studies and students’ own experiences

•

activities designed to engage students on the key concepts in implicit ways, such as activating preexisting knowledge of the concepts, illustrating them with examples and bringing them to life with
the help of experiments

•

building up students’ own understanding of the key concepts through, for example, a “concept diary”
in which students record their evolving understanding of the concepts, along with examples that
contribute to these understandings

66

Global politics guide

Approaches to teaching and learning in the Diploma Programme global politics course

•

identification of the key concepts in readings and other materials studied

•

integration of the key concepts into formative and summative assessment tasks.

Teaching developed in local and global contexts
As young individuals and as members of local and global communities, students make sense of the world
through their life experiences and the world around them. IB programmes emphasize contextualized
teaching because the more students can relate to their learning, the more likely they are to engage with
it. Equally valuably, through enabling students to see the applications of their learning, contextualized
teaching, like conceptually focused teaching, helps students to get to the heart of why they are learning
what they are learning.
In order to appreciate the role of contexts for relevant learning, it is helpful to think of contexts as students’
frames of reference. When they are learning in a contextualized way, students are grounding abstract
ideas and new information in familiar real-life situations. In a classroom in which contextualized teaching
is happening, concepts and theories are related to accessible and meaningful examples, illustrations and
stories, which again inform further conceptual and theoretical understandings.
In the global politics course, contemporary examples, case studies and real-life engagement with political
issues bring the course to life. Students learn that political issues are dynamic, varied and present at all levels
of global social organization: global issues have local ramifications and local issues are often a part of a
wider phenomenon. Which issues are relevant to study varies by when the course is taught, and where and
what the students’ particular interests are. Teachers’ free choice of examples in the core units and students’
free choice of engagements in the engagement activity and case studies in the HL extension make room for
each global politics course and experience to be different, reflecting the contextual nature of politics.
Examples of contextualized teaching approaches and activities in global politics include:
•

discussion of news and current events with the help of the key concepts and theories learned, such as
a weekly news briefing

•

more extensive, research-based analyses of contemporary political issues debated at various levels of
global politics

•

drawing on students’ backgrounds, experiences and interests in teaching

•

individual students becoming “experts” on a territory, issue or theme over time, with teaching
drawing on the “experts” in appropriate situations for the benefit of the whole class

•

participation in a virtual student community in which the same political issues are explored by
students from different parts of the world

•

real-life learning experiences, and especially the engagement activity

•

the HL extension case study research of two global political challenges.

Teaching focused on effective teamwork and collaboration
IB programmes acknowledge that learning is a social activity. Students and teachers come together, each
with unique life experiences, beliefs, ideas, strengths and weaknesses. They then interact with the intention
of making progress with, ideally, shared objectives and do so within a specific cultural context. Learning is
the result of these complex interactions. An important aspect of the learning process is regular feedback
from students to teachers on what they have and have not yet understood. Concrete and constructive
feedback from teachers to students on performance is similarly crucial for learning.
In the global politics course, developing an awareness of multiple perspectives is at the heart of the course.
Though many perspectives on political issues can be discovered from literature and explored through
individual thinking, an appreciation for the contextual and deeply held nature of political beliefs and
positions can perhaps be most effectively developed through social learning. When students practise to

Global politics guide

67

Approaches to teaching and learning in the Diploma Programme global politics course

listen and respond to one another respectfully and critically, they not only discover a variety of perspectives
other than their own but may also start developing a civic spirit, experiencing that dialogue and negotiation
can lead to reasonable compromises and shared understandings. Teamwork and collaboration model how
political issues are ideally solved in the real world and teach students to draw on each other’s strengths.
Students can gradually learn to appreciate that different perspectives and ways of being in the world do not
necessarily mean an inability to work together but are on the contrary critical for progress.
Examples of teaching approaches and activities focused on effective teamwork and collaboration in global
politics include:
•

establishing clear expectations of mindful behaviour from the start—and following up with
consequences if these are not met

•

modelling listening and interaction skills

•

teamwork in mixed language and cultural groups, either in changing or permanent teams

•

formalized peer support in team work and collective responsibility for the team’s final product

•

games, simulations, role plays, debates and other collaborative learning activities with perhaps
different interests, starting points and natural roles—but shared goals

•

regular, concrete and constructive feedback on learning from students to teacher and on
performance from teacher to students

•

collaborations with other teachers and actors outside school as “experts” on specific themes of global
politics.

Teaching differentiated to meet the needs of all learners
IB programmes promote equal access to the curriculum for all learners. Differentiation entails planning for
student differences through the use of a variety of teaching approaches, implementing a variety of learning
activities and making a variety of formats and modes of exploring knowledge and understanding available
to students. It also involves identifying, with each student, the most effective strategies for them to develop,
pursue and achieve realistic and motivational learning goals. In the context of an IB education, special
consideration often needs to be given to students’ language backgrounds and skills. Affirming students’
identity and valuing their prior knowledge are important aspects of treating students as unique individuals
and helping them develop holistically as young human beings.
In the global politics course, a multiplicity of perspectives can often be found most naturally in the
classroom. Different students are interested in different political issues, their beliefs and positions on the
same political issue differ, and they are differently placed to help their classmates understand a certain
key concept, theory, idea or example. Teachers should identify and draw on this richness in their planning
and teaching. The engagements in the engagement activity and the case studies in the HL extension give
room for differentiated learning and more individualized guidance. A challenge of differentiation may be
how to best help all students acquire a conceptual understanding of global politics—arguably the most
challenging aspect of the course, especially for second-language learners and concretely oriented learners.
Here, a variety of ways of approaching the key concepts throughout the course is likely to be most helpful, in
addition to being alert from the beginning on which students are struggling with the conceptual layers and
how they could be helped on a more individual or small-group basis.
Examples of teaching approaches and activities differentiated to meet the needs of all learners in global
politics include:
•

a variety of teaching approaches, learning activities and examples, with the intention to reach each
student meaningfully several times over the course

•

options and choice in approaches and activities, such as freedom to explain terms or key concepts in
ways that resonates with the student, freedom to select sources in research, freedom to use preferred
media and methods to communicate learning

68

Global politics guide

Approaches to teaching and learning in the Diploma Programme global politics course

•

drawing on students’ backgrounds, experiences and interests in teaching

•

individual students becoming “experts” on a territory, issue or theme over time, with teaching
drawing on the “experts” in appropriate situations for the benefit of the whole class

•

individualized support in research-based work.

Teaching informed by assessment (formative and summative)
Assessment plays a crucial role in IB programmes in supporting learning and in measuring learning. Formal
Diploma Programme assessments are based on course aims and objectives and, therefore, effective teaching
to the course requirements also ensures effective teaching to the summative assessment requirements.
Formative assessments developed by teachers are tools and processes to improve student learning. Here,
feedback is most effective as a two-way channel: students learn how they are doing, and teachers learn
what students understand, struggle with, and find engaging—or not worthwhile. In addition to assessment
tasks, such feedback can be provided more informally, through for example individual and group feedback
sessions, surveys, polls or brief reflections.
Examples of teaching approaches and activities informed by assessment in global politics include:
•

assessments modelling summative global politics assessments

•

active use of global politics assessment criteria, markbands and available past papers and sample
student answers throughout the course

•

self-assessments, oral feedback from fellow students, feedback to the teacher

•

detailed feedback throughout the learning process to individual students, tracking development of
student-specific issues

•

attention in teaching to areas of “general confusion”, such as returning briefly to topics that were not
understood and doing so through a different approach, modelling answers, debriefing with students
after assessments and activities.

Thinking skills
IB programmes pride themselves on giving students opportunities to develop their thinking skills and an
awareness of themselves as thinkers and learners. Being “thinkers” is one of the IB learner profile attributes,
and is defined in terms of exercising initiative in applying thinking skills critically and creatively to recognize
and approach complex problems, and make reasoned, ethical decisions.
Thinking skills consist of a large number of related skills. In the Diploma Programme, particular emphasis
is placed on skills such as metacognition, reflection, critical thinking, creative thinking, and transfer.
Metacognition, or control over one’s cognitive processes of learning, can be thought of as a foundation
for developing other thinking skills. When practising metacognition, students think about the ways in
which they process information, find patterns, build conceptual understandings, and remember key facts
and ideas. Once they become aware that they are using a variety of techniques and strategies to perform
even the most basic learning tasks, students can be encouraged to consider if there are more effective or
efficient ways to achieve the same learning, try out these new ways and evaluate them. Similarly, reflection
is a thinking skill that plays a critical role in improving learning. When practising reflection, students think
about the success, value or otherwise of their learning. The Diploma Programme course aims, assessment
objectives and assessment tasks place a premium on higher order thinking skills, such as critical thinking,
creative thinking and transfer.
In the global politics course, the thinking skills described above are practised continuously; in fact, one way
to view the subject is as a space where students can learn to think about the world they inhabit in richer and
deeper ways. While metacognition and reflection are skills that teachers need to consciously build into the
learning routines of the course, critical thinking, creative thinking and transfer are emphasized in the set-up
of the global politics curriculum and assessment. Working with the global politics course on a conceptual

Global politics guide

69

Approaches to teaching and learning in the Diploma Programme global politics course

level and exploring political issues through a variety of perspectives and approaches exposes students to
many thoughts. Many thoughts require sorting and evaluation, and spark further new ideas. For example,
while working with the same key concept or political issue on a global, national and community levels,
students connect related ideas, recognize that the “story” may look very different (depending upon which
actors are the focus) and develop an ethical response. While thinking through such matters, they engage in
critical thinking, creative thinking and transfer of thoughts from one area of global politics to another.
Examples of approaches and activities that develop students’ thinking skills in global politics include:
•

starting learning sequences with activities that engage students’ minds, such as activating their
pre-existing views on contentious issues, visual thinking, thinking through analogies, think-pair-share
activities

•

closing learning sequences similarly, such as mapping learning to key concepts, writing newspaper
type headlines to capture the essence of an idea, engaging in the routine “I used to think ... now I think”

•

establishing connections between global politics and news, current events and life outside the
classroom

•

ensuring a variety of perspectives in learning materials

•

establishing rigorous expectations on written and oral reactions to readings and helping students
construct arguments

•

using active learning, such as simulations, games, role plays and debates, where students need to
“think on the go”, followed by debriefing and reflection.

Communication skills
Communication skills are not only important in IB programmes for success in school disciplines but are also
an essential part of a wider positive dynamic in the learning community: they help to form and maintain
good relationships between students, and between students and adults. Furthermore, being able to
communicate well contributes to the development of students’ self-confidence and enhances their future
prospects, as communication skills are a critical ingredient of success in working life.
Communication skills consist of a cluster of different skills and forms of communication. The ability to
listen and understand various spoken messages, to read and understand diverse written texts and other
forms of media, and to respond clearly and convincingly in spoken, written and digital form are all part
of how students and human beings reach outside themselves. Some of these forms of communication
are independent of era and culture, but interacting in and with the digital space is a significant part of
communication and social interaction for most students. Often collaborative in nature and with
much creative potential, online activities present exciting opportunities for development of students’
communication skills through engagement with new, previously inconceivable tasks.
In the global politics course, all of the above mentioned communication skills are practised. Examination of
complex political issues invites dialogue, discussion and debate, but also requires reflective engagement
with arguments and views expressed in academic literature, popular opinion and news. When students
write and present on political issues, ideas and concepts, their own arguments and beliefs are clarified.
Essays, reports, shorter writing tasks and oral presentations are often the assessable end outcome of a
learning sequence, and make up students’ summative assessment in global politics.
Examples of approaches and activities that develop students’ communication skills in global politics include:
•

practising various oral communication techniques, such as Socratic discussions, seminars, student-led
discussions, formal debates, a classroom practice where students are required to respond to a point
just made

•

group and individual presentations, using a variety of presentation formats, with an emphasis for HL
students on the type of concise argument delivery required in the HL extension work

70

Global politics guide

Approaches to teaching and learning in the Diploma Programme global politics course

•

purposeful use of digital tools in enriching understanding of global politics and improving
communication and feedback in the class community, such as virtual learning environments, polls,
data tools, expert talks, student created videos

•

workshop-style writing classes for various writing styles, with an emphasis on conceptual essays

•

enabling students to practise taking on roles through, for example, role plays and games, followed by
reflection on the reality, benefits and drawbacks of roles in global politics and in social life in general.

Social skills
Closely related to communication skills are social skills, whose importance in IB programmes, perhaps even
more than that of communication skills, has to do with the development of the learner as a whole and the
value of a community for learning. A starting point for developing students’ social skills is to acknowledge
that people differ greatly in terms of their degree of introversion or extroversion and that these differences
should be respected. Similarly, different cultures have different expectations on appropriate behaviours
in social situations. To be able to understand the perspectives of others, to form good relationships and to
regulate one’s own emotions and behaviour are at the heart of many of the IB learner profile attributes and
the IB’s aspiration to develop international-minded students. School, being such a formative community
in young people’s lives, can play a significant part in the development of their social and emotional skills.
Arguably, helping students to appreciate their contributions to the “human project” and connecting these
with others’ contributions is the most valuable life skill education can contribute towards.
From the perspective of learning, the ability to collaborate is a particularly important social skill. The role of
and potential for collaboration in global politics is addressed above in the sub-section “Teaching focused on
effective teamwork and collaboration”.

Self-management skills
In addition to practising life in relation to others, IB learners also need to learn to persevere and be
emotionally stable as individuals. Often, of course, these two processes go hand in hand, as membership
and support of a community is critical for individual well-being. Learning to manage themselves is important
for students in a demanding educational programme like the IB programmes, as well as a highly helpful
competency in their later, potentially quite fast-paced lives.
Self-management skills consist of organization skills, such as setting goals and managing time and tasks
effectively, and affective skills, such as managing one’s state of mind, motivation and resilience. Like other
learning skills, self-management skills can be modelled and practised. For DP students, time management
is often a particularly pertinent organization skill. Strategies for improving time management include
breaking down assignments into achievable steps and timelining each step, planning revision and study
plans for tests and examinations, and building study timetables. An important aspect of such strategies is
not only what they factually do with students’ use of time but that they give students a perception of greater
control over their time. Affective self-management skills, in turn, enable students to gain some control over
their mood, their motivation, and their ability to deal with setbacks and difficulties. A school environment
where students feel they have a degree of autonomy and self-direction and where they do not need to get
things right the first time, setting of challenging but not too difficult objectives, and even psychological
techniques, such as mindfulness training, can all support the development of students’ affective skills.
In the global politics course, students face a more open-ended course than in many other DP subjects, and
need to come to terms with this open-endedness. On one hand, they have a wonderful opportunity to focus
on issues of particular interest to them, which can be highly motivational. On the other hand, they must
conduct their inquiries in the context of the course framework, always returning to the key concepts and
remembering to move on so as to ensure coverage of all course requirements. Teachers, of course, guide
them in this process. The subject matter of global politics can teach students much about affective skills, as
they study inspirational individuals at all levels of global politics.

Global politics guide

71

Approaches to teaching and learning in the Diploma Programme global politics course

Examples of approaches and activities that develop students’ self-management skills in global politics
include:
•

establishing clear deadlines, managing expectations and specifying consequences if these are not
met

•

consistent attention to study techniques, such as time management, note-taking, mind mapping,
digital behaviour

•

student choice on when they wish to seek teacher or peer support

•

self-reflection on progress, such as start-stop-continue, use of tracking tools for longer term
assignments, written reflections

•

offering of voluntary, additional activities.

Research skills
Research skills are a central element of the inquiry-based pedagogy of IB programmes. While good research
skills have always been at the heart of academic endeavour, the availability of digital resources and the
explosion in the amount of information easily accessible to students make the development of research
skills a particularly pertinent part of today’s education. Also, learning to work in an academically honest way
and respecting others’ intellectual contributions is an important aspect of learning in all IB programmes.
Fundamental research skills include formulating focused and precise research questions, appraising sources,
recording, analysing, evaluating and synthesizing information, and presenting and evaluating results. These
are as critical skills to a digital era research as they have always been. However, research today requires much
more validating, comparing and contrasting available information, and narrowing down the volume of data
into a manageable quantity and to what is relevant. Though confident in browsing and communicating
online, students often lack the information literacy skills they need for the kind of effective and self-directed
research they are expected to do as part of their inquiries.
In the global politics course, students have ample and excellent opportunities to practise their research
skills. A course in current affairs where the key concepts, theories and ideas are grounded in local and
global examples, students need to engage in varied research, depending on the type and geography
of the political issue they examine for any given task. They get exposed to various types of media and
encounter more and less reliable sources. The summative assessment tasks of the course and the types of
learning activities that lend themselves well to learning about dynamic and continuously evolving political
issues require engagement with the world through research; there is no stationary body of global politics
knowledge that could be studied from a textbook. The self-selected case studies of the HL extension are one
of the best opportunities in the Diploma Programme to do in-depth research, as are, of course, extended
essays in global politics.
Examples of approaches and activities that develop students’ research skills in the global politics course
include:
•

teacher modelling effective research skills and solid academic honesty practices

•

individual research-based essays, papers, reports and presentations, initially with much guidance on
aspects such as finding, using and referencing appropriate sources

•

group research tasks in which each student studies one aspect of a full phenomenon and compiling
this as a resource booklet for students at the end of the exercise

•

preparatory and ongoing research for simulations, games, debates, role plays, and the engagement
activity completed for internal assessment.

72

Global politics guide

Appendices

Glossary of command terms

Command terms for global politics
Students should be familiar with the following key terms and phrases used in examination questions, which
are to be understood as described below. Although these terms will be used frequently in examination
questions, other terms may be used to direct students to present an argument in a specific way.
Command
term

Assessment
objective level

Definition

Analyse

AO2

Break down in order to bring out the essential elements or structure.

Compare

AO3

Give an account of the similarities between two (or more) items or
situations, referring to both (all) of them throughout.

Compare and
contrast

AO3

Give an account of similarities and differences between two (or more)
items or situations, referring to both (all) of them throughout.

Contrast

AO3

Give an account of the differences between two (or more) items or
situations, referring to both (all) of them throughout.

Define

AO1

Give the precise meaning of a word, phrase, concept or physical
quantity.

Describe

AO1

Give a detailed account.

Discuss

AO3

Offer a considered and balanced review that includes a range of
arguments, factors or hypotheses. Opinions or conclusions should be
presented clearly and supported by appropriate evidence.

Distinguish

AO2

Make clear the differences between two or more concepts or items.

Evaluate

AO3

Make an appraisal by weighing up the strengths and limitations.

Examine

AO3

Consider an argument or concept in a way that uncovers the
assumptions and interrelationships of the issue.

Explain

AO2

Give a detailed account including reasons or causes.

Identify

AO1

Provide an answer from a number of possibilities.

Justify

AO3

Give valid reasons or evidence to support an answer or conclusion.

Outline

AO1

Give a brief account or summary.

Suggest

AO2

Propose a solution, hypothesis or other possible answer.

To what extent AO3

Consider the merits or otherwise of an argument or concept. Opinions
and conclusions should be presented clearly and supported with
appropriate evidence and sound argument.

Global politics guide

73

