Language A: language and literature guide
First assessment 2021Language A: language and literature guide
First assessment 2021
Published February 2019
Published on behalf of the International Baccalaureate Organization, a not-for-profit 
educational foundation of 15 Route des Morillons, 1218 Le Grand-Saconnex, Geneva, 
Switzerland by the
International Baccalaureate Organization (UK) Ltd  
Peterson House, Malthouse Avenue, Cardiff Gate  
Cardiff, Wales CF23 8GL  
United Kingdom  
Website: ibo.org
© International Baccalaureate Organization 2019
The International Baccalaureate Organization (known as the IB) offers four high-quality 
and challenging educational programmes for a worldwide community of schools, aiming 
to create a better, more peaceful world. This publication is one of a range of materials 
produced to support these programmes.
The IB may use a variety of sources in its work and checks information to verify accuracy 
and authenticity, particularly when using community-based knowledge sources such as 
Wikipedia. The IB respects the principles of intellectual property and makes strenuous 
efforts to identify and obtain permission before publication from rights holders of all 
copyright material used. The IB is grateful for permissions received for material used 
in this publication and will be pleased to correct any errors or omissions at the earliest 
opportunity.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the IB’s prior written 
permission, or as expressly permitted by the Rules for use of IB Intellectual Property .
IB merchandise and publications can be purchased through the IB Store  (email: sales@
ibo.org ). Any commercial use of IB publications (whether fee-covered or commercial) 
by third parties acting in the IB’s ecosystem without a formal relationship with the IB 
(including but not limited to tutoring organizations, professional development providers, 
educational publishers and operators of curriculum mapping or teacher resource digital 
platforms etc) is prohibited and requires a subsequent written license from the IB. License 
requests should be sent to copyright@ibo.org . More information can be obtained on the 
IB public website .
Diploma Programme
Language A: language and literature guide
International Baccalaureate , Baccalauréat International , Bachillerato Internacional   
and IB logos are registered trademarks of the International Baccalaureate Organization.IB learner profile I
profile IB learner p
arner profile IB lea
ile IB learner profi
IB learner profile I
er profile IB learne
© International Bac calaur eate Or ganiza tion 2017
International Bac calaur eate® | Bac calaur éat International® | Bachiller ato Internacional®
The IB learner pro/f_ile represents 10 attributes valued by IB World Schools. We believe these attributes, and others 
like them, can help individuals and groups become responsible members of local, national and global communities.We nurture our curiosity, developing skills for inquiry and 
research. We know how to learn independently and with others. 
We learn with enthusiasm and sustain our love of learning 
throughout life.
We develop and use conceptual understanding, exploring 
knowledge across a range of disciplines. We engage with issues 
and ideas that have local and global signi/f_icance. 
We use critical and creative thinking skills to analyse and take 
responsible action on complex problems. We exercise initiative in 
making reasoned, ethical decisions.
We express ourselves con/f_idently and creatively in more than one 
language and in many ways.  We collaborate eﬀectively, listening 
carefully to the perspectives of other individuals and groups.
We act with integrity and honesty, with a strong sense of 
fairness and justice, and with respect for the dignity and rights 
of people everywhere. We take responsibility for our actions 
and their consequences.We critically appreciate our own cultures and personal histories, 
as well as the values and traditions of others. We seek and evaluate 
a range of points of view, and we are willing to grow from the 
experience.
We show empathy, compassion and respect. We have a 
commitment to service, and we act to make a positive diﬀerence 
in the lives of others and in the world around us.
We understand the importance of balancing diﬀerent aspects of 
our lives /emdash.capintellectual, physical, and emotional/emdash.cap to achieve 
well-being for ourselves and others. We recognize our interde-
pendence with other people and with the world in which we live.
We thoughtfully consider the world and our own ideas and expe-
rience. We work to understand our strengths and weaknesses in 
order to support our learning and personal development.We approach uncertainty with forethought and determination; 
we work independently and cooperatively to explore new ideas 
and innovative strategies. We are resourceful and resilient in the 
face of challenges and change.IB learner profile
The aim of all IB programmes is to develop internationally minded people who, recognizing their common 
humanity and shared guardianship of the planet, help to create a better and more peaceful world.
As IB learners we strive to be:THE IB LEARNER PROFILEIB mission statement
The International Baccalaureate aims to develop inquiring, knowledgeable and caring young people who 
help to create a better and more peaceful world through intercultural understanding and respect.
To this end the organization works with schools, governments and international organizations to develop 
challenging programmes of international education and rigorous assessment.
These programmes encourage students across the world to become active, compassionate and lifelong 
learners who understand that other people, with their differences, can also be right.IB learner profile I
profile IB learner parner profile IB leaile IB learner profiIB learner profile Ier profile IB learne
© International Bac calaur eate Or ganiza tion 2017
International Bac calaur eate® | Bac calaur éat International® | Bachiller ato Internacional®
The IB learner pro/f_ile represents 10 attributes valued by IB World Schools. We believe these attributes, and others 
like them, can help individuals and groups become responsible members of local, national and global communities.We nurture our curiosity, developing skills for inquiry and 
research. We know how to learn independently and with others. 
We learn with enthusiasm and sustain our love of learning 
throughout life.
We develop and use conceptual understanding, exploring 
knowledge across a range of disciplines. We engage with issues 
and ideas that have local and global signi/f_icance. 
We use critical and creative thinking skills to analyse and take 
responsible action on complex problems. We exercise initiative in 
making reasoned, ethical decisions.
We express ourselves con/f_idently and creatively in more than one 
language and in many ways.  We collaborate eﬀectively, listening 
carefully to the perspectives of other individuals and groups.
We act with integrity and honesty, with a strong sense of 
fairness and justice, and with respect for the dignity and rights 
of people everywhere. We take responsibility for our actions 
and their consequences.We critically appreciate our own cultures and personal histories, 
as well as the values and traditions of others. We seek and evaluate 
a range of points of view, and we are willing to grow from the 
experience.
We show empathy, compassion and respect. We have a 
commitment to service, and we act to make a positive diﬀerence 
in the lives of others and in the world around us.
We understand the importance of balancing diﬀerent aspects of 
our lives /emdash.capintellectual, physical, and emotional/emdash.cap to achieve 
well-being for ourselves and others. We recognize our interde-
pendence with other people and with the world in which we live.
We thoughtfully consider the world and our own ideas and expe-
rience. We work to understand our strengths and weaknesses in order to support our learning and personal development.We approach uncertainty with forethought and determination; we work independently and cooperatively to explore new ideas and innovative strategies. We are resourceful and resilient in the face of challenges and change.IB learner profile
The aim of all IB programmes is to develop internationally minded people who, recognizing their common 
humanity and shared guardianship of the planet, help to create a better and more peaceful world.
As IB learners we strive to be:THE IB LEARNER PROFILEIntroduction 1
Purpose of this document 1
The Diploma Programme 2
Nature of the subject 6
Aims 14
Assessment objectives 15
Assessment objectives in practice 16
Syllabus 18
Syllabus outline 18
Syllabus content 19
Assessment 31
Assessment in the Diploma Programme 31
Assessment outline—SL 33
Assessment outline—HL 34
External assessment 35
Internal assessment 52
Approaches to teaching and approaches to learning 60
Approaches to teaching and approaches to learning in studies in language and literature 60
Appendices 67
Glossary of command terms 67
Bibliography 69
Contents
Language A: language and literature guide
This  publication  is intended  to guide  the planning,  teaching  and  assessment  of the subject  in schools. 
Subject teachers are the primary audience, although it is expected that teachers will use the guide to inform 
students and parents about the subject.
This  guide  can be found  on the subject  page  of the programme  resource  centre  at resources.ibo.org , a 
password-protected  IB website  designed  to support  IB teachers.  It can also  be purchased  from  the IB store 
at store.ibo.org .
Additional resources
Additional  publications  such  as specimen  papers  and  markschemes,  teacher  support  materials,  subject 
reports  and  grade  descriptors  can also  be found  on the programme  resource  centre.  Past  examination 
papers as well as markschemes can be purchased from the IB store.
Teachers are encouraged to check the programme resource centre for additional resources created or used 
by other  teachers.  Teachers  can provide  details  of useful  resources,  for example:  websites,  books,  videos, 
journals or teaching ideas.
Acknowledgment
The IB wishes  to thank  the educators  and  associated  schools  for generously  contributing  time  and 
resources to the production of this guide.
First assessment 2021
Introduction
Purpose of this document
1 Language A: language and literature guide
The Diploma  Programme  (DP)  is a rigorous  pre-university  course  of study  designed  for students  in the 
16 to 19 age range.  It is a broad-based  two-year  course  that  aims  to encourage  students  to be 
knowledgeable  and  inquiring,  but also  caring  and  compassionate.  There  is a strong  emphasis  on 
encouraging  students  to develop  intercultural  understanding,  open-mindedness,  and  the attitudes 
necessary for them to respect and evaluate a range of points of view.
The Diploma Programme model
The course  is presented  as six academic  areas  enclosing  a central  core  (see  figure  1). It encourages  the 
concurrent  study  of a broad  range  of academic  areas.  Students  study  two  modern  languages  (or a modern 
language  and  a classical  language),  a humanities  or social  science  subject,  an experimental  science, 
mathematics and one of the creative arts. It is this comprehensive range of subjects that makes the Diploma 
Programme  a demanding  course  of study  designed  to prepare  students  effectively  for university  entrance. 
In each  of the academic  areas  students  have  flexibility  in making  their  choices,  which  means  they  can 
choose subjects that particularly interest them and that they may wish to study further at university.
Figure 1
The Diploma Programme model
Introduction
The Diploma Programme
2 Language A: language and literature guide
Choosing the right combination
Students are required to choose one subject from each of the six academic areas, although they can, 
instead  of an arts  subject,  choose  two  subjects  from  another  area.  Normally,  three  subjects  (and  not 
more  than  four)  are taken  at higher  level  (HL),  and  the others  are taken  at standard  level  (SL).  The IB 
recommends 240 teaching hours for HL subjects and 150 hours for SL. Subjects at HL are studied in greater 
depth and breadth than at SL.
At both levels, many skills are developed, especially those of critical thinking and analysis. At the end of the 
course,  students’  abilities  are measured  by means  of external  assessment.  Many  subjects  contain  some 
element of coursework assessed by teachers.
The core of the Diploma Programme model
All Diploma Programme students participate in the three elements that make up the core of the model.
Theory  of knowledge  (TOK)  is a course  that  is fundamentally  about  critical  thinking  and  inquiry  into  the 
process of knowing rather than about learning a specific body of knowledge. The TOK course examines the 
nature  of knowledge  and  how  we know  what  we claim  to know.  It does  this by encouraging  students  to 
analyse  knowledge  claims  and  explore  questions  about  the construction  of knowledge.  The task  of TOK  is 
to emphasize  connections  between  areas  of shared  knowledge  and  link them  to personal  knowledge  in 
such  a way  that  an individual  becomes  more  aware  of his or her own  perspectives  and  how  they  might 
differ from others.
Creativity, activity, service (CAS) is at the heart of the Diploma Programme. CAS enables students to live out 
the IB learner  profile  in real and  practical  ways,  to grow  as unique  individuals  and  to recognise  their  role  in 
relation  to others.  Students  develop  skills,  attitudes  and  dispositions  through  a variety  of individual  and 
group  experiences  that  provides  students  opportunities  to explore  their  interests  and  express  their 
passions,  personalities  and  perspectives.  CAS  complements  a challenging  academic  programme  in a 
holistic way, providing opportunities for self-determination, collaboration, accomplishment and enjoyment.
The three strands of CAS are:
• Creativity—exploring and extending ideas leading to an original or interpretive product or 
performance
• Activity—physical exertion contributing to a healthy lifestyle
• Service—collaborative and reciprocal engagement with the community in response to an authentic 
need.
The extended  essay,  including  the world  studies  extended  essay,  offers  the opportunity  for IB students  to 
investigate  a topic  of special  interest,  in the form  of a 4,000-word  piece  of independent  research.  The area 
of research undertaken is chosen from one of the students’ six Diploma Programme subjects, or in the case 
of the inter-disciplinary  World  Studies  essay,  two  subjects,  and  acquaints  them  with  the independent 
research  and  writing  skills  expected  at university.  This  leads  to a major  piece  of formally  presented, 
structured  writing,  in which  ideas  and  findings  are communicated  in a reasoned  and  coherent  manner, 
appropriate  to the subject  or subjects  chosen.  It is intended  to promote  high-level  research  and  writing 
skills,  intellectual  discovery  and  creativity.  An authentic  learning  experience,  it provides  students  with  an 
opportunity to engage in personal research on a topic of choice, under the guidance of a supervisor.
Approaches to teaching and approaches to 
learning
The approaches to teaching and approaches to learning across the Diploma Programme refers to deliberate 
strategies,  skills  and  attitudes  which  permeate  the teaching  and  learning  environment.  These  approaches 
and tools, intrinsically linked with the learner profile attributes, enhance student learning and assist student 
preparation  for the Diploma  Programme  assessment  and  beyond.  The aims  of the approaches  to teaching 
and approaches to learning in the Diploma Programme are to:The Diploma Programme
3 Language A: language and literature guide
• empower teachers as teachers of learners as well as teachers of content
• empower teachers to create clearer strategies for facilitating learning experiences in which students 
are more meaningfully engaged in structured inquiry and greater critical and creative thinking
• promote both the aims of individual subjects (making them more than course aspirations) and linking 
previously isolated knowledge (concurrency of learning)
• encourage students to develop an explicit variety of skills that will equip them to continue to be 
actively engaged in learning after they leave school, and to help them not only obtain university 
admission through better grades but also prepare for success during tertiary education and beyond
• enhance further the coherence and relevance of the students’ Diploma Programme experience
• allow schools to identify the distinctive nature of an IB Diploma Programme education, with its blend 
of idealism and practicality.
The five approaches  to learning  (developing  thinking  skills,  social  skills,  communication  skills,  self-
management  skills  and  research  skills)  along  with  the six approaches  to teaching  (teaching  that  is inquiry-
based,  conceptually  focused,  contextualised,  collaborative,  differentiated  and  informed  by assessment) 
encompass the key values and principles that underpin IB pedagogy.
For further  guidance  on approaches  to teaching  and  approaches  to learning  in language  A: language  and 
literature please see the section “Approaches to teaching and learning in studies in language and literature” 
of this guide.
The IB mission statement and the IB learner profile
The Diploma  Programme  aims  to develop  in students  the knowledge,  skills  and  attitudes  they  will need  to 
fulfil  the aims  of the IB, as expressed  in the organization’s  mission  statement  and  the learner  profile. 
Teaching  and  learning  in the Diploma  Programme  represent  the reality  in daily  practice  of the 
organization’s educational philosophy.
Academic honesty
Academic  honesty  in the Diploma  Programme  is a set of values  and  behaviours  informed  by the attributes 
of the learner  profile.  In teaching,  learning  and  assessment,  academic  honesty  serves  to promote  personal 
integrity,  engender  respect  for the integrity  of others  and  their  work,  and  ensure  that  all students  have  an 
equal opportunity to demonstrate the knowledge and skills they acquire during their studies.
All coursework—including  work  submitted  for assessment—is  to be authentic,  based  on the student’s 
individual  and  original  ideas  with  the ideas  and  work  of others  fully  acknowledged.  Assessment  tasks  that 
require  teachers  to provide  guidance  to students  or that  require  students  to work  collaboratively  must  be 
completed in full compliance with the detailed guidelines provided by the IB for the relevant subjects.
For further  information  on academic  honesty  in the IB and  the Diploma  Programme,  please  consult  the IB 
publications  Academic  honesty  in the IB educational  context,  Academic  honesty  in the Diploma  Programme, 
The  Diploma  Programme:  From  principles  into  practice  and  General  regulations:  Diploma  Programme . Specific 
information  regarding  academic  honesty  as it pertains  to external  and  internal  assessment  components  of 
this Diploma Programme subject can be found in this guide.
Acknowledging the ideas or work of another 
person
Coordinators  and  teachers  are reminded  that  candidates  must  acknowledge  all sources  used  in work 
submitted for assessment. The following is intended as a clarification of this requirement.
Diploma  Programme  candidates  submit  work  for assessment  in a variety  of media  that  may  include  audio-
visual material, text, graphs, images and/or data published in print or electronic sources. If a candidate uses 
the work  or ideas  of another  person,  the candidate  must  acknowledge  the source  using  a standard  style  of 
referencing  in a consistent  manner.  A candidate’s  failure  to acknowledge  a source  will be investigated  by The Diploma Programme
4 Language A: language and literature guide
the IB as a potential  breach  of regulations  that  may  result  in a penalty  imposed  by the IB final  award 
committee.
The IB does not prescribe which style(s) of referencing or in-text citation should be used by candidates; this 
is left to the discretion  of appropriate  faculty/staff  in the candidate’s  school.  The wide  range  of subjects, 
three  response  languages  and  the diversity  of referencing  styles  make  it impractical  and  restrictive  to insist 
on particular  styles.  In practice,  certain  styles  may  prove  most  commonly  used,  but schools  are free  to 
choose  a style  that  is appropriate  for the subject  concerned  and  the language  in which  candidates’  work  is 
written.  Regardless  of the reference  style  adopted  by the school  for a given  subject,  it is expected  that  the 
minimum  information  given  includes:  name  of author,  date  of publication,  title  of source,  and  page 
numbers as applicable.
Candidates  are expected  to use a standard  style  and  use it consistently  so that  credit  is given  to all sources 
used,  including  sources  that  have  been  paraphrased  or summarized.  When  writing  text  candidates  must 
clearly  distinguish  between  their  words  and  those  of others  by the use of quotation  marks  (or other 
method, such as indentation) followed by an appropriate citation that denotes an entry in the bibliography. 
If an electronic  source  is cited,  the date  of access  must  be indicated.  Candidates  are not expected  to show 
faultless  expertise  in referencing,  but are expected  to demonstrate  that  all sources  have  been 
acknowledged.  Candidates  must  be advised  that  audio-visual  material,  text,  graphs,  images  and/or  data 
published  in print  or in electronic  sources  that  is not their  own  must  also  attribute  the source.  Again,  an 
appropriate style of referencing/citation must be used.
Learning diversity and learning support 
requirements
Schools  must  ensure  that  equal  access  arrangements  and  reasonable  adjustments  are provided  to 
candidates  with  learning  support  requirements  that  are in line with  the IB documents  Candidates  with 
assessment access requirements and Learning diversity and inclusion in IB programmes. The Diploma Programme
5 Language A: language and literature guide
Studies in language and literature in the Diploma 
Programme
All three  courses  in studies  in language  and  literature  are designed  for students  from  a wide  variety  of 
linguistic  and  cultural  backgrounds,  who  have  experience  of using  the language  of the course  in an 
educational  context.  The focus  of the study  developed  in each  of the subjects  varies  depending  on their 
individual characteristics.
The language  profile  of students  taking  these  courses  will vary,  but their  receptive,  productive  and 
interactive  skills  should  be strong  and  the expectation  is that  the course  will consolidate  them  further. 
Students are expected to develop their proficiency, fluency and linguistic range, and in particular to acquire 
the vocabulary  appropriate  to the analysis  of texts.  They  will also  deepen  their  understanding  of a wide 
variety  of concepts  explored  through  literary  and  non-literary  texts  in order  to interpret,  analyse,  evaluate 
and then communicate this understanding in clear, organized and developed products.
The three  studies  in language  and  literature  courses  each  have  their  own  identity  and  are designed  to 
support  future  academic  study  or career  related  paths  by developing  social,  aesthetic  and  cultural  literacy, 
as well  as improving  language  competence  and  communication  skills.  For each  course,  the syllabus  and 
assessment  requirements  are identical  for all languages  offered.  The teaching  and  assessment  of any 
particular studies in language and literature course will be conducted in that language.
All three  studies  in language  and  literature  courses  explore  elements  of language,  literature  and 
performance.  Each  also  focuses  on the relationships  between  texts,  readers  and  writers;  on the range  and 
functions  of texts  across  geographical  space  and  historical  time;  and  on aspects  of intertextuality.  Within 
this framework, each course has its own emphases.
Language  is crucial  to all three  courses,  but is treated  more  broadly  in the language  A: language  and 
literature  course.  Literary  texts  are the sole  focus  of the language  A: literature  course  and  the literature  and 
performance  course,  while  the language  A: language  and  literature  course  examines  both  literary  and  non-
literary  texts.  Finally,  while  performance  is an explicit  component  of the literature  and  performance  course, 
student  production  and  the performativity  of textual  creation,  analysis  and  response  are elements  in all 
three courses.
The study  of literary,  non-literary,  visual  and  performance  texts  provides  a focus  for understanding  how 
meaning is constructed within belief or value systems, and how it is negotiated across multiple perspectives 
generated  by single  or multiple  readers.  Thinking  critically  about  texts,  as well  as responding  to, producing 
or performing  them,  leads  to an understanding  of how  language  sustains  or challenges  ways  of thinking 
and  being.  The study  additionally  builds  an awareness  that  all texts  may  be understood  in relation  to their 
form,  content,  purpose,  audience  and  their  associated  contexts,  such  as social,  historical  and  cultural 
circumstances
Note:  Expectations of language usage, of level of analysis and of critical reflection are the same across the 
three courses.
All three  studies  in language  and  literature  courses  emphasise  the centrality  of performance,  encouraging 
teachers  and  students  to consider  the range  of ways  in which  literary  texts  in different  forms  can be 
performed. In doing so, they will explore the dramatic nature of literary texts in different forms, and the way 
writers  employ  voices,  speech  and  sound  in them,  as well  as dramatic  structures.  Teaching  and  learning 
activities could involve embracing live and recorded performances of texts, or adaptation of texts, as well as 
employing performance approaches in the classroom where appropriate.
Introduction
Nature of the subject
6 Language A: language and literature guide
Some ways in which performance may be applied to literary forms other than drama include examining:
• the performative nature of narrative and dialogue in the novel, and of voices and speakers in poetry
• the use of rhythm and sound in many texts in different forms, and in poetry in particular
• the relationships between written and oral forms in literature; between the drama script and the 
performed play, between poetry and music, and between fiction and storytelling
• the relationship between written texts and dramatic adaptations and transformations of those texts, 
for instance in the adaptation of narrative texts of all kinds to film, television and the stage, and in live 
readings of poetry and fiction.
To fulfil the requirements of the DP, students must study one of the three courses in the studies in language 
and literature group. To be awarded a bilingual diploma, two studies in language and literature courses can 
be taken, each in a different language.
Both  the language  A: literature  course  and  the language  A: language  and  literature  course  are offered  at 
standard  level  (SL) and  higher  level  (HL).  Literature  and  performance,  which  is an interdisciplinary  subject 
that links studies in language and literature and The arts, is only available as an SL course.
Language A: literature
Students  will focus  exclusively  on literary  texts,  adopting  a variety  of approaches  to textual  criticism. 
Students  explore  the nature  of literature,  the aesthetic  function  of literary  language  and  literary  textuality, 
and the relationship between literature and the world.
Language A: language and literature
In this course,  students  study  a wide  range  of literary  and  non-literary  texts  in a variety  of media.  By 
examining  communicative  acts  across  literary  form  and  textual  type  alongside  appropriate  secondary 
readings,  students  will investigate  the nature  of language  itself  and  the ways  in which  it shapes  and  is 
influenced  by identity  and  culture.  Approaches  to study  in the course  are meant  to be wide  ranging  and 
can include literary theory, sociolinguistics, media studies and critical discourse analysis among others.
Literature and performance
Students  will study  essential  elements  of literature  and  performance  and  explore  their  dynamic 
relationship.  In the course,  students  synthesise  conventional  literary  analysis  with  the practical,  aesthetic 
and symbolic elements of performance. 
Distinction between SL and HL
The model  for language  A: language  and  literature  is the same  at SL and  HL but there  are significant 
quantitative and qualitative differences between the levels.
SL students are required to study four literary works and a number of non-literary texts that is equivalent in 
teaching  and  learning  time,  whereas  HL students  are required  to study  six literary  works  and  a number  of 
non-literary texts that is equivalent in teaching and learning time.
In paper 1, both SL and HL students are presented with two previously unseen non-literary extracts or texts 
from  different  text  types,  each  accompanied  by a guiding  question.  SL students  are required  to write  a 
guided  analysis  of one  of these,  while  HL students  must  write  guided  analyses  of both  non-literary  extracts 
or texts.
In addition,  HL students  will have  a fourth  assessment  component,  the higher  level  (HL)  essay,  a written 
coursework  task  that  requires  students  to explore  a line of inquiry  in relation  to a studied  non-literary  text 
or texts,  or a literary  text  or work.  The outcome  of this exploration  is a 1200-1500  word  essay  in which  HL 
students are expected to demonstrate a deeper understanding of the nature of linguistic or literary study.
The distinction between SL and HL is summarized below.Nature of the subject
7 Language A: language and literature guide
Works read SL HL
Works in translation written by 
authors on the Prescribed reading 
listStudy of a minimum of one work Study of a minimum of two works
Works originally written in the 
language studied, by authors on 
the Prescribed reading listStudy of a minimum of one work Study of a minimum of two works
Free choice works Study of two works freely chosen Study of two works freely chosen
Total works studied 4 6
External assessment SL HL
Paper 1: Guided textual analysis A guided analysis of a previously 
unseen non-literary extract or text 
from a choice of twoTwo guided analyses of previously 
unseen non-literary extracts or 
texts
HL essay A 1200-1500 word essay exploring 
a line of inquiry in connection with 
a studied text or work
Studies in language and literature and the core
Studies in language and literature and theory of knowledge
The theory  of knowledge  (TOK)  course  engages  students  in reflection  on the nature  of knowledge  and  on 
how  it is constructed  and  represented.  Studies  in language  and  literature  similarly  engages  students  in an 
exploration of the nature of the human experience and of the ways in which personal views are constructed 
and  communicated.  In relating  their  studies  to TOK,  students  become  aware  of the fact that  although 
language  and  literature  offer  a powerful  means  of access  to knowledge,  they  are nonetheless  a 
construction rather than a perfectly mimetic representation of life and reality.
Additionally, in becoming more aware of the perspectives of others through their studies, students develop 
a stronger  sense  of their  own  individual  viewpoints,  such  as their  position  in time  and  place.  The reflection 
this prompts creates strong links with TOK.
In language  A courses  students  are constantly  engaged  with  inquiry,  critical  thinking  and  reflection  as they 
explore  how  meaning  is generated  in texts.  Studies  in language  and  literature  therefore  enhance  the 
students’  ability  to examine  diverse  ways  of knowing  and  different  knowledge  questions.  For example, 
questions  regarding  the extent  to which  the reader  shapes  the meaning  of a text,  the impact  of translation 
on a text,  or the way  texts  influence  understanding  of the self and  the world  are continuously  raised  in 
these  courses  and  constitute  an important  part  of the focus  of inquiry  in them.  Further  examples  of TOK 
questions can be found within the description of each the of the areas of exploration of the syllabus.
Studies in language and literature and creativity, activity, service
Studies  in language  and  literature  courses  offer  significant  potential  to complement  creativity,  activity, 
service  (CAS).  In their  engagement  with  the characters  or the situations  portrayed  in the texts,  students 
achieve  a better  understanding  of others  and  of themselves  while  developing  the capacity  for empathy. 
The tasks  involved  in these  courses  are also  instrumental  in developing  critical-thinking  skills.  As students 
interact  with  the texts  and  with  each  other,  they  continuously  check  their  hypotheses  against  the evidence 
in the texts  and  against  other  readers’  interpretations  to reflect  and  evaluate  how  their  own  assumptions 
and  beliefs  frame  possible  textual  meanings.  As a result,  they  acquire  the ability  to take  a critical  distance 
and  inspect  a statement  or hypothesis  to determine  the extent  to which  it is supported  by fact.  These  skills Nature of the subject
8 Language A: language and literature guide
are useful  for CAS  as students  reflect  on the effect  their  experiences  and  projects  had  and  subsequently 
plan for future action.
An important aim of studies in language and literature courses is to relate the reading experience to aspects 
of the students’  contexts.  The internal  assessment,  for example,  with  its emphasis  on the connection 
between  themes  and  attitudes  in the texts  and  current  global  issues,  encourages  students  to meaningfully 
apply  and  transfer  the understanding  gained  in the classroom  to the reality  of their  world.  This  might 
translate  into  a willingness  to commit  themselves  to a CAS  experience  or project  which  addresses  a global 
issue  in a local  context.  Embarking  on a CAS  experience  or project  might  at the same  time  feed  back  into 
the course in the form of an enriched understanding of the situations portrayed in the texts.
A wide  range  of connections  can be made  between  CAS  experiences  and  projects  and  studies  in language 
and literature courses. Some examples are:
• Create or participate in a literary walking tour, in which the milestones of a particular author’s 
biography or the most significant places in the setting of a text read are visited, described and 
discussed. The three strands—creativity, service and activity—would be involved if the students 
actually created the tour, while activity and creativity would be involved if the student participated in 
the walking tour and then produced some kind of creative response to it. Simple participation in the 
tour would just constitute activity.
• Plan and host an event to raise awareness about a global issue explored in a text being studied, which 
would involve creativity and service.
• Create audiobooks of a text being studied for the vision-impaired, or make a critical review of existing 
audiobooks for the school librarian in terms of the performance of the actor or reader. This would 
involve creativity and service.
• Develop and run book clubs or literary circles with younger students in the school. This would 
constitute creativity and service.
The connections  between  a subject  and  CAS  can result  in a single  experience  or may  be developed  into  a 
project.
No matter  what  final  shape  this connection  takes,  CAS  experiences  and  projects  must  be distinct  from,  and 
may not be included or used in, the student’s DP course requirements.
Studies in language and literature and the extended essay
An extended  essay  in studies  in language  and  literature  provides  students  with  an opportunity  to 
undertake  independent  research  into  a literary  or linguistic  topic  of special  interest.  It also  allows  students 
the freedom  to explore  their  preferred  texts  and  authors,  applying  and  transferring  the analytical  and 
interpretative  skills  acquired  in studies  in language  and  literature  courses.  It is intended  to promote 
advanced research and writing skills, intellectual discovery, critical thinking and creativity.
The extended essay in studies in language and literature cannot be based on a text or work studied in class.
It must  aim at identifying  a valid  approach  to the analysis  of language  or literature.  The treatment  of the 
topic  must  be analytical.  Although  the student  may  research  secondary  sources,  the extended  essay  must 
consist primarily in an independent response to the topic.
There are four types of extended essay:
1. It could have a literary focus. The student would choose between: category 1, which is based on a 
literary text or texts originally written in the language A studied and category 2, which is a comparative 
essay, with at least one of the literary texts being a translation.
2. It could have a linguistic focus, which would be a category 3 essay. This approach should emphasize 
the production and reception of non-literary texts or an academic study of an issue related to the 
understanding of language as an area of investigation. Although the extended essay may involve 
comparison and contrast with different languages and cultures, the main focus must be on the 
language A studied and its culture(s).
3. It could examine the relationship between a literary text and its performance, examining the creative 
and critical relationship that exists between both. Students interested in this option would choose a Nature of the subject
9 Language A: language and literature guide
literature and performance extended essay and would therefore focus on an exploration of both the 
text and the transformation that gives rise to its performance. This is one of the two kinds of 
interdisciplinary extended essay a student can write involving a studies in language and literature 
course. Although an extended essay in literature and performance may involve an element of 
creativity, analysis and reasoned argument are fundamental to success.
4. It could be a world studies extended essay, an interdisciplinary research project which examines an 
issue of contemporary global significance, drawing on the methods, concepts and theories of two DP 
subjects. The topic must be taken from one of the six prescribed areas of study.
• Culture, language and identity
• Science, technology and society
• Equality and inequality
• Conflict, peace and security
• Environmental and/or economic sustainability
• Health and development
This  is an option  available  to all DP subjects.  However,  key elements  of studies  in language  and 
literature  such  as cultural  linguistics,  aesthetics,  discourse  analysis,  and  critical  perspectives  could  find 
broad application across the six global themes and play a significant role in advancing students’ global 
consciousness.
Studies in language and literature and 
international-mindedness
International-mindedness is at the heart of the IB. It is central to its philosophy, and inspires and informs its 
pedagogical principles and practices.
The study  of language  and  literature  is instrumental  in developing  an awareness  and  understanding  of the 
self and how it relates to others. Through the study of texts written originally in the language studied and in 
translation,  students  gain  an understanding  of the ways  in which  different  languages  and  literatures 
represent  the world  and  how  these  can reflect  and  help  create  diverse  identities.  Students  also  become 
aware  that  representations  of the world  vary  across  cultures  and  are encouraged  to consider  the reasons 
why,  attaining  a better  understanding  of the different  ways  in which  people  experience  and  represent  the 
world.
The syllabuses of studies in language and literature require that a set number of texts be read in translation 
and recommend that the texts chosen should be representative of a variety of perspectives. In the creation 
of the Prescribed reading list , the IB has aimed at including a wide variety of writers and at trying to attain as 
equitable  a balance  as possible  between  canonical  and  more  contemporary  writers,  male  and  female 
writers  and  writers  from  different  regions  and  countries  in the cases  in which  a language  is spoken  in a 
variety of places. The Prescribed reading list  is aimed at inspiring and encouraging teachers to make choices 
that  will result  in a collection  of texts  for class  study  that  will strike  a similar  balance  and  that  will therefore 
allow students to be able to fully appreciate the diversity of forms the human experience can take.
The way  that  studies  in language  and  literature  courses  contribute  to the development  of international-
mindedness  in students  is linked  to the way  that  they  contribute  to the development  of the attributes  of 
the IB learner  profile.  By reading  texts  which  offer  perspectives  which  may  be different  from  their  own, 
students will:
• use critical thinking skills to be able to understand the nature of the experience that is communicated 
in a text and the ways in which such an experience is communicated (thinkers)
• nurture their curiosity in connection with the different views and experiences of life present in a text 
(inquirers)
• engage with issues and ideas of global significance of which they might have been unaware 
(knowledgeable)Nature of the subject
10 Language A: language and literature guide
• be encouraged to appreciate the ideas, values and traditions of others in an inquiring way (open-
minded)
• understand that the dignity and rights of people everywhere must be respected (principled)
• show empathy, compassion and respect for other people (caring)
• recognize interdependence among people and between people and the world in which they live 
(balanced)
• listen carefully to the perspectives of other individuals and groups and express as articulately as 
possible their own perspectives (communicators)
• question their own views about the world (reflective)
• be open to transforming such views and consider how this transformation can lead to action (risk-
takers).
Studies  in language  and  literature  courses  offer  various  opportunities  for students  to examine  the ways  in 
which  their  personal  world,  identities  and  relationships  are represented  in texts  and  how  these  relate  to 
their own perspectives of the reality around them. They also enable students to experience representations 
of other  realities  and  other  people,  allowing  them  to get acquainted  with  perspectives  of the world  that 
might  be different  from  their  own.  In this way,  studies  in language  and  literature  courses  provide  fertile 
ground  for a deep  reflection  on the interaction  between  the local  and  the global  and  are a pathway  to 
intercultural critical thinking and consciousness.
Engaging with sensitive topics
All studies  in language  and  literature  courses  will provide  the opportunity  to engage  with  a broad  range  of 
texts,  approaches,  ideas,  stimuli  and  interpretations  that  address  topics  of personal,  local  and  global 
significance.   These  works  may  challenge  learners  intellectually,  personally  and  culturally,  and  involve 
sensitive  and  mature  topics.   The courses  studied  may  explicitly  address  sensitive  topics  through  texts  and 
issues discussed while inviting students to critically reflect on various perspectives offered.
Engaging  with  sensitive  topics  in these  courses—whether  receptively  or productively—must  be done  with 
every  reasonable  effort  to encourage  students  to respond  with  respect  for their  peers  and  larger  learning 
communities.   Providing  a safe  environment  in which  discussion  may  be facilitated  is an important  role  of 
the teacher.   In general,  approaching  sensitive  topics  in studies  in language  and  literature  courses  must  be 
done  through  an intellectually  critical  lens  avoiding  gratuitous  excess  and/or  glib  treatment  and  bearing  in 
mind the IB’s commitment to international-mindedness and intercultural respect.
Prior learning
There  are no formal  requirements  for students  undertaking  the studies  in language  and  literature  courses. 
Students  who  take  these  courses  will often  have  varied  language  profiles  and  may  be multilingual.  While  it 
is recommended  that  students  have  had  experience  of writing  critical  essays  about  texts,  not having  done 
so should  not exclude  them  from  studies  in language  and  literature.  Schools  should  refer  to the IB 
document,  Learning  in a language  other  than  mother  tongue  in IB programmes , available  on the programme 
resource  centre,  for support.  Each  course  offers  the opportunity  for continued  language  development  and 
the acquisition  of a range  of skills  including,  for example,  textual  analysis  and  the expression  of literary 
appreciation.  The choice  of the specific  course  will depend  on the students’  and  teacher’s  interests  and  the 
students’ future educational goals.
Links to the Middle Years Programme
The MYP  is designed  for students  aged  11 to 16 and,  as an integral  part  of the IB continuum,  can directly 
lead into the DP. MYP language and literature provides students with opportunities that prepare them for a 
DP studies in language and literature course.
The MYP  Language  and  literature  guide  indicates  the following  IB continuum  pathway  for MYP  Language 
and literature students continuing their studies in the DP:Nature of the subject
11 Language A: language and literature guide
Figure 2
IB continuum pathway to Diploma Programme studies in language and literature
The appropriate  pathway  for a student  who  has studied  an MYP  language  and  literature  course  is a DP 
studies  in language  and  literature  course,  which  would  guarantee  that  the level  of challenge  is suitable  to 
the student’s  linguistic  proficiency  and  to their  previous  experience  with  language  and  literature.  The 
choice  of course  among  the three  studies  in language  and  literature  courses  would  depend  on matters  of 
individual  preference.  The choice  of level  would  be dictated  by the students’  previous  performance  in the 
MYP  Language  and  literature  course  and  on their  overall  decisions  about  the distribution  of SL and  HL 
subjects across the six academic areas.
An MYP  student  who  has achieved  a phase  5 or phase  6 in a Language  acquisition  course  could  also 
potentially proceed to take a DP studies in language and literature course and perform successfully, though 
as the MYP Language acquisition guide indicates, it is recommended they have at least one semester in MYP 
language and literature before starting these DP courses. This will guarantee a smoother transition between 
the courses  of both  programmes.  In these  cases,  decisions  about  the most  appropriate  studies  in language 
and literature course and level should be made in consultation with teachers.
The MYP  Language  and  literature  course  allows  students  to develop  an appreciation  and  understanding  of 
language  and  literature  through  key concepts  such  as communication,  connections,  creativity  and 
perspective, and through the more discipline-specific related concepts.
The conceptual  focus  is maintained  in studies  in language  and  literature  courses,  which  build  on the 
foundations  established  by the four  key concepts  chosen  by the MYP  Language  and  literature  course  by 
studying  them  in greater  depth,  redefining  them  in more  specific  ways  and  complementing  them  with 
others which are suitable for study at this stage in the students’ academic development.
Having  gained  an understanding  of language  and  literature  through  oral,  written  and  visual 
communication,  students  develop  analytical  and  organizational  skills  in creative,  personal  and  imaginative 
ways.  The six skill areas  in the MYP  Language  and  literature  subject  group—listening,  speaking,  reading, 
writing, viewing and presenting—are developed as both independent and interdependent skills.Nature of the subject
12 Language A: language and literature guide
The studies  in language  and  literature  courses  continue  to encourage  the cultivation  of these  skills,  along 
with  intercultural  understanding  and  engagement,  from  local,  national  and  global  communities.  The 
courses further develop linguistic and literary understanding through the study of a broad range of texts, as 
well as through learning language in context in order to promote international-mindedness.
The DP studies  in language  and  literature  courses  build  on the foundation  provided  by the MYP.  They  aim 
to ensure  the continuing  development  of a student’s  powers  of expression  and  understanding  in a variety 
of language domains.
Links to the IB Career-related Programme
The IB Career-related Programme (CP) is a framework of international education that incorporates the vision 
and educational principles of the IB into a unique programme specifically developed for students who wish 
to engage  in career-related  learning.  The CP’s  flexible  educational  framework  allows  schools  to meet  the 
needs, backgrounds and contexts of students.
The aim of the CP is to provide  students  with  both  an academic  and  practical  foundation  to support  both 
their  further  studies  and  specialized  training,  thereby  ensuring  their  success  in the workforce.  Taking  a 
course  in studies  in language  and  literature  will support  this aim by developing  linguistic,  analytical  and 
creative skills through a variety of written and oral tasks.
The studies  in language  and  literature  courses  provide  opportunities  for students  to collaborate  and  be 
better  prepared  for an effective  participation  in an ever-changing  world  of work.  Through  approaches  to 
learning skills, CP students are encouraged to become reflective, creative and critical thinkers and confident 
communicators.  Through  the study  of a wide  range  of texts,  students  are encouraged  to think  about  the 
needs, perspectives, values and attitudes of other people. The requirements of the courses in general terms 
encourage  them  to be independent  learners  and  global  citizens  through  the study  of a variety  of texts  and 
perspectives.Nature of the subject
13 Language A: language and literature guide
Studies in language and literature aims
The aims of all subjects in studies in language and literature are to enable students to:
1. engage with a range of texts, in a variety of media and forms, from different periods, styles, and 
cultures
2. develop skills in listening, speaking, reading, writing, viewing, presenting and performing
3. develop skills in interpretation, analysis and evaluation
4. develop sensitivity to the formal and aesthetic qualities of texts and an appreciation of how they 
contribute to diverse responses and open up multiple meanings
5. develop an understanding of relationships between texts and a variety of perspectives, cultural 
contexts, and local and global issues and an appreciation of how they contribute to diverse responses 
and open up multiple meanings
6. develop an understanding of the relationships between studies in language and literature and other 
disciplines
7. communicate and collaborate in a confident and creative way
8. foster a lifelong interest in and enjoyment of language and literature.
Introduction
Aims
14 Language A: language and literature guide
Know, understand and interpret:
• a range of texts, works and/or performances, and their meanings and implications
• contexts in which texts are written and/or received
• elements of literary, stylistic, rhetorical, visual and/or performance craft
• features of particular text types and literary forms.
Analyse and evaluate:
• ways in which the use of language creates meaning
• uses and effects of literary, stylistic, rhetorical, visual or theatrical techniques
• relationships among different texts
• ways in which texts may offer perspectives on human concerns.
Communicate
• ideas in clear, logical and persuasive ways
• in a range of styles, registers and for a variety of purposes and situations
• (for literature and performance only) ideas, emotion, character and atmosphere through performance.
Introduction
Assessment objectives
15 Language A: language and literature guide
Assessment objective Which component addresses 
this assessment objective?How is the assessment objective 
addressed?
Know, understand and interpret Paper 1 The response to a previously 
unseen non-literary passage 
requires students to show their 
knowledge and understanding of 
texts and text types and their 
ability to establish their own 
interpretation from the text and to 
come to conclusions about it.
Paper 2 The essay on two works requires 
students to show their knowledge 
and understanding of the works 
and interpret their implications, 
and their similarities and 
differences, in connection with a 
given focus.
Internal assessment Students are required to 
demonstrate knowledge and 
understanding of one non-literary 
text and one work in their course 
of studies and interpret them in 
relation to a global issue.
HL essay Students are required to 
demonstrate knowledge and 
understanding of one of the texts 
or works studied in relation to a 
line of inquiry they have selected.
Analyse and evaluate Paper 1 Students are required to explore a 
previously unseen non-literary 
passage and write a response to it 
analysing and evaluating how the 
writer’s choices have contributed 
to meaning.
Paper 2 Students are required to write a 
comparative analysis and 
evaluation of two of the works 
studied in terms of the demands 
of a given question.
Internal assessment Students are required to evaluate 
one non-literary text and one 
work studied in terms of a global 
issue present in both of them, and 
Introduction
Assessment objectives in practice
16 Language A: language and literature guide
Assessment objective Which component addresses 
this assessment objective?How is the assessment objective 
addressed?
analyse and evaluate how their 
unique perspectives are 
constructed by means of the 
authors’ choices.
HL essay Students are required to analyse 
and evaluate one of the texts or 
works studied in relation to a line 
of inquiry of their own choice.
Communicate Paper 1 Students are required to write a 
formal, well-organized and well-
focused response using language 
appropriate to a formal essay.
Paper 2 Students are required to write a 
formal essay which is well-
organized, which offers a 
balanced comparison between 
two works, and which is clearly 
focused on a given question.
Internal assessment Students are required to deliver a 
well-organized, coherent, 
convincing and balanced oral 
which focuses on a global issue of 
their own choice.
HL essay Students are required to write a 
formal essay exploring a line of 
inquiry in relation to a text or 
work. The essay should be formal, 
well-structured and should 
evidence good citation and 
referencing skills.Assessment objectives in practice
17 Language A: language and literature guide
Syllabus component Teaching hours*
SL HL
Readers, writers and texts 
Non-literary texts are chosen from a variety of sources and media to represent 
as wide a range of text types as possible, and works are chosen from a variety 
of literary forms. The study of the non-literary texts and works focuses on the 
nature of language and communication and the nature of literature and its 
study. This study includes the investigation of how texts themselves operate as 
well as the contexts and complexities of production and reception. Focus is on 
the development of personal and critical responses to the particulars of 
communication.50 80
Time and space
Non-literary texts and literary works are chosen from a variety of sources, 
literary forms and media that reflect a range of historical and/or cultural 
perspectives. Their study focuses on the contexts of language use and the 
variety of ways literary and non-literary texts might both reflect and shape 
society at large. The focus is on the consideration of personal and cultural 
perspectives, the development of broader perspectives, and an awareness of 
the ways in which context is tied to meaning.50 80
Intertextuality: connecting texts
Non-literary texts and literary works are chosen from a variety of sources, 
literary forms and media in a way that allows students an opportunity to 
extend their study and make fruitful comparisons. Their study focuses on 
intertextual relationships with possibilities to explore various topics, thematic 
concerns, generic conventions, modes or literary traditions that have been 
introduced throughout the course. The focus is on the development of critical 
response grounded in an understanding of the complex relationships among 
texts.50 80
Total teaching hours 150 240
* The number  of hours  indicated  for each  area  of exploration  should  not be taken  as either  prescriptive  or 
restrictive,  since  these  areas  will many  times  overlap  in the study  of a text.  Careful  planning  of class 
activities  is necessary  to ensure  that  there  will be a balance  between  the types  of approaches  to texts 
favoured  by each  of the areas.  There  should  also  be a balance  between  the time  of study  allotted  to non-
literary texts and literary works within each area.
The recommended  teaching  time  is 240 hours  to complete  HL courses  and  150 hours  to complete  SL 
courses as stated in the document General regulations: Diploma Programme (see article 8.2 ).
Syllabus
Syllabus outline
18 Language A: language and literature guide
Model for studies in language and literature
Studies  in language  and  literature  are built  on the notion  of conceptual  learning  in which  students  engage 
with  central  concepts  of the discipline  in order  to become  flexible,  critical  readers  of all types  of texts.  The 
model  below  represents  the relationship  between  the three  courses  in studies  of language  and  literature, 
their main topics of study, their central concepts, and the way they relate to the principles at the core of the 
IB DP.
Figure 3
Studies in language and literature model
At the heart of the study of all three courses are the domains of language, literature and performance. Each 
course stresses these elements to a different degree, but all engage with them to some extent.
The study  of language,  literature  and  performance,  and  the development  of the relevant  skills,  is divided 
into three areas of exploration—the exploration of the nature of the interactions between readers, writers 
and  texts ; the exploration  of how  texts  interact  with  time  and  space  and  the exploration  of 
intertextuality  and  how  texts  connect  with  each  other.  Although  these  three  areas  seem  to offer  an 
ordered  approach  to progression  through  the course,  they  are, as represented  in the diagram,  inherently 
over-lapping, iterative or circular and allow for flexibility in course design.
Syllabus
Syllabus content
19 Language A: language and literature guide
The entire  pursuit  of studies  in language  and  literature  is tied  to core  elements  of the DP and  to the 
overarching  principles  of IB learning,  theory  of knowledge  (TOK),  creativity,  activity  and  service  (CAS),  the 
extended essay, the approaches to teaching and approaches to learning, and international-mindedness.
What students will learn in the language A: language and literature 
course
In the language  A: language  and  literature  course  students  will learn  about  the complex  and  dynamic 
nature  of language  and  explore  both  its practical  and  aesthetic  dimensions.  They  will explore  the crucial 
role language plays in communication, reflecting experience and shaping the world. Students will also learn 
about their own roles as producers of language and develop their productive skills. Throughout the course, 
students  will explore  the various  ways  in which  language  choices,  text  types,  literary  forms  and  contextual 
elements  all effect  meaning.   Through  close  analysis  of various  text  types  and  literary  forms,  students  will 
consider  their  own  interpretations,  as well  as the critical  perspectives  of others,  to explore  how  such 
positions  are shaped  by cultural  belief  systems  and  to negotiate  meanings  for texts.   Students  will engage 
in activities  that  involve  them  in the process  of production  and  help  shape  their  critical  awareness  of how 
texts  and  their  associated  visual  and  audio  elements  work  together  to influence  the audience/reader  and 
how audiences/readers open up the possibilities of texts. With its focus on a wide variety of communicative 
acts,  the course  is meant  to develop  sensitivity  to the foundational  nature,  and  pervasive  influence,  of 
language in the world at large.
Course requirements
Across  the three  areas  of exploration  at least  four  works  must  be studied  in the SL course  and  at least  six 
works must be studied in the HL course.
The IB has created an extensive Prescribed reading list  of authors in a wide range of languages to accompany 
studies  in language  and  literature  courses.  This  searchable  online  list provides  teachers  with  a resource 
from  which  they  will be able  to select  a group  of authors  that  guarantees  diversity  and  compliance  with 
course requirements. Six authors have been suggested as a starting point in the exploration of the literature 
of each language. Teachers can decide whether to follow this recommendation or not.
Each area of exploration must involve the study of both literary works and non-literary texts, with equal 
time devoted to the study of each. Texts and works must be chosen from a variety of cultures and 
languages. In selecting them, teachers should attempt to achieve a balance in relation to text-type, literary 
form, period and place, and endeavor to include a variety of forms the human and artistic experience can 
take.
Selection of literary works
SL students must study at least four works of which: 
• a minimum of one must be written originally in the language studied, by an author on the Prescribed 
reading list
• a minimum of one must be a work in translation written by an author on the Prescribed reading list
• two can be chosen freely—from the Prescribed reading list  or elsewhere—and may be in translation.
There  must  be a minimum  of one  work  for each  area  of exploration.  Works  must  be selected  to cover  two 
literary  forms,  two  periods  and  two  places  as defined  on the Prescribed  reading  list covering  at least  two 
continents.
HL students must study at least six works of which: 
• a minimum of two must be written originally in the language studied, by authors on the Prescribed 
reading list
• a minimum of two must be works in translation written by authors on the Prescribed reading list
• two can be chosen freely—from the Prescribed reading list  or elsewhere—and may be in translation.Syllabus content
20 Language A: language and literature guide
There  must  be a minimum  of two  works  for each  of the areas  of exploration.  Works  must  be selected  to 
cover  three  literary  forms,  three  periods  and  three  places  as defined  on the Prescribed  reading  list covering 
at least two continents.
A work is defined for studies in language and literature courses as one single literary text, such as a novel, 
autobiography or biography; two or more shorter literary texts such as novellas; 5-10 short stories; 5-8 
essays; 10-15 letters; or a substantial section or the whole of a long poem (at least 600 lines) or 15-20 
shorter poems.
Where more than one text is studied as part of a work, texts must be from the same author.
The ideas  and  skills  introduced  in each  of the areas  are integral  to and  embedded  throughout  the course, 
and  there  is a significant  overlap.  Teachers  should  take  into  account  the type  and  range  of works  to be 
studied,  the time  required  for each  area  of the course,  the development  of student  skills,  learning 
outcomes,  performance  work  to be undertaken  and  assessment  deadlines  when  making  decisions 
regarding  teaching  sequence.  More  guidance  on course  construction  models  is provided  in the teacher 
support material (TSM).
Authors 
One  same  author  cannot  be studied  twice  within  a language  A: language  and  literature  course. 
Additionally, a language A: language and literature candidate may not study:
• an author that they may already be studying as part of another studies in language and literature 
course
• an author that they may already be studying as part of a language B course
A language  A: language  and  literature  candidate  may  write  their  extended  essay  on an author  studied  as 
part of the course provided they choose a different work by that author.
Literary forms
The Prescribed  reading  list includes  four  literary  forms.  At SL two  of the literary  forms  must  be selected  for 
the study of works. At HL three literary forms must be studied.
Period 
The Prescribed  reading  list contains  different  periods,  which  classify  authors  according  to the century/
centuries  in which  they  lived.  The language  A: language  and  literature  syllabus  at standard  level  must 
include  works  by authors  from  at least  two  different  periods.  At HL, the syllabus  must  include  works  by 
authors from at least three different periods.
Place 
The Prescribed  reading  list indicates  the countries  or regions  with  which  authors  are closely  associated.  The 
language A: language and literature syllabus at SL must include works by authors from at least two different 
countries  or regions  and  must  cover  at least  two  continents.  At HL, the syllabus  must  include  works  by 
authors from at least three different countries or regions and must cover at least two continents. 
Selection of non-literary texts
The following list of non-literary text types is designed to help construct the course, as well as to encourage 
variety and exploration. The list is not exhaustive and it must be emphasised that students are not expected 
to learn  the features  or characteristics  of them  all. The skills  of analysing  one  text  type  can be transferrable 
to another.
Teachers  should  ensure  there  is a balance  between  the time  of study  allotted  to non-literary  texts  and 
literary works within each area or in the course as a whole.
Table 1
A list of text types which may help teachers construct the course
Advertisement Encyclopedia entry Parody*
Appeal Film/television Pastiche*Syllabus content
21 Language A: language and literature guide
Biography* Guide book Photographs
Blog Infographic Radio broadcast
Brochure/leaflet Interview Report
Cartoon Letter (formal)* Screenplay
Diagram Letter (informal) * Set of instructions
Diary* Magazine article Speech*
Electronic texts Manifesto* Textbook
Essay* Memoir* Travel writing*
* In some  of their  manifestations,  these  text  types  could  be considered  literary  forms,  usually  within  the 
category of non-fiction. They will be regarded in this course as non-literary texts, unless a collection of texts 
by a single author is studied as a literary work.
Area of exploration—readers, writers and texts
A word after a word after a word is power.
Margaret Atwood
This  area  introduces  students  to the nature  of language  and  literature  and  its study.  The investigation 
undertaken  involves  close  attention  to the details  of texts  in a variety  of types  and  literary  forms  so that 
students  learn  about  the choices  made  by creators  and  the ways  in which  meaning  is communicated 
through  words,  image,  and  sound.  At the same  time,  study  will focus  on the role  receivers  play  in 
generating  meaning  as students  move  from  personal  response  to understanding  and  interpretation 
influenced  by the classroom  community.  Students  will learn  to understand  the creativity  of language,  the 
relationship  between  language  and  thought  and  the aesthetic  nature  of literature.  Students  will see that 
texts  are powerful  means  to express  individual  thoughts  and  feelings,  and  that  their  own  perspectives  as 
experienced users of language are integral to the effect and success of a communicative act.
Study  in this area  should  be structured  to allow  students  to become  more  confident  in their  ability  to 
recognize  key textual  and  rhetorical  features  and  how  they  create  or affect  meaning.  Non-literary  texts  and 
literary  works  can be chosen  that  lend  themselves  to close  reading  and  give  students  a sense  of stylistic, 
rhetorical and literary elements across a variety of text types and literary forms. The aim is not to enumerate 
or define various features and study will move beyond the identification of elements or the consideration of 
individual effects to see the complex constructed nature of texts. While conducting detailed study, learning 
activities  can be structured  to introduce  students  to the ways  in which  linguistic  and  literary  professionals 
attend  to communicative  acts  and  their  concerns.  Student  writing  and  response  can involve  moving 
between personal and academic response or between the creative and the expository.
Readers,  writers  and  texts  aims  to introduce  students  to the skills  and  approaches  required  to closely 
examine  texts  as well  as to introduce  metacognitive  awareness  of the nature  of the discipline  by 
considering the following guiding conceptual questions:
1. Why and how do we study language and literature?
2. How are we affected by texts in various ways?
3. In what ways is meaning constructed, negotiated, expressed and interpreted?
4. How does language use vary amongst text types and amongst literary forms?
5. How does the structure or style of a text affect meaning?
6. How do texts offer insights and challenges?
Possible links to TOK
Links to TOK in this area revolve around the question of what kind of knowledge can be constructed from a 
text,  how  that  knowledge  is constructed  and  the extent  to which  the meaning  of a text  can be considered 
to be fixed. Examples of links to TOK include:Syllabus content
22 Language A: language and literature guide
• What do we learn about through the study of a literary text? How is this different from what we learn 
through the study of a non-literary text?
• In what ways is the kind of knowledge we gain from the study of language and literature different 
from the kind we gain through the study of other disciplines? Can the study of language and of 
literature be considered scientific?
• How much of the knowledge we construct through reading a text is determined by authorial 
intention, by the reader’s cultural assumptions and by the purpose valued for a text in a community of 
readers?
• Are some interpretations of a text better than others? How are multiple interpretations best 
negotiated?
• In what ways do interpretive strategies vary when reading a literary work and when reading a non-
literary text?
Area of exploration—time and space
I think  the use of language  is a very  important  means  by which  this species,  because  of its 
biological nature, creates a kind of social space, to place itself in interactions with other people.
Noam Chomsky
This  area  of exploration  focuses  on the idea  that  language  is a social  capacity  and  as such  is intertwined 
with community, culture and history. It explores the variety of cultural contexts in which texts are produced 
and  read  across  time  and  space  as well  as the ways  texts  themselves  reflect  or refract  the world  at large. 
Students will examine how cultural conditions can affect language and how these conditions are a product 
of language. Students will also consider the ways culture and identity influence reception.
Students  will investigate  ways  in which  texts  may  represent,  and  be understood  from,  a variety  of cultural 
and  historical  perspectives.  Through  this exploration  students  will recognize  the role  of relationships 
among text, self and other, and the ways in which the local and the global connect. These relationships are 
complex  and  dynamic.  The background  of an author  and  the make-up  of an audience  are not necessarily 
clear  or easily  described.  Texts  are situated  in specific  contexts  and  deal  with  or represent  social,  political 
and  cultural  concerns  particular  to a given  time  and  place.  For example,  a text  written  to address  the 
concerns of an author in contemporary society can be set in ancient times. Cultures that are geographically 
separated  can share  mores  or ideas,  while  people  living  in proximity  can embrace  disparate  traditions. 
Students  will consider  the intricacies  of communication  within  such  a complex  societal  framework  and  the 
implications that language and text take on when produced and read in shifting contexts.
Study  and  work  selection  in this area  should  allow  students  to explore  texts  and  issues  from  a variety  of 
places,  cultures  and/or  times.  The culture,  biography  of an author,  historical  events  or narratives  of critical 
reception  will be considered  and  may  be researched,  but the focus  of study  will be on the ideas  and  issues 
raised  by the texts  themselves  and  a consideration  of whether  these  are best  understood  in relation  to an 
informed  consideration  of context.  In this area  of exploration,  students  examine  the ways  in which  a text 
may  illuminate  some  aspect  of the political  or social  environment,  or the ways  in which  a more  nuanced 
understanding  of events  may  affect  their  understanding  or interpretation  of a text.  The study  of contexts 
does  not imply  a static,  one-to-one  relationship  between  a text  and  the world,  but sees  the former  as a 
powerful “non-human actor” across time and space.
Time and space aims to broaden student understanding of the open, plural, or cosmopolitan nature of texts 
ranging from advertisements to poems by considering the following guiding conceptual questions:
1. How important is cultural or historical context to the production and reception of a text?
2. How do we approach texts from different times and cultures to our own?
3. To what extent do texts offer insight into another culture?
4. How does the meaning and impact of a text change over time?
5. How do texts reflect, represent or form a part of cultural practices?
6. How does language represent social distinctions and identities?Syllabus content
23 Language A: language and literature guide
Possible links to TOK
Links to TOK are related to the questions of how far the context of production of a text influences or informs 
its meaning  and  the extent  to which  the knowledge  a reader  can obtain  from  a text  is determined  by the 
context of reception. Examples of such links to TOK include:
• How far can a reader understand a text that was written in a context different from their own and 
which may have addressed a different audience?
• Is not sharing a world view with an author an obstacle to understand their text?
• What is lost in translation from one language to another?
• How might the approaches to a given time and place of a poet, a cartoonist or a diary-writer and a 
historian differ?
• Is the notion of a canon helpful in the study and understanding of literature? How does a canon get 
established? What factors influence its expansion or change over time?
Area of exploration—intertextuality: connecting 
texts
I will not deny  that  language  is based  on difference;  rather  I will argue  that  it is also  based  on 
reference.
Robert Scholes
This area of exploration focuses on the concerns of intertextuality, or the connections between and among 
media,  text  and  audience  involving  diverse  traditions  and  ideas.  It focuses  on the comparative  study  of 
texts  so that  students  may  gain  deeper  appreciation  of both  unique  characteristics  of individual  texts  and 
complex  systems  of connection.  Throughout  the course,  students  will be able  to see similarities  and 
differences among diverse texts. This area allows for a further exploration of literary and linguistic concerns, 
examples,  interpretations  and  readings  by studying  a grouping  of texts  set by the teacher  or set in close 
conversation  with  a class  or groups  of students.  Students  will gain  an awareness  of how  texts  can provide 
critical  lenses  to reading  other  texts  and  of how  they  can support  a text's  interpretation  by expanding  on it 
or question it by providing a different point of view.
Intertextuality: connecting texts can be approached in a variety of ways, such as:
• through the study of a group of texts from the same text type or literary form (for example, 
advertisements, drama or short stories respectively)
• a study of chronological development (for example, the tale, the elegy, political oration, the 
newspaper)
• a consideration of mode (for example, satire, action-adventure, parody)
• an exploration of a topic or concept (for example, fame, gender, power, social code, values, the hero)
• an investigation into a theoretical perspective or debate in language or literature (for example literary 
value, feminism, cognitive theory, critical discourse theory).
This  area  of exploration  aims  to give  students  a sense  of the ways  in which  texts  exist  in a system  of 
relationships  with  other  communicative  acts  past  and  present.  Students  will further  engage  with  literary 
and linguistic traditions and new directions by considering the following guiding conceptual questions:
1. How do texts adhere to and deviate from conventions associated with literary forms or text types?
2. How do conventions and systems of reference evolve over time?
3. In what ways can diverse texts share points of similarity?
4. How valid is the notion of a classic text?
5. How can texts offer multiple perspectives of a single issue, topic or theme?
6. In what ways can comparison and interpretation be transformative?Syllabus content
24 Language A: language and literature guide
Possible links to TOK
Links  to TOK  in this area  are related  to the question  of how  the interaction  of a text  with  other  texts, 
brought  about  explicitly  by the author  or established  by the reader  in the act of reception,  influence  the 
perception of them and their meaning.
• What are the boundaries between a literary text and a non-literary text, and how are these boundaries 
determined?
• What kind of knowledge about a text is gained when compared and contrasted with other texts?
• Does knowledge of conventions of form, text type and of literary and rhetorical techniques allow for a 
better and deeper understanding of a text?
• How are judgements made about the merit of a text? What makes a text better than others?
• Is the study of texts better approached by means of a temporal perspective, grouping texts according 
to when they were written, or by means of a thematic approach, grouping them according to the 
theme or concern they share? What impact does each one of them have on knowledge of the 
discipline?
• How useful are classifications of texts according to form, text type and period? How do they contribute 
to the understanding of communication and its development?
The learner portfolio
The learner  portfolio  is a central  element  of the language  A: language  and  literature  course,  and  is 
mandatory  for all students.  It is an individual  collection  of student  work  done  throughout  the two  years  of 
the course.
The work  carried  out for the learner  portfolio  forms  the basis  of preparation  for the assessment,  although 
the portfolio  itself  will not be directly  assessed  or moderated  by the IB. However,  it is a fundamental 
element of the course, providing evidence of the student’s work and a reflection of their preparation for the 
assessment  components.  Schools  may  be required  to submit  these  learner  portfolios  in cases  in which  it is 
necessary  to determine  the authenticity  of student’s  work  in a component,  to certify  that  the principles  of 
academic honesty have been respected or to evaluate the implementation of the syllabus in a school.
The learner  portfolio  is a place  for a student  to explore  and  reflect  upon  literary  and  non-literary  texts,  and 
to establish  connections  among  them  and  with  the areas  of exploration  and  the central  concepts  in the 
subject.  In the learner  portfolio,  students  will be expected  to reflect  on their  responses  to the works  being 
studied  in the corresponding  area  of exploration.  They  will also  be expected  to establish  connections 
between  these  works  and  previous  ones  they  have  read,  and  between  their  perspectives  and  values  as 
readers  and  those  of their  peers.  As they  progress  through  the syllabus,  it is expected  that  these 
connections will be drawn between works within and across areas of exploration, and that they will provide 
a foundation  for the construction  of broader  knowledge  about  the transactions  between  texts,  culture  and 
identity.
The learner  portfolio  is also  a space  in which  students  can prepare  for assessment.  They  will use the 
portfolio  to make  decisions  about  the most  appropriate  and  productive  connections  between  the works 
they have studied and the assessment components. It should be introduced at the beginning of the course 
and become increasingly important as students progress, and prepare for external and internal assessment.
The learner  portfolio  must  consist  of a diversity  of formal  and  informal  responses  to the literary  and  non-
literary  texts  studied,  which  may  come  in a range  of critical  and/or  creative  forms,  and  in different  media.  It 
is the student’s  own  record  of discovery  and  development  throughout  the course.  It could  be used  to 
document:
• reflections related to the guiding conceptual questions of the course
• reflections on the assumptions, beliefs, and values that frame a response to texts
• explorations of literary texts and the insights they offer into social, global and real-world issues
• detailed evaluations and critical analysis of works, literary texts or extracts which explore the potential 
meanings for language used in them Syllabus content
25 Language A: language and literature guide
• reflections on the connections across a range of texts studied
• experiments with form, media and technology
• creative writing tasks for exploration of different literary forms and development of the students’ 
personal responses to works/texts
• reading, research and inquiry carried out beyond the classroom experience
• records of valued feedback received
• reports of classroom or group activities or discussions that explore the diverse values and perspectives 
negotiated and the process of negotiation in itself
• challenges faced and achievements
• selections of suitable extracts that could form the basis of the individual oral
• instances of self-assessment to evaluate the student’s own progress.
Teachers  are free  to monitor  and  set guidelines  for the learner  portfolios,  but students  should  be 
encouraged  to shape  them  in ways  that  allow  them  to independently  record  their  personal  development. 
The type  of portfolio  the students  keep—digital  or non-digital,  traditional  or multimodal—will  be dictated 
by individual learning preferences. Students should be allowed to explore different options freely.
It is expected  that  the work  necessary  to meet  the requirements  in all assessment  components  will have 
evolved  and  been  drawn  from  the contents  of the portfolio.  To that  effect,  each  student’s  portfolio  should 
include  at the end  the “Works  studied  form”  detailing  the works  that  have  been  selected  as part  of the 
course and how they have been made to interact with the assessment components. The assessment section 
contains  suggestions  on how  to make  use of the learner  portfolio  in the preparation  for each  assessment 
component.
Examples  of the kind  of work  that  could  be included  in the portfolio  are provided  in the teacher  support 
materials (TSM.)
Development of linguistic skills
Students will use and develop the following linguistic skills at all levels in the three studies in language and 
literature courses.
Receptive skills
Students  will understand  and  evaluate  a wide  range  of works,  attending  to textual  detail,  applying 
knowledge  of textual  conventions  and  making  informed  interpretations,  analyses,  comparisons  and 
evaluations.  They  will consider  arguments,  distinguishing  the main  points  from  relevant  supporting  details 
and explanations. They will use a variety of strategies to deduce meaning and move beyond the literal level 
to broader implications.
Productive skills
Students will present and develop their ideas and opinions on a variety of topics, orally and in writing. They 
will construct  and  support  complex  arguments  with  explanations  and  examples.  They  will experiment  with 
form by carrying out, as part of their class activities, transformative and re-creative activities either in writing 
or as performance.  They  will speak  and  write  at length  and  with  purpose  in order  to meet  a wide  range  of 
communicative needs; describing, narrating, comparing, explaining, persuading and evaluating.
Interactive skills 
Students  will begin,  maintain  and  close  oral  exchanges,  displaying  the ability  to adjust  style  or emphasis; 
using  a variety  of strategies  to maintain  the flow  of discussions;  attending  to diverse  perspectives  and 
opinions.  They  will take  into  account  audience  and  purpose  employing  appropriate  language,  tone  of 
voice,  body  language  and  gesture.  They  will also  be able  to interact  with  texts  and  maintain  written 
conversation in various registers and on various platforms.Syllabus content
26 Language A: language and literature guide
Conceptual understanding
The document  What  is an IB education?  states:  “IB programmes  offer  students  access  to a broad  and 
balanced range of academic studies and learning experiences. They promote conceptual learning, focusing 
on powerful  organizing  ideas  that  are relevant  across  subject  areas,  and  that  help  integrate  learning  and 
add coherence to the curriculum” (see the “Broad, balanced, conceptual and connected” section).
All DP language  programme  subject  groups  promote  a vision  of learning  in which  the development  of 
language  skills  and  conceptual  understandings  of language  are complementary  to each  other,  so that  the 
total  learning  experience  of the student  is as robust  as possible.  As a result,  DP students  become  more 
accomplished  communicators  in the languages  they  study  when  their  abilities  to read,  write  and  speak 
about  course  content  are reinforced  and  extended  by an understanding  of why  and  how  people  use 
language to communicate.
In particular,  the approach  to developing  conceptual  understandings  of language  in the DP languages 
programme is designed using the following guiding principles.
• DP students with experience of the PYP or the MYP are provided with frequent opportunities to 
develop further their conceptual understandings of language (PYP) or their understanding of the key 
and related concepts in the MYP language and literature and language acquisition courses
• DP students are encouraged to apply what they already know about other languages and cultures—
through formal study or personal experience—in order to enhance their overall learning process
• DP students are encouraged to consider broad questions about language and culture as appropriate 
to their course of study in order to develop international-mindedness and increase self-awareness as 
inquirers in their own learning process
Conceptual understanding in studies in language and literature 
courses
Concepts  are vital  in studies  in language  and  literature  courses  since  they  help  to organise  and  guide  the 
study  of texts  across  the three  areas  of exploration.  The concepts  interact  with  the three  areas  of 
exploration  in numerous  ways  and  contribute  a sense  of continuity  in the transition  from  one  area  to the 
next.  They  also  facilitate  the process  of establishing  connections  between  texts,  making  it easier  for 
students  to identify  different  ways  in which  the texts  they  study  relate  to one  another.  Although  they  are 
not explicitly  assessed  in any component,  the concepts  constitute  an essential  part  of a student’s 
investigation and should therefore be included in the discussion of each of the texts studied.
The seven concepts which structure the teaching and learning of these courses have been selected because 
of the central position they occupy in the study of both language and literature. They foreground aspects of 
linguistic  and  literary  study  that  have  been  the focus  of attention  and  inquiry.  Brief  explanations  of the 
seven  concepts  are provided.  These  explanations  are not meant  to be exhaustive,  although  they  will serve 
as a guiding set of ideas for the course.
For ideas  on how  to approach  these  concepts  through  class  activities,  please  consult  the "Approaches  to 
teaching  and  approaches  to learning  in studies  in language  and  literature"  section  in this guide  or the 
Language A teacher support material .
Identity
When  reading  texts,  students  will encounter  and  interact  with  a multiplicity  of perspectives,  voices  and 
characters.  It is usual  when  reading  and  interpreting  a text  to assume  that  the views  are to some  extent 
representative  of the writer’s  identity.  However,  the relationship  between  an author  and  the different 
perspectives  and  voices  they  assume  in the texts  is frequently  complex,  and  this makes  the concept  of 
identity  an elusive  one.  The figure  that  emerges  from  the reading  of various  texts  by the same  author  adds 
to the complexity  of the discussion.  Conversely,  the ways  in which  the identity  of a reader  comes  into  play 
at the moment of reading a text are equally central to the analysis of the act of reading and interpretation.
Culture
The concept of culture is central to the study of language and literature. It raises the question of how a text 
relates  to the context  of its production  and  reception,  and  to the respective  values,  beliefs  and  attitudes Syllabus content
27 Language A: language and literature guide
prevalent  in them.  This  concept  also  plays  an important  role  with  regards  to the relationship  that  is 
established  between  an individual  text  and  the writing  tradition  that  precedes  it. In both  senses,  the 
application  of this concept  to the study  of a text  should  prompt  reflection  on the extent  to which  it is the 
product of a particular cultural and literary context and how it interacts with it.
Creativity
Creativity  plays  an important  part  in the experience  of reading  and  writing.  The concept  is fundamental  to 
analyse  and  understand  the act of writing,  and  the role  that  imagination  plays.  When  applied  to the act of 
reading,  creativity  highlights  the importance  of the reader  being  able  to engage  in an imaginative 
interaction  with  a text  which  generates  a range  of potential  meanings  from  it, above  and  beyond 
established  interpretations.  Creativity  is also  related  to the notion  of originality  and  to the question  of the 
extent to which it is important or desirable in the production and reception of a text.
Communication
The concept  of communication  revolves  around  the question  of the relationship  that  is established 
between  a writer  and  a reader  by means  of a text.  The extent  to which  writers  facilitate  communication 
through their choices of style and structure may be an aspect to analyse in this exploration. The writer may 
also  have  a particular  audience  in mind  which  may  mean  assumptions  have  been  made  about  the reader’s 
knowledge  or views  which  might  make  communication  with  some  readers  easier  than  with  others. 
Alternatively,  the amount  of cooperation  that  a text  demands  from  a reader  for communication  to take 
place,  and  the readiness  of the reader  to engage  is also  important  as a topic  for discussion.  Even  with 
cooperative readers, the meaning of a text is never univocal, which makes the concept of communication a 
particularly productive, and potentially problematic one in relation to both literary and non-literary texts.
Perspective
A text may offer a multiplicity of perspectives which may, or may not, reflect the views of its author. Readers 
have  also  their  own  perspectives  which  they  bring  to their  interaction  with  the text.  This  variety  of 
perspectives impacts on the interpretation of a text and therefore deserves critical attention and discussion. 
The fact that  the acts  of reading  and  writing  happen  in a given  time  and  place  poses  the additional 
question  of how  far the contexts  of production  and  reception  have  influenced  and  even  shaped  those 
perspectives.
Transformation
The study of the connections among texts constitutes the focus of one of three areas of exploration, namely 
intertextuality:  connecting  texts.  The complex  ways  in which  texts  refer  to one  another,  appropriate 
elements  from  each  other  and  transform  them  to suit a different  aesthetic  or communicative  purpose,  are 
evidence  of the importance  of transformation  in the process  of creating  a text.  Additionally,  the act of 
reading  is potentially  transformative  in itself,  both  for the text  and  the reader.  Different  readers  may 
transform  a text  with  their  personal  interpretation.  The text  can also  have  an impact  on the reader  which 
potentially might lead to action and to the transformation of reality.
Representation
The way  in which  language  and  literature  relate  to reality  has been  the subject  of long  running  debate 
among  linguists  and  literary  theorists.  Statements  and  manifestos  by writers  have  made  claims  about  this 
relationship  which  range  from  affirming  that  literature  should  represent  reality  as accurately  as possible,  to 
claiming art’s absolute detachment and freedom from reality and any duty to represent it in the work of art. 
Irrespective  of such  a discussion,  the concept  is a central  one  to the subject  in connection  with  the way  in 
which form and structure interact with, and relate to, meaning.
Principles of course design
The language  A: language  and  literature  course  allows  teachers  significant  freedom  in organising  and 
structuring  their  courses.  The three  areas  of exploration  focus  on different  approaches  to the study  of texts 
and  do not establish  any requirements  about  the text  types  or literary  forms  to be studied  in each  one  of 
areas  individually.  The requirements  on the provenance  of the works—whether  they  are studied  in the 
original  language  they  were  written  in or are studied  in translation;  whether  authors  are on the Prescribed Syllabus content
28 Language A: language and literature guide
reading  list or freely  chosen—must  be met  throughout  the course.  There  is no prescribed  method  of how 
they should be distributed across the areas of exploration.
Additionally,  as the syllabus  does  not bind  the areas  of exploration  to particular  assessment  components, 
there is room for individual decisions to be made by students about the works for each of their assessment 
tasks.  The freedom  to make  course  design  decisions  requires  careful  planning  to guarantee  that 
requirements are met throughout the teaching of the syllabus material.
The central principles of variety, integration, autonomy and accountability are aimed at providing guidance 
for teachers in structuring their courses and advising students how to make sensible and careful decisions.
Variety
Teachers must ensure that:
• the choice of texts represents as wide a variety of text types, literary forms, places, times and voices as 
possible
• the organisation of the texts into the three areas of exploration allows for sufficient opportunities in 
each area to connect, compare and contrast texts written originally in the language studied with those 
studied in translation, texts from different literary forms and text types and texts from diverse times 
and places
• the texts that are chosen represent a balance between canonical voices and newer, less traditional, 
voices (this is so that students are exposed to different conceptions of language and literature, and 
have a sense of the current linguistic and literary developments and of the accompanying theoretical 
constructs)
• whenever possible, student involvement is encouraged in the selection of texts, so that individual 
preferences can be considered and hopefully catered for.
Integration
The three  areas  of exploration  should  not be thought  of as isolated  compartments,  but as complementary 
approaches  in the study  of the selected  texts.  While  each  will propose  a specific  lens  through  which  to 
explore  a text,  it is expected  that  teachers  will take  advantage  of opportunities  to make  consistent 
references  to the immanent,  the contextual  and  the comparative  study  of texts,  and  attempt  to integrate 
them throughout the course.
The syllabus offers various other ways of integrating the three areas of exploration.
• The learner portfolio is a space in which students will be expected to reflect on the texts being studied 
in the corresponding area of exploration and establish connections between these texts and previous 
ones read. As they progress through the syllabus, it is to be expected that these connections will be 
drawn between texts within and across areas of exploration.
• Assessment components like the individual oral or paper 2 will prompt students to elaborate on points 
of contact between texts as they think of possible options to choose for these assessments. Teachers 
should encourage students to take advantage of the flexibility the syllabus allows and not to limit 
themselves in their choice of texts to individual areas of exploration.
• The seven central concepts in studies in language and literature courses provide sustained lines of 
inquiry that run through the three areas of exploration.
Autonomy
For students  to be able  to make  careful  decisions  about  the choice  of texts  to use for assessment 
components,  they  need  to be encouraged  to think  of their  learning  in a more  autonomous  way.  Teachers 
should  foster  this by initially  ensuring  students  have  access  to information  about  course  aims,  syllabus 
requirements,  assessment  components  and  criteria  as early  as possible.  Studies  in language  and  literature 
courses  require  a high  level  of agency  on the part  of the students  regarding  the preparation  of their  work 
for the assessment  components.  For that  to be successful,  students  must  be made  aware  of what  is 
expected of them in each area of exploration, and for each assessment component.
It is also  important  that  there  should  be ongoing  assessment  of the students’  progress  towards  their  goals. 
It is likely  that  students  will elaborate  and  follow  individual  routes  in their  preparation  for the assessment 
components.  They  will,  however,  require  guidance  on the part  of the teacher  with  regards  to the Syllabus content
29 Language A: language and literature guide
appropriateness  of their  choice  of works,  and  the associated  concept  or global  issue.  Regular  instances  of 
self-assessment  and  peer-assessment  will also  help  students  to carry  out an evaluation  of their  progress 
towards the objectives the course sets for them.
Accountability
A prominent  feature  of the structure  of studies  in language  and  literature  courses  is the amount  of latitude 
it permits  to both  teachers  and  students  in their  choice  of pathways  to comply  with  syllabus  requirements. 
The syllabus is not prescriptive and this means there is plenty of room for individual choice.
Both  teachers  and  students  should  be aware  that  this flexibility  does  not imply  leniency  in relation  to 
compliance with the requirements of the course. Teachers must make sure that:
• the requirements of the course are met by the whole class
• each student has a clearly laid-out plan for addressing the demands of all assessment components 
which guarantees that all the necessary texts will have been read and studied,
• to the best of their knowledge, no work will be used for two different assessment components
• the principles of academic honesty are respected.Syllabus content
30 Language A: language and literature guide
General
Assessment  is an integral  part  of teaching  and  learning.  The most  important  aims  of assessment  in the 
Diploma  Programme  are that  it should  support  curricular  goals  and  encourage  appropriate  student 
learning.  Both  external  and  internal  assessments  are used  in the Diploma  Programme.  IB examiners  mark 
work produced for external assessment, while work produced for internal assessment is marked by teachers 
and externally moderated by the IB.
There are two types of assessment identified by the IB.
• Formative assessment informs both teaching and learning. It is concerned with providing accurate and 
helpful feedback to students and teachers on the kind of learning taking place and the nature of 
students’ strengths and weaknesses in order to help develop students’ understanding and capabilities. 
Formative assessment can also help to improve teaching quality, as it can provide information to 
monitor progress towards meeting the course aims and objectives.
• Summative assessment gives an overview of previous learning and is concerned with measuring 
student achievement.
The Diploma  Programme  primarily  focuses  on summative  assessment  designed  to record  student 
achievement  at, or towards  the end  of, the course  of study.  However,  many  of the assessment  instruments 
can also  be used  formatively  during  the course  of teaching  and  learning,  and  teachers  are encouraged  to 
do this.  A comprehensive  assessment  plan  is viewed  as being  integral  with  teaching,  learning  and  course 
organization. For further information, see the IB Programme standards and practices  document.
The approach  to assessment  used  by the IB is criterion-related,  not norm-referenced.  This  approach  to 
assessment  judges  students’  work  by their  performance  in relation  to identified  levels  of attainment,  and 
not in relation  to the work  of other  students.  For further  information  on assessment  within  the Diploma 
Programme  please  refer  to the publication  Assessment  principles  and  practice—Quality  assessments  in a 
digital age .
To support  teachers  in the planning,  delivery  and  assessment  of the DP courses,  a variety  of resources  can 
be found  on the programme  resource  centre  or purchased  from  the IB store  (store.ibo.org ). Additional 
publications  such  as specimen  papers  and  markschemes,  teacher  support  materials,  subject  reports  and 
grade descriptors can also be found on the programme resource centre. Past examination papers as well as 
markschemes can be purchased from the IB store.
Methods of assessment
The IB uses several methods to assess work produced by students.
Assessment criteria
Assessment  criteria  are used  when  the assessment  task  is open-ended.  Each  criterion  concentrates  on a 
particular  skill that  students  are expected  to demonstrate.  An assessment  objective  describes  what 
students should be able to do, and assessment criteria describe how well they should be able to do it. Using 
assessment criteria allows discrimination between different answers and encourages a variety of responses. 
Each  criterion  comprises  a set of hierarchically  ordered  level  descriptors.  Each  level  descriptor  is worth  one 
or more marks. Each criterion is applied independently using a best-fit model. The maximum marks for each 
criterion may differ according to the criterion’s importance. The marks awarded for each criterion are added 
together to give the total mark for the piece of work.
Assessment
Assessment in the Diploma Programme
31 Language A: language and literature guide
Markbands
Markbands  are a comprehensive  statement  of expected  performance  against  which  responses  are judged. 
They represent a single holistic criterion divided into level descriptors. Each level descriptor corresponds to 
a range  of marks  to differentiate  student  performance.  A best-fit  approach  is used  to ascertain  which 
particular mark to use from the possible range for each level descriptor.
Analytic markschemes
Analytic  markschemes  are prepared  for those  examination  questions  that  expect  a particular  kind  of 
response and/or a given final answer from students. They give detailed instructions to examiners on how to 
break down the total mark for each question for different parts of the response.
Marking notes
For some  assessment  components  marked  using  assessment  criteria,  marking  notes  are provided.  Marking 
notes give guidance on how to apply assessment criteria to the particular requirements of a question.
Inclusive assessment arrangements
Inclusive  assessment  arrangements  are available  for candidates  with  access  requirements.   These 
arrangements  enable  candidates  with  diverse  needs  to access  the examinations  and  demonstrate  their 
knowledge and understanding of the constructs being assessed.
The IB Access  and  inclusion  policy  provides  details  on all the inclusive  assessment  arrangements  available  to 
candidates  with  learning  support  requirements.  The IB document  Learning  diversity  and  inclusion  in IB 
Programmes  outlines  the position  of the IB with  regard  to candidates  with  diverse  learning  needs  in the IB 
programmes.  For candidates  affected  by adverse  circumstances,  the IB documents  General  regulations: 
Diploma  Programme  and  the Diploma  Programme  Assessment  procedures  provide  details  on access 
consideration.
Responsibilities of the school
Schools  must  ensure  that  equal  access  arrangements  and  reasonable  adjustments  are provided  to 
candidates  with  learning  support  requirements,  in line with  the IB documents  Candidates  with  assessment 
access requirements and Learning diversity within the IB programmes.
The documents  Meeting  student  learning  diversity  in the classroom  and  The  IB guide  to inclusive  education:  a 
resource  for whole  school  development  are available  to support  schools  in the ongoing  process  of increasing 
access and engagement by removing barriers to learning.Assessment in the Diploma Programme
32 Language A: language and literature guide
First assessment 2021
Assessment component Weighting
External assessment (3 hours)
Paper 1: Guided textual analysis (1 hour 15 minutes)
The paper consists of two non-literary passages, from two different text types, each 
accompanied by a question. Students choose one passage and write an analysis of it. 
(20 marks)70%
35%
Paper 2: Comparative essay (1 hour 45 minutes)
The paper consists of four general questions. In response to one question students write a 
comparative essay based on two works studied in the course. (30 marks)35%
Internal assessment 
This component consists of an individual oral which is internally assessed by the teacher and 
externally moderated by the IB at the end of the course.
Individual oral (15 minutes)
Supported by an extract from one non-literary text and one from a literary work, students 
will offer a prepared response of 10 minutes, followed by 5 minutes of questions by the 
teacher, to the following prompt:
Examine the ways in which the global issue of your choice is presented through the content 
and form of two of the texts that you have studied. (40 marks)30%
Assessment
Assessment outline—SL
33 Language A: language and literature guide
First assessment 2021
Assessment component Weighting
External assessment (4 hours)
Paper 1: Guided textual analysis (2 hours 15 minutes)
The paper consists of two non-literary passages, from two different text types, each 
accompanied by a question. Students write an analysis of each of the passages. (40 marks)80%
35%
Paper 2: Comparative essay (1 hour 45 minutes)
The paper consists of four general questions. In response to one question students write a 
comparative essay based on two works studied in the course. (30 marks)
HL essay
Students submit an essay on one non-literary text or a collection of non-literary texts by one 
same author, or a literary text or work studied during the course. (20 marks)
The essay must be 1,200-1,500 words in length.25%
20%
Internal assessment: Individual oral (15 minutes)
This component consists of an individual oral which is internally assessed by the teacher 
and externally moderated by the IB at the end of the course.
Individual oral (15 minutes)
Supported by an extract from both one non-literary text and one from a literary work, 
students will offer a prepared response of 10 minutes, followed by 5 minutes of questions 
by the teacher, to the following prompt:
Examine the ways in which the global issue of your choice is presented through the content 
and form of two of the works that you have studied. (40 marks)20%
Assessment
Assessment outline—HL
34 Language A: language and literature guide
Assessment  criteria  are used  to assess  students  for all assessment  tasks.  The assessment  criteria  are 
published in this guide.
There  are four  criteria  for each  of the assessment  components:  an attempt  has been  made  to make  these 
criteria  mirror  the assessment  objectives  closely.  The criteria  and  descriptors  are the same  for SL and  HL in 
the shared components.
The external components contribute 70% to the final assessment at SL and 80 % at HL.
External assessment details—SL
Paper 1: Guided textual analysis
Duration: 1 hour 15 minutes
Weighting: 35%
Paper  1 contains  two  previously  unseen  non-literary  passages.  Students  write  a guided  analysis  of one  of 
these  passages.  A guided  analysis  in this context  refers  to an exploration  of the passage  supported  by a 
guiding  question  which  asks  the students  to consider  a technical  or formal  aspect  of the passage.  The 
passages  could  be taken  from  any of the text  types  listed  in course  requirements . Each  of the passages  will 
be from a different text type.
The passages for analysis may be either complete pieces of writing or extracts from longer pieces.
One  guiding  question  will be provided  for each  passage  on a central  technical  or formal  element  that  may 
provide  an interesting  point  of entry  into  the text.  Although  it is not compulsory  to answer  this question, 
students  should  be aware  that  it is expected  that  the analysis  will be focused  on a particular  aspect  of the 
text. Students may propose an alternative point of entry about any other technical or formal element of the 
text they feel important in order to provide such a focus.
The paper  is assessed  according  to the assessment  criteria  published  in this guide.  The maximum  mark  for 
paper 1 is 20.
The learner portfolio and paper 1
The learner  portfolio  is not specifically  assessed  but it is an important  tool  in helping  students  prepare  for 
formal  assessment.  It provides  a place  for students  to practise  and  develop  the skills  necessary  for 
performing successfully in paper 1.
In relation to the preparation of paper 1, the learner portfolio provides an opportunity for students to:
• record responses to a passage or text read for the first time
• formulate guiding questions for different passages, using them as a lens through which to view those 
passages
• assess which of the skills involved in paper 1 they feel less confident in and use the portfolio to track 
their progress in the development of those skills
• keep a record of the text types covered in their practice of paper 1 skills, make sure that they have 
covered as many text types as possible from those that might appear in paper 1, and assess how much 
of a challenge each one presents to them.
• compare their successive practices of paper 1 to the first one they have done and monitor the 
evolution of their overall performance in the paper.
Assessment
External assessment
35 Language A: language and literature guide
Paper 2: Comparative essay
Duration: 1 hour 45 minutes
Weighting: 35%
Paper  2 contains  four  questions  of a general  nature  which  require  students  to write  a comparative  essay 
referring to two works studied during the course. Students are required to answer one  question only.
The format  of paper  2 and  the four  questions  are the same  for both  SL and  HL students,  and  for both  the 
literature and language and literature courses. The assessment criteria will also be shared by both levels and 
both courses.
The essay  is written  under  examination  conditions,  without  access  to the studied  works.  Students  will be 
expected  to compare  and  contrast  two  of the works  studied  in relation  to the question  chosen.  Attention 
should  be paid  to the relevance  of the argument  to the question  chosen  and  to the appropriateness  of the 
works selected by the student to address the question. Students are expected to make detailed reference to 
the works in their answer, but they are not expected to include quotations from them.
Given  the open  and  flexible  nature  of the course,  potentially  any work  studied  can be used  by students  for 
paper  2. It is highly  recommended,  however,  that  three  of the works  studied  should  be preselected  by 
students  in preparation  for this paper,  either  individually  or in conjunction  and  in consultation  with  the 
teacher.  This  will make  it more  manageable  for students,  at the moment  of the exam,  to select  both  the 
essay question and the two works to answer it with.
Under  no circumstances  can students  use for paper  2 a work  that  has been  already  used  for another 
assessment component, be it the Internal Assessment for both SL and HL, or the HL essay for HL.
The paper  is assessed  according  to the assessment  criteria  published  in this guide.  The maximum  mark  for 
paper 2 is 30.
The learner portfolio and paper 2
The learner  portfolio  is not specifically  assessed  but it is an important  tool  in helping  students  prepare  for 
formal  assessment.  It provides  a place  for students  to practise  and  develop  the skills  necessary  for 
performing successfully in paper 2.
In relation to the preparation of paper 2, the learner portfolio provides an opportunity for students to:
• group the works studied according to a common theme or issue and explore their similarities and 
differences
• develop an awareness of the differences between literary forms, and of the bearing these differences 
may have on how different works approach one theme or issue
• consider which combinations of works might be the most productive ones to address the variety of 
questions they might encounter in the actual paper
• inquire into the connections between the works studied, the areas of exploration and the central 
concepts of the course to gain an awareness of the multiplicity of lenses that can be used when 
studying a work and the essay questions that these might potentially lead to
• compare their successive practices of paper 2 to the first one they have done and monitor the 
evolution of their overall performance in the paper.
External assessment criteria—SL
Paper 1: Guided textual analysis
There are four assessment criteria at both SL and HL.
Criterion A Understanding and interpretation 5 marks
Criterion B Analysis and evaluation 5 marks
Criterion C Focus and organisation 5 marksExternal assessment
36 Language A: language and literature guide
Criterion D Language 5 marks
Total 20 marks
Criterion A: Understanding and interpretation  
• How well does the candidate demonstrate an understanding of the text and draw reasoned 
conclusions from implications in it? 
• How well are ideas supported by references to the text? 
Marks Level descriptor 
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below. 
1 The response demonstrates little understanding of the literal meaning of the text.   
References to the text are infrequent or are rarely appropriate. 
2 The response demonstrates some understanding of the literal meaning of the text.  
References to the text are at times appropriate. 
3 The response demonstrates an understanding of the literal meaning of the text.  There is 
a satisfactory interpretation of some implications of the text. 
References to the text are generally relevant and mostly support the candidate’s ideas. 
4 The response demonstrates a thorough understanding of the literal meaning of the 
text. There is a convincing interpretation of many implications of the text. 
References to the text are relevant and support the candidate’s ideas. 
5 The response demonstrates a thorough and perceptive understanding of the 
literal meaning of the text. There is a convincing and insightful interpretation 
of larger implications and subtleties of the text.  
References to the text are well-chosen and effectively support the candidate’s ideas. 
 
Criterion B: Analysis and evaluation  
• To what extent does the candidate analyse and evaluate how textual features and/or authorial choices 
shape meaning? 
Marks Level descriptor 
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below. 
1 The response is descriptive and/or demonstrates little relevant analysis of textual 
features and/or authorial choices. 
2 The response demonstrates some appropriate analysis of textual features and/or 
authorial choices, but is reliant on description.  
3 The response demonstrates a generally appropriate analysis of textual features and/or 
authorial choices. 
4 The response demonstrates an appropriate and at times insightful analysis of textual 
features and/or authorial choices. There is a good evaluation of how such features and/or 
choices shape meaning. 
5 The response demonstrates an insightful and convincing analysis of textual features 
and/or authorial choices. There is a very good evaluation of how such features and/or 
choices shape meaning. 
 External assessment
37 Language A: language and literature guide
Criterion C: Focus and organization  
• How well organized, coherent and focused is the presentation of ideas? 
Marks Level descriptor 
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below. 
1 Little organization is apparent in the presentation of ideas.  No discernible focus is 
apparent in the analysis.
2 Some organization is apparent in the presentation of ideas. There is little focus in the 
analysis. 
3 The presentation of ideas is adequately organized in a generally coherent manner. There 
is some focus in the analysis.
4 The presentation of ideas is well organized and mostly coherent. The analysis is 
adequately focused. 
5 The presentation of ideas is effectively organized and coherent. The analysis is 
well focused. 
Criterion D: Language 
• How clear, varied and accurate is the language? 
• How appropriate is the choice of register and style? (“Register” refers, in this context, to the candidate’s 
use of elements such as vocabulary, tone, sentence structure and terminology appropriate to the 
analysis). 
Marks Level descriptor 
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below. 
1 Language is rarely clear and appropriate; there are many errors in grammar, vocabulary 
and sentence construction and little sense of register and style. 
2 Language is sometimes clear and carefully chosen; grammar, vocabulary and sentence 
construction are fairly accurate, although errors and inconsistencies are apparent; the 
register and style are to some extent appropriate to the task. 
3 Language is clear and carefully chosen with an adequate degree of accuracy in grammar, 
vocabulary and sentence construction despite some lapses; register and style are mostly 
appropriate to the task. 
4 Language is clear and carefully chosen, with a good degree of accuracy in grammar, 
vocabulary and sentence construction; register and style are consistently appropriate to 
the task. 
5 Language is very clear, effective, carefully chosen and precise, with a high degree of 
accuracy in grammar, vocabulary and sentence construction; register and style are 
effective and appropriate to the task. 
Paper 2 Comparative essay
There are four assessment criteria at SL.
Criterion A Knowledge, understanding and interpretation 10 marks
Criterion B Analysis and evaluation 10 marks
Criterion C Focus and organisation 5 marks
Criterion D Language 5 marksExternal assessment
38 Language A: language and literature guide
Total 30 marks
Criterion A: Knowledge, understanding and interpretation 
• How much knowledge and understanding does the candidate demonstrate of the works?  
• To what extent does the candidate make use of knowledge and understanding of the works to draw 
conclusions about their similarities and differences in relation to the question? 
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below. 
1–2 There is little knowledge and understanding of the works in relation to the question 
answered.
There is little meaningful comparison and contrast of the works used in relation to the 
question. 
3–4 There is some knowledge and understanding of the works in relation to the question 
answered.
There is a superficial attempt to compare and contrast the works used in relation to the 
question. 
5–6 There is satisfactory knowledge and understanding of the works and an interpretation of 
their implications in relation to the question answered.
The essay offers a satisfactory interpretation of the similarities and differences between 
the works used in relation to the question. 
7–8 There is good knowledge and understanding of the works and a sustained interpretation 
of their implications in relation to the question answered.
The essay offers a convincing interpretation of the similarities and differences between 
the works used in relation to the question. 
9–10 There is perceptive knowledge and understanding of the works and a persuasive 
interpretation of their implications in relation to the question answered.  
The essay offers an insightful interpretation of the similarities and differences between 
the works used in relation to the question. 
 
Criterion B: Analysis and evaluation  
• To what extent does the candidate analyse and evaluate how the choices of language, technique and 
style, and/or broader authorial choices, shape meaning? 
• How effectively does the candidate use analysis and evaluation skills to compare and contrast both 
works? 
Marks Level descriptor 
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below. 
1–2 The essay is descriptive and/or demonstrates little relevant analysis of textual features 
and/or the broader authorial choices.  
3–4 The essay demonstrates some appropriate analysis of textual features and/or broader 
authorial choices, but is reliant on description.  
There is a superficial comparison and contrast of the authors' choices in the works 
selected. External assessment
39 Language A: language and literature guide
Marks Level descriptor 
5–6 The essay demonstrates a generally appropriate analysis of textual features and/or 
broader authorial choices.
There is an adequate comparison and contrast of the authors’ choices in the works 
selected. 
7–8 The essay demonstrates an appropriate and at times insightful analysis of textual 
features and/or broader authorial choices. There is a good evaluation of how such 
features and/or choices shape meaning.
There is a good comparison and contrast of the authors’ choices in the works selected. 
9–10 The essay demonstrates a consistently insightful and convincing analysis of textual 
features and/or broader authorial choices. There is a very good evaluation of how such 
features and/or choices contribute to meaning. 
There is a very good comparison and contrast of the authors’ choices in the works 
selected. 
Criterion C: Focus and organization 
• How well structured, balanced and focused is the presentation of ideas? 
Marks Level descriptor 
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below. 
1 The essay rarely focuses on the task. There are few connections between ideas. 
2 The essay only sometimes focuses on the task, and treatment of the works may be 
unbalanced. There are some connections between ideas, but these are not always 
coherent. 
3 The essay maintains a focus on the task, despite some lapses; treatment of the works is 
mostly balanced. The development of ideas is mostly logical; ideas are generally 
connected in a cohesive manner. 
4 The essay maintains a mostly clear and sustained focus on the task; treatment of the 
works is balanced. The development of ideas is logical; ideas are cohesively connected. 
5 The essay maintains a clear and sustained focus on the task; treatment of the works is 
well-balanced. The development of ideas is logical and convincing; ideas are connected 
in a cogent manner. 
 
Criterion D: Language 
• How clear, varied and accurate is the language? 
• How appropriate is the choice of register and style? (“Register” refers, in this context, to the candidate’s 
use of elements such as vocabulary, tone, sentence structure and terminology appropriate to the 
essay).
Marks Level descriptor 
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below. 
1 Language is rarely clear and appropriate; there are many errors in grammar, vocabulary 
and sentence construction and little sense of register and style. External assessment
40 Language A: language and literature guide
Marks Level descriptor 
2 Language is sometimes clear and carefully chosen; grammar, vocabulary and sentence 
construction are fairly accurate, although errors and inconsistencies are apparent; the 
register and style are to some extent appropriate to the task. 
3 Language is clear and carefully chosen with an adequate degree of accuracy in grammar, 
vocabulary and sentence construction despite some lapses; register and style are mostly 
appropriate to the task. 
4 Language is clear and carefully chosen, with a good degree of accuracy in grammar, 
vocabulary and sentence construction; register and style are consistently appropriate to 
the task. 
5 Language is very clear, effective, carefully chosen and precise, with a high degree of 
accuracy in grammar, vocabulary and sentence construction; register and style are 
effective and appropriate to the task. 
 
External assessment details—HL
Paper 1: Guided textual analysis
Duration: 2 hours 15 minutes
Weighting: 35%
Paper  1 contains  two  previously  unseen  non-literary  passages  and  students  are instructed  to write  a 
separate guided analysis of each of these passages. A guided analysis in this context refers to an exploration 
of the passage  supported  by a guiding  question  which  asks  the students  to consider  a technical  or formal 
aspect  of the passage.  The passages  could  be taken  from  any of the text  types  listed  in "Course 
requirements". Each of the passages will be from a different text type.
The passages for analysis may be either a complete piece of writing or an extract from a longer piece.
One  guiding  question  will be provided  for each  passage  on a central  technical  or formal  element  that  may 
provide  an interesting  point  of entry  into  the text.  Although  it is not compulsory  to answer  this question, 
students  should  be aware  that  it is expected  that  the analysis  will be focused  on a particular  aspect  of the 
text. Students may propose an alternative point of entry about any other technical or formal element of the 
text they feel important in order to provide such a focus.
The assessment  criteria  for this paper  are the same  at HL and  SL. 20 marks  will be allotted  to each  answer. 
The maximum mark for paper 1 is 40.
The learner portfolio and paper 1
The learner  portfolio  is not specifically  assessed  but it is an important  tool  in helping  students  prepare  for 
formal  assessment.  It provides  a place  for students  to practise  and  develop  the skills  necessary  for 
performing successfully in paper 1.
In relation to the preparation of paper 1, the learner portfolio provides an opportunity for students to:
• record responses to a passage or text read for the first time
• formulate guiding questions for different passages, using them as a lens through which to view those 
passages
• assess which of the skills involved in paper 1 they feel less confident in and use the portfolio to track 
their progress in the development of those skills
• keep a record of the text types covered in their practice of paper 1 skills, make sure that they have 
covered as many text types as possible from those that might appear in paper 1, and assess how much 
of a challenge each one presents to them.External assessment
41 Language A: language and literature guide
• compare their successive practices of paper 1 to the first one they have done and monitor the 
evolution of their overall performance in the paper.
Paper 2: Comparative essay
Duration: 1 hour 45 minutes
Weighting: 25%
Paper  2 contains  four  questions  of a general  nature  which  require  students  to write  a comparative  essay 
referring to two works studied during the course. Students are required to answer one  question only.
The format  of paper  2 and  the four  questions  are the same  for both  SL and  HL students,  and  for both  the 
literature and language and literature courses. The assessment criteria will also be shared by both levels and 
both courses.
The essay  is written  under  examination  conditions,  without  access  to the studied  works.  Students  will be 
expected  to compare  and  contrast  two  of the works  studied  in relation  to the question  chosen.  Attention 
should  be paid  to the relevance  of the argument  to the question  chosen  and  to the appropriateness  of the 
works selected by the student to address the question. Students are expected to make detailed reference to 
the works in their answer, but they are not expected to include quotations from them.
Given  the open  and  flexible  nature  of the course,  potentially  any work  studied  can be used  by students  for 
paper  2. It is highly  recommended,  however,  that  three  of the works  studied  should  be preselected  by 
students  in preparation  for this paper,  either  individually  or in conjunction  and  in consultation  with  the 
teacher.  This  will make  it more  manageable  for students,  at the moment  of the exam,  to select  both  the 
essay question and the two works to answer it with.
Under  no circumstances  can students  use for paper  2 a work  that  has been  already  used  for another 
assessment component, be it the internal assessment for both SL and HL, or the HL essay for HL.
The paper  is assessed  according  to the assessment  criteria  published  in this guide.  The maximum  mark  for 
paper 2 is 30.
The learner portfolio and paper 2
The learner  portfolio  is not specifically  assessed  but it is an important  tool  in helping  students  prepare  for 
formal  assessment.  It provides  a place  for students  to practise  and  develop  the skills  necessary  for 
performing successfully in paper 2.
In relation to the preparation of paper 2, the learner portfolio provides an opportunity for students to:
• group the works studied according to a common theme or issue and explore their similarities and 
differences
• develop an awareness of the differences between literary forms, and of the bearing these differences 
may have on how different works approach one theme or issue
• consider which combinations of works might be the most productive ones to address the variety of 
questions they might encounter in the actual paper
• inquire into the connections between the works studied and the areas of exploration of the course to 
gain an awareness of the multiplicity of lenses that can be used when studying a work and the essay 
questions that these might potentially lead to
• compare their successive practices of paper 2 to the first one they have done and monitor the 
evolution of their overall performance in the paper.
Higher level essay
Weighting: 20%
The nature of the task
At HL, students  are required  to write  a 1,200  –1,500  word  formal  essay  which  develops  a particular  line of 
inquiry  of their  own  choice  in connection  with  a non-literary  text,  a collection  of non-literary  texts  by one 
same author or a literary text or work studied during the course.External assessment
42 Language A: language and literature guide
The HL essay  offers  students  an opportunity  to develop  as independent,  critical  and  creative  readers, 
thinkers and writers by exploring a literary or language topic over an extended period of time, refining their 
ideas by means of a process of planning, drafting and re-drafting. The essay requires students to construct a 
focused,  analytical  argument  examining  the work  from  a broad  literary  or linguistic  perspective.   It also 
requires them to adhere to the formal framework of an academic essay, using citations and references.
Explanation of the task
The HL essay  is based  on the exploration  the student  has carried  out in the learner  portfolio.  During  this 
exploration  process,  the student  will have  investigated  a number  of works  and  texts  from  a variety  of 
different perspectives. In the lead-up to the drafting of the essay, the student must decide which text, texts 
or work  to focus  on for further  investigation,  and  which  topic  to write  about  in connection  with  them.   In 
choosing  the topic,  the student  can consult  the course’s  seven  central  concepts.  Any  text,  texts  or work 
previously studied in class may be selected, with the exception of the texts used for the internal assessment 
and the works the student plans to use in paper 2.
Selection of text, texts or work
Candidates  must  select  the texts  and  topic  for their  essay  independently;  however,  consultation  with  the 
teacher  is essential  in this process.  Care  must  be taken  to make  sure  that  the chosen  non-literary  text  or 
texts or literary texts or works are rich enough to support a developed, focused, and analytical argument.
In the case  of a collection  of short  stories,  poems,  song  lyrics  or any short  literary  text,  candidates  may 
choose  to use just one  literary  text  from  the work  as their  focus.   However,  students  and  teachers  should 
remember that the assignment is a broad literary investigation rather than a more narrowly-focused stylistic 
commentary  task.  It may  be necessary  to use more  than  one  literary  text  from  the work  chosen  in order  to 
achieve this.
In the case  of short  non-literary  texts,  it may  be necessary  for the candidate  to use more  than  one  from  the 
same  text  type  by the same  authorship,  for example  the same  creative  advertising  agency,  cartoonist, 
photographer  or social  media  user.   In this instance,  at least  one  of the texts  should  be studied  in class.   If 
using language texts in translation, these must be professional and published translations of the text.  
Determining the topic
The chosen  topic  should  enable  a broad  literary  or linguistic  focus  for the essay.   In achieving  this,  the 
course’s seven central concepts may be a helpful starting point for students in generating or determining a 
topic  for the essay.   While  students  do not have  to trace  their  essay  back  to one  of the seven  concepts  and 
the assessment  criteria  do not require  it, working  with  one  of the seven  concepts  will allow  students  to 
begin  thinking  about  their  topic  as they  refine  their  ideas  and  arguments.   The seven  concepts  are briefly 
discussed here in relation to the assignment. The TSM has more specific examples for further guidance.
Identity
The student  might  be interested  in an aspect  of the representation  of identity  of a particular  character  or 
group of characters in the text, or on the way in which the text relates to the identity of the writer.
Culture
The student  might  be interested  in an aspect  of the representation  of the culture  of a particular  place, 
institution or group of people, or on the way in which the text itself relates to a particular culture.
Creativity
The student  might  be interested  in an aspect  of the representation  of individual  or collective  creativity,  or 
lack of creativity, within the text, or on the way in which the text represents the creativity of the writer.
Communication
The student  might  be interested  in an aspect  of the representation  of acts  of communication,  or failures  in 
communication, in the text, or on the way in which the text itself represents an act of communication.
Transformation
The student might be interested in an aspect of the representation of transformation or transformative acts 
in the text,  or on the way  in which  the text  itself  is a transformative  act either  of other  texts  through External assessment
43 Language A: language and literature guide
intertextual  reference  to them  or of reality  by means  of a transformative  effect  on the reader’s  identity, 
relationships, goals, values, and beliefs.
Perspective
The student  might  be interested  in an aspect  of the representation  of a particular  perspective  or 
perspectives within the text, or on the way in which the text represents the writer’s perspective.
Representation
The student  might  be interested  in an aspect  of the way  in which  the text  represents  different  themes, 
attitudes and concepts, or in the extent to which language and literature can actually represent reality.
The learner portfolio and the higher level essay
The learner  portfolio  is not specifically  assessed  but it is an important  tool  in helping  students  prepare  for 
formal  assessment.  It provides  a platform  for students  to develop  independent  thinking  when  studying 
texts,  reflecting  on the ways  their  texts  and  responses  explore  cultural  values,  identities,  relationships,  and 
issues across a variety of topics.
In relation to the preparation of the HL essay, the learner portfolio provides an opportunity for students to:
• reflect on the ways in which each text they read relates to the seven central concepts of the course
• keep an ongoing record of themes and issues they find interesting in relation to each of the texts they 
read
• explore how key passages in the texts they have studied are significant in relation to those themes and 
issues
• trace the evolution of their thinking and planning in connection with their chosen topic
• record references for, and ideas and quotations from, secondary sources they might want to mention 
in their essay
• reflect on the challenges that the HL essay poses for them as individual learners.
Guidance and authenticity
Teachers  are expected  to guide  students  throughout  the HL essay;  from  choice  of topic  to submission  of 
the essay,  monitoring  and  advising  them  on the process,  giving  feedback  on plans,  and  helping  them  to 
stay on task by setting timelines and stages for the essay’s development.  Help, guidance and support at the 
beginning of this process cannot be emphasised enough.
At the same time, the student must have autonomy throughout; teachers should not assign works or topics, 
but should  give  advice  on the appropriateness  of ideas,  question  students  to clarify  them  and  make 
suggestions for avenues which could be explored or ways in which they might adjust their approach.
Teachers  are expected  to ensure  that  essays  are students’  own  work  and  address  any academic  honesty 
issues  arising  before  submission  of the assessment.  It is the teachers’  responsibility  to make  sure  that  all 
students  understand  the importance  of academic  honesty,  in particular  in relation  to the authenticity  of 
their  work  and  the need  to acknowledge  other  people’s  ideas.  Teachers  must  ensure  students  understand 
that the essay they submit for this externally assessed component must be entirely their own work.
While  teachers  should  give  regular  feedback  on students’  work,  they  should  not edit  or correct  their  work 
directly.  As students  draw  close  to the end  of the writing  process,  teachers  are allowed  to give  advice  to 
students  on a first complete  draft  in terms  of suggestions  as regards  the way  the work  could  be improved. 
This  could  be done  by annotating  the draft  through  comments  on the margin.  These  comments  could 
consist  in questions  or prompts  for further  reflection  and  improvement.  Under  no circumstances  can a 
teacher  edit  or rewrite  the draft.  The next  version  handed  to the teacher  after  the first draft  must  be the 
final one.
Students  should  make  detailed  references  to their  primary  source,  using  such  references  to support  their 
broader  argument  about  the text.   The use of secondary  sources  is not mandatory.  Any  sources  used  must 
be appropriately  cited.   Essays  must  be students’  own  work,  adhering  consistently  to the IB policy  on 
academic honesty.
For further guidelines about the HL essay and the role of the teacher in it, please consult the TSM.External assessment
44 Language A: language and literature guide
External assessment criteria—HL
Assessment  criteria  are used  to assess  students  for all assessment  tasks.  The assessment  criteria  are 
published in this guide. The assessment criteria are the same at SL and HL for all shared components.
The following is an overview of the external assessment criteria at HL.
Paper 1: Guided textual analysis
There are four assessment criteria at HL which will be applied separately to each answer.
Criterion A Understanding and interpretation 5 marks
Criterion B Analysis and evaluation 5 marks
Criterion C Focus and organisation 5 marks
Criterion D Language 5 marks
Total 20 marks
Criterion A: Understanding and interpretation  
• How well does the candidate demonstrate an understanding of the text and draw reasoned 
conclusions from implications in it? 
• How well are ideas supported by references to the text? 
Marks Level descriptor 
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below. 
1 The response demonstrates little understanding of the literal meaning of the text.   
References to the text are infrequent or are rarely appropriate. 
2 The response demonstrates some understanding of the literal meaning of the text.  
References to the text are at times appropriate. 
3 The response demonstrates an understanding of the literal meaning of the text.  There is 
a satisfactory interpretation of some implications of the text. 
References to the text are generally relevant and mostly support the candidate’s ideas. 
4 The response demonstrates a thorough understanding of the literal meaning of the 
text. There is a convincing interpretation of many implications of the text. 
References to the text are relevant and support the candidate’s ideas. 
5 The response demonstrates a thorough and perceptive understanding of the 
literal meaning of the text. There is a convincing and insightful interpretation 
of larger implications and subtleties of the text.  
References to the text are well-chosen and effectively support the candidate’s ideas. 
Criterion B: Analysis and evaluation  
• To what extent does the candidate analyse and evaluate how textual features and/or authorial choices 
shape meaning? 
Marks Level descriptor 
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below. 
1 The response is descriptive and/or demonstrates little relevant analysis of textual 
features and/or authorial choices. External assessment
45 Language A: language and literature guide
Marks Level descriptor 
2 The response demonstrates some appropriate analysis of textual features and/or 
authorial choices, but is reliant on description.  
3 The response demonstrates a generally appropriate analysis of textual features and/or 
authorial choices. 
4 The response demonstrates an appropriate and at times insightful analysis of textual 
features and/or authorial choices. There is a good evaluation of how such features and/or 
choices shape meaning. 
5 The response demonstrates an insightful and convincing analysis of textual features 
and/or authorial choices. There is a very good evaluation of how such features and/or 
choices shape meaning. 
 
Criterion C: Focus and organization  
• How well organized, coherent and focused is the presentation of ideas? 
Marks Level descriptor 
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below. 
1 Little organization is apparent in the presentation of ideas.  No discernible focus is 
apparent in the analysis.
2 Some organization is apparent in the presentation of ideas. There is little focus in the 
analysis. 
3 The presentation of ideas is adequately organized in a generally coherent manner. There 
is some focus in the analysis.
4 The presentation of ideas is well organized and mostly coherent. The analysis is 
adequately focused. 
5 The presentation of ideas is effectively organized and coherent. The analysis is 
well focused. 
Criterion D: Language 
• How clear, varied and accurate is the language? 
• How appropriate is the choice of register and style? (“Register” refers, in this context, to the candidate’s 
use of elements such as vocabulary, tone, sentence structure and terminology appropriate to the 
analysis). 
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below. 
1 Language is rarely clear and appropriate; there are many errors in grammar, vocabulary 
and sentence construction and little sense of register and style. 
2 Language is sometimes clear and carefully chosen; grammar, vocabulary and sentence 
construction are fairly accurate, although errors and inconsistencies are apparent; the 
register and style are to some extent appropriate to the task. 
3 Language is clear and carefully chosen with an adequate degree of accuracy in grammar, 
vocabulary and sentence construction despite some lapses; register and style are mostly 
appropriate to the task. External assessment
46 Language A: language and literature guide
Marks Level descriptor
4 Language is clear and carefully chosen, with a good degree of accuracy in grammar, 
vocabulary and sentence construction; register and style are consistently appropriate to 
the task. 
5 Language is very clear, effective, carefully chosen and precise, with a high degree of 
accuracy in grammar, vocabulary and sentence construction; register and style are 
effective and appropriate to the task. 
 
Paper 2: Comparative essay
There are four assessment criteria at HL.
Criterion A Knowledge, understanding and interpretation 10 marks
Criterion B Analysis and evaluation 10 marks
Criterion C Focus and organisation 5 marks
Criterion D Language 5 marks
Total 30 marks
Criterion A: Knowledge, understanding and interpretation 
• How much knowledge and understanding of the works does the candidate show?  
• To what extent does the candidate make use of knowledge and understanding of the works to draw 
conclusions about their similarities and differences in relation to the question? 
Marks Level descriptor 
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below. 
1–2 There is little knowledge and understanding of the works in relation to the question 
answered.
There is little meaningful comparison and contrast of the works used in relation to the 
question. 
3–4 There is some knowledge and understanding of the works in relation to the question 
answered.
There is a superficial attempt to compare and contrast the works used in relation to the 
question. 
5–6 There is satisfactory knowledge and understanding of the works and an interpretation of 
their implications in relation to the question answered.
The essay offers a satisfactory interpretation of the similarities and differences between 
the works used in relation to the question. 
7–8 There is good knowledge and understanding of the works and a sustained interpretation 
of their implications in relation to the question answered.
The essay offers a convincing interpretation of the similarities and differences between 
the works used in relation to the question. 
9–10 There is perceptive knowledge and understanding of the works and a persuasive 
interpretation of their implications in relation to the question answered.
The essay offers an insightful interpretation of the similarities and differences between 
the works used in relation to the question. External assessment
47 Language A: language and literature guide
 
Criterion B: Analysis and evaluation  
• To what extent does the candidate analyse and evaluate how the choices of language, technique and 
style, and/or broader authorial choices, shape meaning? 
• How effectively does the candidate use analysis and evaluation skills to compare and contrast both 
works? 
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below. 
1–2 The essay is descriptive and/or demonstrates little relevant analysis of textual features 
and/or the broader authorial choices.  
3–4 The essay demonstrates some appropriate analysis of textual features and/or broader 
authorial choices, but is reliant on description.  
There is a superficial comparison and contrast of the authors' choices in the works 
selected. 
5–6 The essay demonstrates a generally appropriate analysis of textual features and/or 
broader authorial choices.
There is an adequate comparison and contrast of the authors’ choices in the works 
selected. 
7–8 The essay demonstrates an appropriate and at times insightful analysis of textual 
features and/or broader authorial choices. There is a good evaluation of how such 
features and/or choices shape meaning. 
There is a good comparison and contrast of the authors’ choices in the works selected. 
9–10 The essay demonstrates a consistently insightful and convincing analysis of textual 
features and/or broader authorial choices. There is a very good evaluation of how such 
features and/or choices contribute to meaning. 
There is a very good comparison and contrast of the authors’ choices in the works 
selected. 
 
Criterion C: Focus and organization 
• How well structured, balanced and focused is the presentation of ideas? 
Marks Level descriptor 
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below. 
1 The essay rarely focuses on the task. There are few connections between ideas. 
2 The essay only sometimes focuses on the task, and treatment of the works may be 
unbalanced. There are some connections between ideas, but these are not always 
coherent. 
3 The essay maintains a focus on the task, despite some lapses; treatment of the works is 
mostly balanced. The development of ideas is mostly logical; ideas are generally 
connected in a cohesive manner. 
4 The essay maintains a mostly clear and sustained focus on the task; treatment of the 
works is balanced. The development of ideas is logical; ideas are cohesively connected. External assessment
48 Language A: language and literature guide
Marks Level descriptor 
5 The essay maintains a clear and sustained focus on the task; treatment of the works is 
well-balanced. The development of ideas is logical and convincing; ideas are connected 
in a cogent manner. 
 
Criterion D: Language 
• How clear, varied and accurate is the language? 
• How appropriate is the choice of register and style? (“Register” refers, in this context, to the candidate’s 
use of elements such as vocabulary, tone, sentence structure and terminology appropriate to the 
essay).
Marks Level descriptor 
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below. 
1 Language is rarely clear and appropriate; there are many errors in grammar, vocabulary 
and sentence construction and little sense of register and style. 
2 Language is sometimes clear and carefully chosen; grammar, vocabulary and sentence 
construction are fairly accurate, although errors and inconsistencies are apparent; the 
register and style are to some extent appropriate to the task. 
3 Language is clear and carefully chosen with an adequate degree of accuracy in grammar, 
vocabulary and sentence construction despite some lapses; register and style are mostly 
appropriate to the task. 
4 Language is clear and carefully chosen, with a good degree of accuracy in grammar, 
vocabulary and sentence construction; register and style are consistently appropriate to 
the task. 
5 Language is very clear, effective, carefully chosen and precise, with a high degree of 
accuracy in grammar, vocabulary and sentence construction; register and style are 
effective and appropriate to the task. 
 
Higher level essay
There are four assessment criteria at HL.
Criterion A Knowledge, understanding and interpretation 5 marks
Criterion B Analysis and evaluation 5 marks
Criterion C Focus, organisation and development 5 marks
Criterion D Language 5 marks
Total 20 marks
Criterion A: Knowledge, understanding and interpretation 
• How well does the candidate demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the work or text 
chosen?   
• To what extent does the candidate make use of knowledge and understanding of the work or text to 
draw conclusions in relation to the chosen topic? 
• How well are ideas supported by references to the work or text in relation to the chosen topic?External assessment
49 Language A: language and literature guide
Marks Level descriptor 
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below. 
1 There is little knowledge and understanding of the work or text shown through the essay in 
relation to the topic chosen. 
References to the work or text are infrequent or are rarely appropriate in relation to the 
chosen topic. 
2 There is some knowledge and understanding of the work or text shown through the essay in 
relation to the topic chosen. 
References to the work or text are at times appropriate in relation to the chosen topic. 
3 There is satisfactory knowledge and understanding of the work or text shown through the 
essay and an interpretation of its implications in relation to the topic chosen. 
References to the work or text are generally relevant and mostly support the candidate’s 
ideas in relation to the chosen topic. 
4 There is good knowledge and understanding of the work or text shown through the 
essay and a sustained interpretation of its implications in relation to the topic chosen. 
References to the work or text are relevant and support the candidate’s ideas in relation to 
the chosen topic. 
5 There is excellent knowledge and understanding of the work or text shown through the 
essay and a persuasive interpretation of their implications in relation to the chosen topic.
References to the work or text are well-chosen and effectively support the candidate’s ideas 
in relation to the chosen topic. 
Criterion B: Analysis and evaluation 
• To what extent does the candidate analyse and evaluate how the choices of language, technique and 
style, and/or broader authorial choices shape meaning in relation to the chosen topic? 
Marks Level descriptor 
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below. 
1 The essay is descriptive and/or demonstrates little relevant analysis of textual features and/or 
the author’s broader choices in relation to the chosen topic. 
2 The essay demonstrates some appropriate analysis of textual features and the author’s 
broader choices in relation to the chosen topic, but is reliant on description.  
3 The essay demonstrates a generally appropriate analysis and evaluation of textual features 
and the author’s broader choices in relation to the chosen topic.
4 The essay demonstrates an appropriate and at times insightful analysis and evaluation of 
textual features and the author’s broader choices in relation to the chosen topic. 
5 The essay demonstrates a consistently insightful and convincing analysis and evaluation of 
textual features and the author’s broader choices in relation to the chosen topic. 
Criterion C: Focus, organization and development 
• How well organized, focused and developed is the presentation of ideas in the essay? 
• How well are examples integrated into the essay? 
Marks Level descriptor 
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below. External assessment
50 Language A: language and literature guide
Marks Level descriptor 
1 Little organization is present. No discernible line of inquiry is apparent in the essay. 
Supporting examples are not integrated into the structure of the sentences and paragraphs. 
2 Some organization is apparent. There is little development of a line of inquiry.  
Supporting examples are rarely integrated into the structure of the sentences and 
paragraphs.
3 The essay is adequately organized in a generally cohesive manner. There is some 
development of the line of inquiry.
Supporting examples are sometimes integrated into the structure of the sentences and 
paragraphs.
4 The essay is well organized and mostly cohesive. The line of inquiry is adequately developed.
Supporting examples are mostly well integrated into the structure of the sentences and 
paragraphs.
5 The essay is effectively organized and cohesive. The line of inquiry is well developed.
Supporting examples are well integrated into the structure of the sentences and paragraphs.
Criterion D: Language 
• How clear, varied and accurate is the language? 
• How appropriate is the choice of register and style? (“Register” refers, in this context, to the candidate’s 
use of elements such as vocabulary, tone, sentence structure and terminology appropriate to the HL 
essay).
Marks Level descriptor 
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below. 
1 Language is rarely clear and appropriate; there are many errors in grammar, vocabulary and 
sentence construction and little sense of register and style. 
2 Language is sometimes clear and carefully chosen; grammar, vocabulary and sentence 
construction are fairly accurate, although errors and inconsistencies are apparent; the 
register and style are to some extent appropriate to the task. 
3 Language is clear and carefully chosen with an adequate degree of accuracy in grammar, 
vocabulary and sentence construction despite some lapses; register and style are mostly 
appropriate to the task. 
4 Language is clear and carefully chosen, with a good degree of accuracy in grammar, 
vocabulary and sentence construction; register and style are consistently appropriate to the 
task. 
5 Language is very clear, effective, carefully chosen and precise, with a high degree of accuracy 
in grammar, vocabulary and sentence construction; register and style are effective and 
appropriate to the task. External assessment
51 Language A: language and literature guide
Purpose of internal assessment
Internal  assessment  is an integral  part  of the course  and  is compulsory  for both  standard  level  (SL) and 
higher  level  (HL)  students.  It enables  students  to demonstrate  the application  of their  skills  and  knowledge 
in a different  setting  and  to pursue  their  personal  interests  without  the constraints  that  are associated  with 
written examinations.
The internal  assessment  consists  of a task  in the form  of an individual  oral.  Both  SL and  HL students  are 
required  to deliver  an individual  oral  in response  to a prompt,  using  an extract  from  one  work  and  an 
extract from one non-literary text to focus their analysis of how perspectives on a global issue are presented 
in them.
The internal  assessment  should,  as far as possible,  be woven  into  normal  classroom  teaching  and,  to this 
end, will depend upon the students reflecting their study, analysis and exploration of how global issues are 
presented in their learner portfolios.
Guidance and authenticity
The individual  oral  submitted  for internal  assessment  must  be the student’s  own  work.  However,  it is not 
the intention  that  students  should  decide  upon  a topic  and  be left to work  on the internal  assessment 
component without any further support from the teacher. The teacher should play an important role during 
both  the planning  stage  and  the period  when  the student  is working  on the internally  assessed  work.  It is 
the responsibility of the teacher to ensure that students are familiar with:
• the requirements of the individual oral
• the standards for academic honesty
• the assessment criteria.
Teachers and students must discuss the internally assessed work. Students should be encouraged to initiate 
discussions  with  the teacher  to obtain  advice  and  information,  and  students  must  not be penalized  for 
seeking  guidance.  As part  of the learning  process,  teachers  should  give  advice  to students  on how  to best 
prepare  for the individual  oral.  This  should  include  guidance  on the choice  of two  texts  the student  will 
focus  on to address  the global  issue  of their  choice,  and  on the suitability  of the chosen  global  issue  to the 
two  texts.  It could  also  include  practice  of the individual  oral  with  texts  and  global  issues  different  from 
those  the students  will use for their  internal  assessment.  The teacher  should  provide  feedback  on areas  of 
the student’s  work  that  could  be improved  so as to better  fulfil  the assessment  criteria  on the basis  of such 
practices. As the process of preparation for the oral is drawing to a close, teachers may provide feedback on 
the outlines the students have created but may not rehearse the actual oral with the students.
It is the responsibility of teachers to ensure that all students understand the basic meaning and significance 
of concepts  that  relate  to academic  honesty,  especially  authenticity  and  intellectual  property.  Teachers 
must  ensure  that  all student  work  for assessment  is prepared  according  to the requirements  and  must 
explain clearly to students that the internally assessed work must be entirely their own.
All work  submitted  to the IB for moderation  or assessment  must  be authenticated  by a teacher,  and  must 
not include  any known  instances  of suspected  or confirmed  academic  misconduct.  Each  student  must 
confirm  that  the work  is his or her authentic  work.  Once  the oral  has been  completed  at the time 
designated  by the school,  it cannot  be redone,  and  once  the oral  has been  submitted,  it cannot  be 
retracted.  The requirement  to confirm  the authenticity  of work  applies  to the work  of all students,  not just 
the sample  work  that  will be submitted  to the IB for the purpose  of moderation.  For further  details,  refer  to 
Assessment
Internal assessment
52 Language A: language and literature guide
the IB publications  Academic  honesty  in the IB educational  context , The  Diploma  Programme:  From  principles 
into practice  and the relevant articles in General regulations: Diploma Programme .
Authenticity  may  be checked  by discussion  with  the student  on the content  of the work,  and  scrutiny  of 
one or more of the following:
• the student’s initial proposal
• the usual quality of the student’s work.
The same  material  cannot  be submitted  to meet  the requirements  of both  the internal  assessment  and  the 
extended  essay.  The texts  used  in the internal  assessment  must  be different  from  those  used  in other 
assessment components
Time allocation
Internal  assessment  contributes  30%  to the final  assessment  of the SL course  and  20%  to the final 
assessment of the HL course. This weighting should be reflected in the time that is allocated to teaching the 
knowledge,  skills  and  understanding  required  to undertake  the assessment,  as well  as the time  needed  to 
conduct the oral.
Conducting the individual oral will require time:
• for the teacher to explain the requirements of the internal assessment
• to review the academic honesty documents
• for students to work on the internal assessment component and ask questions
• for consultation between the teacher and each student
• to review and monitor progress, and to check authenticity
• to conduct the orals and submit all documentation.
Requirements and recommendations
The individual oral must be conducted in the language A studied. The procedures and characteristics of the 
individual  oral  can,  and  should,  be practised  during  the course,  as should  the development  of verbal 
interaction between student and teacher. Students should be discouraged, however, from committing their 
individual  orals  to memory.  Memorization  tends  to distance  the speaker  from  the listener,  thus  making  it 
unlikely that the oral will be effective or convincing.
Each  student’s  individual  oral  must  be audio  recorded  and  the files  must  be of high  quality.  Each  recording 
is to be retained  according  to the procedures  set out in Diploma  Programme  Assessment  procedures . 
Samples of the internal assessment selected for moderation must be submitted in the form of an audio file.
Using assessment criteria for internal assessment
For internal  assessment,  a number  of assessment  criteria  have  been  identified.  Each  assessment  criterion 
has level  descriptors  describing  specific  achievement  levels,  together  with  an appropriate  range  of marks. 
The level  descriptors  concentrate  on positive  achievement,  although  for the lower  levels  failure  to reach 
certain minimum requirements may be included in the description.
Teachers  must  judge  the internally  assessed  work  at SL and  at HL against  the criteria  using  the level 
descriptors.
• The same assessment criteria are provided for SL and HL.
• The aim is to find, for each criterion, the descriptor that conveys most accurately the level attained by 
the student, using the best-fit model. A best-fit approach means that compensation should be made 
when a piece of work matches different aspects of a criterion at different levels. The mark awarded 
should be one that most fairly reflects the balance of achievement against the criterion. It is not 
necessary for every single aspect of a level descriptor to be met for that mark to be awarded.Internal assessment
53 Language A: language and literature guide
• When assessing a student’s work, teachers should read the level descriptors for each criterion until 
they reach a descriptor that most appropriately describes the level of the work being assessed. If a 
piece of work seems to fall between two descriptors, both descriptors should be read again and the 
one that more appropriately describes the student’s work should be chosen.
• Where there are two marks available within a level, teachers should award the upper marks if the 
student’s work demonstrates the qualities described to a great extent and the work is close to 
matching the descriptors in the level above. Teachers should award the lower marks if the student’s 
work demonstrates the qualities described to a lesser extent and the work is closer to matching the 
descriptors in the level below.
• Only whole numbers should be recorded; partial marks, (fractions and decimals) are not acceptable.
• Teachers should not think in terms of a pass or fail boundary, but should concentrate on identifying 
the descriptor that best matches the student’s work for each assessment criterion.
• The highest level descriptors do not imply a faultless performance; they should be achievable by a 
language A: language and literature student. Teachers should not hesitate to use the extremes of the 
mark range if they are appropriate descriptions of the work being assessed.
• A student who is awarded a mark in a high level in relation to one criterion will not necessarily reach 
high levels in relation to the other criteria. Similarly, a student who is awarded a mark in a low level for 
one criterion will also not necessarily be placed in low levels for the other criteria. Teachers should not 
assume that the overall assessment of the students will produce any particular distribution of marks.
• Teachers are expected to make the assessment criteria available to students and ensure that they 
understand them.
Internal assessment details—SL/HL
Individual oral
Duration: 15 minutes (10 minutes: student individual oral; 5 minutes: teacher questions)
Weighting: 30% for SL, 20% for HL
The nature of the task
The individual oral addresses the following prompt:
Examine  the ways  in which  the global  issue  of your  choice  is presented  through  the content  and  form  of 
one of the works and one of the texts that you have studied.
Explanation of the task
The individual  oral  is based  on the exploration  the student  has carried  out in the learner  portfolio.  During 
this exploration  process,  the student  will have  investigated  a series  of non-literary  texts  and  literary  works 
and  a variety  of global  issues.  In the lead  up to the individual  oral,  the student  must  make  a decision  about 
which global issue and which text and work will be explored in the task. One work and one non-literary text 
must be selected. An extract of no more than 40 lines should be selected from each which is representative 
of the presence  of the global  issue  in it. In forms  or text  types  where  the number  of lines  may  not be 
applicable, teachers should be guided by the volume of text that can be discussed in sufficient depth in the 
time available.
Selection of text, work and extracts
The work  and  text  selected  must  have  a clear  connection  with  the global  issue.  The individual  oral  should 
be a well-supported  argument  about  the ways  in which  both  represent  and  explore  the global  issue. 
Students  must  select  two  extracts,  one  from  the text  and  one  from  the work,  that  clearly  show  significant 
moments when this global issue is being focused on. Normally these extracts should not exceed 40 lines or 
present an unmanageable amount of material to be analysed. As the student brings unannotated copies of 
these  extracts  to the individual  oral,  extracts  which  are too lengthy  may  hinder  their  ability  to effectively 
expand  the discussion  to the text  or work  as a whole.  An extract  may  be a complete  text  in itself,  for 
example a whole poem or an advertisement.Internal assessment
54 Language A: language and literature guide
If the extract  is from  a literary  text  which  is part  of a larger  work  studied,  such  as a short  story,  or if it is a 
complete  text  which  is part  of a work  studied,  such  as a poem,  students  should  discuss  relevant  aspects  of 
the broader work as a whole in their individual oral.
If the extract is a complete non-literary text, students should discuss relevant aspects of the broader body of 
work of the author of the text. In the case of a photograph, for example, the broader discussion should refer 
to other photographs by the same photographer. If identifying the single author of a non-literary text is not 
possible,  students  should  use an ampler  definition  of authorship  to broaden  their  discussion  of the global 
issue.  In the case  of an advertisement,  for example,  students  could  refer  to the other  advertisements  or 
commercials  belonging  to the same  campaign,  to other  campaigns  of the same  brand  or to other  work 
produced by the advertising agency. In the case of an article, students could refer either to other articles by 
the same  author  or to the general  editorial  line of the medium  in which  the article  was  published.  In cases 
such as the latter two, students should make explicit what constitutes their definition of authorship.
The extracts  are meant  to help  students  focus  their  responses,  remove  the need  to learn  quotations  and 
enable  them  to explore  more  precise  issues,  such  as style,  specific  devices  and  other  distinct  techniques 
used  by authors  to present  the global  issue.  The choice  of extracts  should  show  the student’s 
understanding  of the relevance  of the part  to the whole  and  enable  coverage  of larger  and  smaller  choices 
made by the writers to shape their perspectives on the global issue.
Determining the global issue
A global issue incorporates the following three properties:
• It has significance on a wide/large scale.
• It is transnational.
• Its impact is felt in everyday local contexts.
Students  may  look  to one  or more  of the following  fields  of inquiry  for guidance  on how  to decide  on a 
global  issue  to focus  their  orals  on. These  topics  are not exhaustive  and  are intended  as helpful  starting 
points  for students  to generate  ideas  and  derive  a more  specific  global  issue  on which  to base  their 
individual oral. It should also be noted that there is the potential for significant overlap between the areas.
Culture, identity and community
Students  might  focus  on the way  in which  texts  explore  aspects  of family,  class,  race,  ethnicity,  nationality, 
religion, gender and sexuality, and the way these impact on individuals and societies. They might also focus 
on issues concerning migration, colonialism and nationalism.
Beliefs, values and education
Students  might  focus  on the way  in which  texts  explore  the beliefs  and  values  nurtured  in particular 
societies  and  the ways  they  shape  individuals,  communities  and  educational  systems.  They  might  also 
explore the tensions that arise when there are conflicts of beliefs and values, and ethics.
Politics, power and justice 
Students might focus on the ways in which texts explore aspects of rights and responsibilities, the workings 
and  structures  of governments  and  institutions.  They  might  also  investigate  hierarchies  of power,  the 
distribution of wealth and resources, the limits of justice and the law, equality and inequality, human rights 
and peace and conflict.
Art, creativity and the imagination
Students might focus on the ways in which texts explore aspects of aesthetic inspiration, creation, craft, and 
beauty. They might also focus on the shaping and challenging of perceptions through art, and the function, 
value and effects of art in society.
Science, technology and the environment
Students  might  focus  on the ways  in which  texts  explore  the relationship  between  humans  and  the 
environment  and  the implications  of technology  and  media  for society.  They  might  also  consider  the idea 
of scientific development and progress.
In selecting  the global  issue  for their  oral,  students  must  be careful  not simply  to select  from  the broad 
fields of inquiry above, but to determine a specific issue for discussion that can be reasonably explored in a Internal assessment
55 Language A: language and literature guide
10 minute  oral.  The global  issue  chosen  for consideration  should  be significant  on a wide  scale,  be 
transnational  in nature,  and  be an issue  that  has an impact  felt in everyday  local  contexts.  The issue  should 
be clearly evidenced in the extracts or texts chosen.
For example,  within  the field  of culture,  identity  and  community,  the theme  of gender  in itself  might  be 
unsuitably  broad  for an individual  oral.  A student  interested  in this theme  might  explore  instead  how 
gender  bias  manifests  itself  in different  contexts;  how  this can be evidenced  in many  ways  in texts  of 
different  sorts;  how  different  authorial  choices  will determine  what  is meant  by gender  bias;  whether  bias 
should  be viewed  positively  or negatively,  allowing  the students  to evaluate  the writer’s  choices  and  the 
impact they might have on the different readers’ or viewers’ understanding.
The oral  itself  will only  be concerned  with  the aspects  of the global  issue  relevant  to the two  texts  chosen. 
The student  should  ensure  the oral  offers  a balanced  approach,  giving  approximately  equal  attention  to 
both  texts.  Thus,  it is important  that  the student  selects  extracts/texts  that  offer  equally  sufficient  material 
for the discussion.
The learner portfolio and the individual oral
The learner  portfolio  is not specifically  assessed  but it is an important  place  for students  to explore  and 
reflect upon their works in relation to global issues.
In relation  to the preparation  of the individual  oral,  the learner  portfolio  provides  an opportunity  for 
students to:
• keep an ongoing record of the different global issues that could be related to each of the texts they 
read
• explore links that could be established between different texts on the basis of common global issues 
they address
• explore how key passages in the texts they have studied represent different or similar perspectives on 
one global issue through both form and content
• trace the evolution of their thinking and planning in connection with the global issue and how its 
cultural value, its definition and application to the texts they read have changed through their inquiry
• reflect on the challenges that the internal assessment poses for them as individual learners.
Conduct of the individual oral
Students  have  the flexibility  to use any of the texts  from  their  course  of study  up until  the time  of the 
assessment.  It should  be remembered  that  texts  chosen  for the individual  oral  cannot  then  be used  for any 
other  assessment  component.  Students  should  select  their  own  oral  topics.  Teachers  should  monitor  and 
guide  students  in their  selection  of viable  global  issues,  relevant  texts  and  effective  choice  of extracts,  but 
they  should  not suggest  topics  to students  nor tell them  what  to do. Though  teachers  play  a critical  role  in 
helping students prepare, this must be a student inspired and created oral.
The oral  may  be conducted  at any time  after  a significant  number  of the texts  have  been  studied  in the 
course.  All of the texts  used  for the oral  need  to be featured  as part  of the teaching  of the course.   It is 
recommended  that  the oral  takes  place  either  in the last part  of the first year  or the first part  of the second 
year.
The place  and  time  of the oral  is chosen  by the teacher.  Teachers  may  conduct  all the orals  on one  day or 
over  several  days.  Students  must  be given  adequate  notice  of when  the oral  will take  place.  Schools  will be 
provided with a form for students to create an outline of their oral. Students should prepare this in advance 
as it will provide them with a springboard for their oral. Students should not read the outline as a prepared 
script.  The form  gives  students  a maximum  of 10 bullet  points  to help  provide  structure  to their  oral. 
Individual  bullet  points  must  not be excessively  long.  Schools  will be required  to keep  all copies  of the 
outline  form  until  after  the results  are issued.  In order  to determine  authenticity  of student  performance, 
schools may be required to submit these forms to IB.
Copies  of the extracts  chosen  by the student  must  be provided  to the teacher  for approval  at least  one 
week  before  the individual  oral  assessment  takes  place.  Teachers  will have  their  own  copies  of the extracts 
during the assessment and these may help the teacher frame suitable questions for the student.Internal assessment
56 Language A: language and literature guide
The extracts  must  be clean,  unmarked  copies;  the student  may  only  take  the extracts  and  the outline  into 
the room where the individual oral assessment will take place.
The individual  oral  takes  place  between  the student  and  teacher.  The teacher  asks  questions  to probe 
further  into  the student’s  knowledge  and  understanding  of the extracts/texts  and  their  analysis  of the 
choices  made  by the authors  in relation  to the global  issue  chosen.  In the case  of less confident  students, 
teachers  must  encourage  them  to give  them  the opportunity  to expand  on unsubstantiated  or inadequate 
statements.
The individual oral lasts 10 minutes, followed by 5 minutes of questions by the teacher.
The individual  oral  is internally  assessed  and  externally  moderated  by the IB. Audio  recordings  of the oral, 
together  with  the relevant  extracts,  are required  for the purpose  of moderation.  To this end,  all materials 
and  recordings  must  be clearly  and  accurately  assembled  and  kept.  Care  must  also  be taken  to provide  a 
suitably quiet environment for the recordings.
Internal assessment criteria
Individual oral
There are four assessment criteria.
Criterion A Knowledge, understanding and interpretation 10 marks
Criterion B Analysis and evaluation 10 marks
Criterion C Focus and organisation 10 marks
Criterion D Language 10 marks
Total 40 marks
Criterion A: Knowledge, understanding and interpretation
• How well does the candidate demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the extracts, and of the 
works/texts from which they were taken?
• To what extent does the candidate make use of knowledge and understanding of the extracts and the 
works/texts to draw conclusions in relation to the global issue?
• How well are ideas supported by references to the extracts, and to the works/texts?
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–2 There is little knowledge and understanding of the extracts and the works/texts in relation 
to the global issue.
References to the extracts and to the works/texts are infrequent or are rarely appropriate .
3–4 There is some knowledge and understanding of the extracts and the works/texts in relation 
to the global issue
References to the extracts and to the works/texts are at times appropriate.
5–6 There is satisfactory knowledge and understanding of the extracts and the works/texts and 
an interpretation of their implications in relation to the global issue.
References to the extracts and to the works/texts are generally relevant and mostly support 
the candidate’s ideas.
7–8 There is good knowledge and understanding of the extracts and the works/texts and a 
sustained interpretation of their implications in relation to the global issue.Internal assessment
57 Language A: language and literature guide
Marks Level descriptor
References to the extracts and to the works/texts are relevant and support the candidate’s 
ideas.
9–10 There is excellent knowledge and understanding of the extracts and of the works/texts and a 
persuasive interpretation of their implications in relation to the global issue.
References to the extracts and to the works/texts are well-chosen and effectively support the 
candidate’s ideas.
Criterion B: Analysis and evaluation
• How well does the candidate use his or her knowledge and understanding of each of the extracts and 
their associated works/texts to analyse and evaluate the ways in which authorial choices present the 
global issue?
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–2 The oral is descriptive or contains no relevant analysis.
Authorial choices are seldom identified and, if so, are poorly understood in relation to the 
presentation of the global issue .
3–4 The oral contains some relevant analysis, but it is reliant on description.
Authorial choices are identified, but are vaguely treated and/or only partially understood in 
relation to the presentation of the global issue.
5–6 The oral is analytical in nature, and evaluation of the extracts and their works/texts is mostly 
relevant.
Authorial choices are identified and reasonably understood in relation to the presentation of 
the global issue.
7–8 Analysis and evaluation of the extracts and their works/texts are relevant and at times 
insightful
There is a good understanding of how authorial choices are used to present the global issue.
9–10 Analysis and evaluation of the extracts and their works/texts are relevant and insightful.
There is a thorough and nuanced understanding of how authorial choices are used to 
present the global issue.
Criterion C: Focus and organization
• How well does the candidate deliver a structured, well-balanced and focused oral?
• How well does the candidate connect ideas in a cohesive manner?
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–2 The oral rarely focuses on the task. There are few connections between ideas.
3–4 The oral only sometimes focuses on the task, and treatment of the extracts, and of the 
works/texts may be unbalanced.
There are some connections between ideas, but these are not always coherent.
5–6 The oral maintains a focus on the task, despite some lapses; treatment of the extracts and 
works/texts is mostly balanced.Internal assessment
58 Language A: language and literature guide
Marks Level descriptor
The development of ideas is mostly logical; ideas are generally connected in a cohesive 
manner.
7–8 The oral maintains a mostly clear and sustained focus on the task; treatment of the extracts 
and works/texts is balanced.
The development of ideas is logical; ideas are cohesively connected in an effective manner.
9–10 The oral maintains a clear and sustained focus on the task; treatment of the extracts and 
works/texts is well-balanced.
The development of ideas is logical and convincing; ideas are connected in a cogent 
manner.
Criterion D: Language
• How clear, accurate and effective is the language?
Marks Level descriptor
0 The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–2 The language is rarely clear or accurate; errors often hinder communication. Vocabulary 
and syntax are imprecise and frequently inaccurate.
Elements of style (for example, register, tone and rhetorical devices) are inappropriate to 
the task and detract from the oral.
3–4 The language is generally clear; errors sometimes hinder communication. Vocabulary and 
syntax are often imprecise with inaccuracies.
Elements of style (for example, register, tone and rhetorical devices) are often 
inappropriate to the task and detract from the oral.
5–6 The language is clear; errors do not hinder communication. Vocabulary and syntax are 
appropriate to the task but simple and repetitive.
Elements of style (for example, register, tone and rhetorical devices) are appropriate to the 
task and neither enhance nor detract from the oral.
7–8 The language is clear and accurate; occasional errors do not hinder communication. 
Vocabulary and syntax are appropriate and varied.
Elements of style (for example, register, tone and rhetorical devices) are appropriate to the 
task and somewhat enhance the oral.
9–10 The language is clear, accurate and varied; occasional errors do not hinder communication. 
Vocabulary and syntax are varied and create effect.
Elements of style (for example, register, tone and rhetorical devices) are appropriate to the 
task and enhance the oral.Internal assessment
59 Language A: language and literature guide
Through the approaches to learning in language courses, students develop skills that have relevance across 
all areas that help them “learn how to learn”. Approaches to learning can be taught, improved with practice 
and developed incrementally, through implementing a number of approaches to teaching.
The approaches  to learning  provide  a common  framework  for students  to reflect  on, and  articulate,  how 
they  are learning.  They  prepare  students  for success  in their  studies  and  life beyond  school.  To this end, 
language  learning  should  be supported  in ways  that  are consistent  with  the IB learner  profile  and  the 
pedagogical  principles  that  underpin  the IB programmes:  the promotion  of critical  and  creative  thinking 
skills, learning how to learn, and promoting international-mindedness.
When  designing  their  courses,  teachers  need  to embrace  the approaches  to teaching  in order  for them  to 
help students identify and develop learning skills in their studies in language and literature courses.
Approaches to teaching
Teaching based on inquiry
One  of the pedagogical  principles  that  underpins  all IB programmes  is that  of teaching  based  on inquiry. 
Being  inquirers  is one  of the attributes  of the IB learner  profile,  where  the process  of inquiry  is seen  as 
involving the development of students’ natural curiosity, together with the skills needed to enable them to 
become  autonomous  lifelong  learners.  The most  significant  aspect  of inquiry-based  teaching  is that 
students  are actively  engaged  in their  own  learning,  constructing  their  own  understandings  of 
interpretations and issues.
Teaching  and  learning  in studies  in language  and  literature  is not simply  about  the delivery  and 
understanding  of content;  it is also  about  engaging  with  processes  of comprehension,  analysis, 
interpretation  and  contextualization.  As such,  inquiry  is the basis  for both  the design  and  the 
implementation  of classroom  teaching  practice  in studies  in language  and  literature.  Students  need  to be 
encouraged  to activate  their  curiosity,  find  their  own  ways  into  texts  and  make  connections  to prior 
learning.
Examples of inquiry-based teaching approaches and activities in studies in language and literature include:
• providing scope for and encouraging individual lines of inquiry as well as student choice in creating 
and choosing a variety of tasks
• encouraging students to engage in creative tasks (written, oral and visual arts), pastiches, role plays, 
performances, and so on, and to experience and explore through them the process of creative writing 
and the challenges to expression that it entails
• designing individual and group research tasks, case studies and presentations based on student 
questions and areas of interest
• exploring the ways in which other areas of inquiry (for example, historical, philosophical, 
psychological) might contribute to and enrich the reading experience
• using problem-solving approaches to texts (for example, finding connections between texts, applying 
different critical perspectives to texts).
Teaching focused on conceptual understanding
Concepts  are broad,  powerful  organizing  ideas  that  have  relevance  both  within  and  across  subject  areas. 
Exploring  concepts  helps  students  to build  the capacity  to engage  with  complex  ideas,  and  discussion  of 
the “big  ideas”  behind  a topic  can help  students  get to the heart  of why  they  are learning  what  they  are 
Approaches to teaching and approaches to learning
Approaches to teaching and approaches to learning 
in studies in language and literature
60 Language A: language and literature guide
learning.  There  is also  a strong  link between  teaching  through  concepts  and  moving  students  to higher 
order  thinking;  for example,  it allows  students  to move  from  concrete  to abstract  thinking,  and  facilitates 
transfer of learning to new contexts.
In studies  in language  and  literature,  the concepts  of identity,  culture,  creativity,  communication, 
representation,  transformation  and  perspective  are central  elements  of the course.   These  key concepts  to 
which  teaching  and  learning  regularly  return  can help  students  make  sense  of the various  texts  and  issues 
examined  in the course  and  in the world  at large  and  can form  a theoretical  umbrella  for the course  as a 
whole.  When  teachers  approach  the various  texts  and  issues  examined  in the course  from  the perspective 
of what  they  add  to students’  understanding  of broader  concepts,  students’  learning  becomes  more 
meaningful.  This  does  not imply  that  the texts  themselves  are not immanently  of interest  and  do not 
deserve  careful  critical  attention,  in particular  in connection  with  how  authors  employ  language  and  form 
to promote  or even  critique  cultural  identities  and  values,  relationships  and  issues.  However,  it is 
recognized  that  some  wider  and  important  phenomenon  underlies  a specific  text  or issue,  not only  in 
relation to the world but also in relation to the discipline of studies in language and literature. With such an 
aspiration, we develop skills in critical thinking, making learning connected, transferable and deeper.
Examples of conceptually focused teaching approaches and activities in language and literature include:
• moving from the concrete to the abstract, for instance by drawing together knowledge from close 
readings of individual texts in order to explore broader conceptual concerns, e.g. the nature of poetry, 
the construction of meaning or the significance of "literariness" as an idea
• encouraging students to explore different formal representations and mappings of the world of 
literary texts; e.g. through literary form, format, purpose, audience or context 
• applying conceptual frameworks to texts or, conversely, constructing conceptual frameworks from 
reading texts
• exploring the concept of transformation by designing activities that ask students to consider literary 
forms and their conventions by transforming texts in a variety of ways (through translation to film or 
through performance, for example)
• grounding close investigation of texts on broader conceptual discussions: for instance, in connection 
with the concept of representation, does the structure of narrative affect meaning? How does medium 
affect meaning? What is the relationship between the physical (a book, a performance, a live speech) 
and communication?
Teaching developed in local and global contexts
As individuals and as members of local and global communities, students make sense of the world through 
their  life experiences,  the communities  around  them  and  broader  global  concerns.   Contextualized 
teaching  and  learning  helps  students  see connections  between  ideas  and  aids  the development  of 
international-mindedness  because  it allows  students  to move  between  their  own  situations  and  situations 
of others.
There  are a number  of ways  in which  the idea  of context  can be significant  in language  and  literature 
studies.  Audience, purpose and literary form are crucial ways of connecting texts with the contexts of their 
production  and  consumption,  and  can help  students  to see applications  of linguistic  and  literary 
knowledge to real life.  The studies in language and literature classroom is also an ideal place for students to 
gain insights into familiar and unfamiliar, local and global cultural contexts both through the content of the 
texts themselves and the ways in which they are read and interpreted.  
Examples of contextualized teaching approaches and activities in language and literature learning include:
• bringing the outside world into schools (writers, cultural experts, other teachers, theatre 
performances, school partnerships, etc.)
• drawing on students’ backgrounds, experiences and interests allowing for texts from different cultures 
to be juxtaposed
• encouraging creative and real-world opportunities for students to explore cultural contexts and make 
links to other subjects, such as the arts; for example writing program notes for a local theatre 
production, creating art, monologues, collages or poetryApproaches to teaching and approaches to learning in studies in language and literature
61 Language A: language and literature guide
• taking students out into the world by providing opportunities for experiential learning by, for 
example, making explicit connections between CAS and the subject in the hope that students will be 
encouraged to generate a CAS project or experience related to their studies in language and literature
• providing students with cultural frameworks with which to understand texts and issues (for example, 
co-texts such as news articles or other writings from the culture).
Teaching focused on effective teamwork and collaboration
Collaboration  is a key element  of learning  in the Diploma  Programme.  Learning  is a social  phenomenon 
that  is closely  associated  with  the approaches  of shared,  situated  and  embedded  cognition,  which  view 
learning  as the result  of a complex  interaction  of minds  within  specific  contexts.  Collaborative  learning 
takes place between students but also between students and teachers as they construct meaning.
Collaboration  is particularly  important  in studies  in language  and  literature  as the use of language  involves 
interaction amongst people. In addition, our reception of any text depends on the community of readers to 
which  we belong.  Finding  meaning  in a text  is a collaborative  process.  Even  an individual  working  through 
a text  is influenced  by past  readings  and  experiences  with  others  and,  as Michael  Ondaatje  points  out in 
Running in the Family (2009), “a literary work is a communal act”.
Examples of collaborative learning activities in studies in language and literature include:
• designing activities that encourage interaction between students and negotiation among them in 
relation to differing interpretations of one same text
• using particular protocols, like literature circle protocols, that help structure discussion and therefore 
allow for greater autonomy from the teacher, fostering instead reliance on other students
• implementing peer-assessment activities in order for students to obtain feedback on their 
understanding from their classmates
• allowing students as a group a greater say as regards decision-making in relation to syllabus content, 
assessment or sequencing of material within the bounds set by the IB in this guide
• providing opportunities for students to carry out group presentations or performances that call for a 
variety of decisions, tasks, and aspects of performance.
Teaching designed to remove barriers to learning
Differentiation  is about  accommodating  the different  ways  in which  students  learn,  and  about  teachers 
designing learning experiences that allow students with a range of needs to meet their learning objectives. 
There is therefore an important link between differentiation and effective and purposeful planning.
In studies  in language  and  literature,  teachers,  as they  plan,  can design  lessons  and  activities  that  affirm 
identity  and  build  self-esteem,  value  prior  knowledge,  and  scaffold  and  extend  learning.  Decisions  ranging 
from  the choice  of texts  to the nature  of classroom  activities  can greatly  influence  the extent  to which  the 
needs of individual students are being met.
Examples of teaching designed to remove barriers to learning in studies in language and literature include:
• selecting texts that are challenging but accessible and allow students to build on prior knowledge
• planning a wide range of activities that cater for different learning preferences and even suggest 
different modalities of tasks the student can choose from to achieve one same aim
• using a variety of strategies to create in-class groupings that allow for collaboration and growth
• paying attention to the use of multimodal texts so that students are able to access texts that are read 
aloud, or to work on graphic interpretations of texts that allow for a focus on the visual
• paying careful attention to timely and relevant feedback that is specific to the needs of the individual 
learner
• considering the possibility of giving the student some say as far as curriculum design is concerned, for 
example allowing the course to have some say in the choice of works that will be read.Approaches to teaching and approaches to learning in studies in language and literature
62 Language A: language and literature guide
Teaching informed by assessment (formative and summative)
Assessment  plays  a crucial  role  in both  supporting  and  measuring  learning.  While  formal,  criterion-
referenced  summative  assessments  are used  in the Diploma  Programme  to assess  overall  learning,  other 
assessments,  both  formative  and  summative,  should  be used  by teachers  to determine  levels  of learning  at 
different  points  of the teaching  of the syllabus  and  make  decisions  about  future  approaches  and 
engagements.  Formative  and  summative  assessments,  paired  with  appropriate  feedback,  can be powerful 
tools to improve student learning.
In studies  in language  and  literature,  assessment  can be often  process-oriented  and  not just product-
oriented.  For instance,  the work  done  in the learner  portfolio  aims  to encourage  students  to undertake 
ongoing  informal  self-assessment  of their  understanding  of the texts  they  read,  the connections  among 
them,  the cultural  values  that  frame  their  responses,  the intercultural  perspectives  of multiple  readers,  and 
the concepts and areas of exploration that structure the course.
Assessment  will be often  teacher-led;  however,  at certain  points  teachers  can plan  instances  of formal  self- 
or peer-assessment in order to provide students with opportunities to reflect on their own and each other’s 
learning  and  performance  in order  to develop  their  language  and  literature  skills.  The key to assessment  is 
that the data is then used to inform instruction as assessment and feedback are as important to the teacher 
as they are to the student.
Examples of teaching informed by assessment in studies in language and literature include:
• checking that assessment marks and commentaries are understood, followed by clarification and 
further activities as needed
• producing discussion based on student feedback and previous responses
• encouraging students to undertake ongoing reflection and self-assessment in a variety of forms—
brainstorming, free-writing, journal response, critical reflection-- scaffolded over time
• conducting online, collaborative forum discussions on differentiated topics, where students can 
negotiate each other’s interpretations of texts and explore the cultural values on which interpretations 
are based.
• using mini-lessons or workshops to focus instruction based on gathered internal and external 
assessment data.
Approaches to learning
Thinking skills
Developing  thinking  skills  is a key feature  of the constructivist  approach  to learning  that  heavily  influences 
all IB programs.  The teacher  in the IB classroom  is the facilitator  who  provides  or shapes  learning 
opportunities  that  allow  students  to develop  skills  of metacognition,  reflection,  critical  thinking,  creative 
thinking  and  transfer.  Deliberate  thinking  in a classroom  situation  is best  achieved  through  requiring 
students to come up with responses to questions that do not only require remembering or explaining.
In studies  in language  and  literature  students  are asked  to engage  with  authentic  disciplinary  problems. 
The three  courses  are built  around  the reading,  listening  and  viewing  of texts,  the development  of an 
informed,  creative  response  to text  and  the communication  of such  a response  to an audience.  All of these 
activities involve and develop a varied range of sophisticated thinking skills.
Examples  of the ways  in which  thinking  skills  can be developed  in studies  in language  and  literature 
include:
• establishing connections between texts studied and current affairs that might make transfer of 
learning to new contexts more likely to happen
• encouraging students to actively engage in the formulation of hypotheses about a text’s meaning and 
how that meaning is constructed without needing to rely on tried interpretations or on easily 
accessible online sourcesApproaches to teaching and approaches to learning in studies in language and literature
63 Language A: language and literature guide
• fostering thinking through the juxtaposition of texts from different times, cultures, literary forms and 
text types
• using active learning techniques, such as role plays and debates during which students need to think 
and make decisions independently and spontaneously
• ensuring that a culture of thinking is firmly established in the classroom, by consistently using visible 
thinking routines.
Communication skills
Communication  skills  are important  for success  in school  but are also  essential  to create  an atmosphere  of 
congeniality  in the learning  community:  they  help  to form  and  maintain  good  relationships  between 
students  and  between  students  and  adults.  Furthermore,  being  able  to communicate  well  contributes  to 
the development of students’ self-confidence and enhances their future prospects.
It almost  goes  without  saying  that  communication  skills  are at the heart  of studies  in language  and 
literature.  Specific  aspects  of communication  such  as reading,  viewing,  writing,  speaking,  listening  and 
performing form a part of the aims of the courses in studies in language and literature. Almost every aspect 
of the studies of language and literature is related to the development of communication skills in students.
Examples  of further  ways  in which  communication  skills  can be developed  in studies  in language  and 
literature include:
• articulating a well-developed and well-supported personal response to a text
• carrying out group and individual presentations, using a variety of presentation formats, and 
encouraging attentive listening from the rest of the class and presenter/audience interaction
• using digital tools to enrich learning and improve communication and feedback in the class learning 
environment
• practising different roles using role play and reflection and performing plays, skits or oral 
interpretations of literature for an audience of peers
• broadening academic communication beyond the classroom through student-led literary conferences, 
presentations to parents, and work with younger students or other school communities.
Social skills
Social  skills  are closely  connected  to communication  skills  in that  they  relate  to the development  of the 
learner as a whole and in that they both foreground the value of a community for learning. A starting point 
for developing students’ social skills is to acknowledge that people differ greatly in terms of their degree of 
introversion  or extroversion  and  that  these  differences  should  be respected.  Similarly,  different  cultures 
have  different  expectations  on appropriate  behaviours  in social  situations.  To be able  to understand  the 
perspectives  of others,  to form  good  relationships  and  to gain  an awareness  of how  one’s  words  and 
actions  have  an impact  on other  people  are at the heart  of many  of the IB learner  profile  attributes  and  the 
aspiration to develop internationally-minded students.
In studies  in language  and  literature,  the sensitive,  interactive  and  collaborative  engagement  in the 
discussion  of a wide  variety  of texts  allows  students  to consider  and  develop  their  own  social  skills  by 
debating/negotiating  the meaning  of a text,  as students  in one  same  classroom  may  have  different 
interpretations  of one  same  text.  When  students  are faced  with  an interpretation  that  contrasts  with  or 
even  opposes  theirs,  they  need  to listen  carefully  to the other  student(s)  that  hold  such  an interpretation, 
support  their  own,  and  arrive  collaboratively  at an agreement,  or when  that  is not possible,  achieve  a clear 
understanding of the differences between two or more views and identify the evidence that could be used 
to support each of them.
Examples of the ways in which social skills can be developed in studies in language and literature include:
• creating classroom and discussion norms
• creating, through attitude and example, a safe classroom environment where challenging and diverse 
texts can be studied in a respectful mannerApproaches to teaching and approaches to learning in studies in language and literature
64 Language A: language and literature guide
• using in a balanced and purposeful way group and private response, group and individual work, and 
the classroom space for both better classroom interaction and private reflection
• developing an active listening ability that allows students to consider different perspectives and to 
engage in collaborative negotiation of meaning with the students who hold such perspectives
• teacher modelling possible varied responses to texts and public feedback that acknowledges and 
appreciates difference.
Self-management skills
IB students  need  to learn  to persevere  and  be resilient  as individuals.  Learning  to manage  themselves  is 
important for students in any academic programme and is important for competency in later life.
Self-management skills such as organizational skills, goal setting, and time management as well as affective 
skills  such  as managing  state  of mind,  motivation  and  resilience  are important  for success  in the study  of 
language  and  literature  especially  when  it comes  to lengthy  or difficult  texts  and  self-directed  research. 
Students should demonstrate initiative, perseverance and a strong willingness to learn independently. They 
should also be willing to embrace the opportunities for individual and personal choices the syllabus allows.
Examples  of the ways  in which  self-management  skills  can be developed  in studies  in language  and 
literature include:
• establishing clear deadlines and managing expectations in a fair and purposeful manner
• establishing a scheme of work or a plan of study that scaffolds growth and helps students to manage 
time without creating artificial boundaries, hoops or expectations that hinder true reflection
• giving attention to study techniques such as note-taking, text marking or the use of various digital 
organizational tools while allowing students to find their own approaches to self-management and 
academic organization
• encouraging self-reflection on progress against criteria but also self-reflection based on aims as broad 
as developing an interest in and enjoyment of language and literature
• helping students increase their autonomy and take responsibility over the organisation of their own 
work, developing in the process an awareness of the challenges that deadlines pose for them 
individually.
Research skills
While  good  research  skills  have  always  been  at the heart  of academic  endeavour,  the availability  of digital 
resources  and  the explosion  of the amount  of information  easily  accessible  to students  make  the 
development  of research  skills  a particularly  pertinent  part  of today’s  education.  Learning  to use those 
resources  and  to put those  skills  into  practice  in an academically  honest  way  is an important  aspect  of 
learning in all IB programmes.
Fundamental  research  skills  such  as formulating  focused  and  intriguing  research  questions,  appraising 
sources, and recording, evaluating and synthesizing information are critical skills in studies in language and 
literature. Throughout their studies, students have ample and excellent opportunities to practise their skills 
in both  informal  and  more  formal  and  extended  ways.  A course  that  deals  with  a variety  of texts  produced 
in a variety of contexts inherently demands some element of research in order to increase engagement and 
understanding.
Examples  of the ways  in which  research  skills  can be developed  in studies  in language  and  literature 
include:
• teacher modelling effective research skills and solid academic honesty practices through the use of 
carefully selected secondary material that goes beyond the basic internet search
• development in the student of the ability to distinguish between a sound, well-grounded and well-
researched interpretation of a text and one that isn’t, and the ability to evaluate the validity of the 
claims of different critical perspectives on texts
• individual research for presentations, papers or performances with teacher guidance on how to use 
online databases and how to identify and select the most fruitful sourcesApproaches to teaching and approaches to learning in studies in language and literature
65 Language A: language and literature guide
• group research tasks in relation to contextual concerns of texts studied
• research of linguistic and literary history or practices, again structured by the teacher, so that students 
can begin to have a sense of important disciplinary questions, appropriate databases, possible 
secondary text sources and means of assessing reliability.Approaches to teaching and approaches to learning in studies in language and literature
66 Language A: language and literature guide
Command terms for studies in language and 
literature
Students  should  be familiar  with  the following  key terms  and  phrases  used  in assessment  objectives  and 
assessment criteria, which are to be understood as described below. Some of these terms may be also used 
in examination questions, but most of them will be more frequently used to describe levels of achievement 
in the descriptors of the different assessment criteria.
Command term Assessment 
objective levelDefinition
Analyse 2,3 Break down in order to bring out the essential elements or 
structure.
Comment 2,3 Give a judgment based on a given statement or result of a 
calculation.
Compare 1,2,3 Give an account of the similarities between two (or more) items 
or situations, referring to both (all) of them throughout.
Compare and 
contrast1,2,3 Give an account of similarities and differences between two (or 
more) items or situations, referring to both (all) of them 
throughout.
Contrast 1,2,3 Give an account of the differences between two (or more) items 
or situations, referring to both (all) of them throughout.
Describe 1,3 Give a detailed account.
Discuss 1,2,3 Offer a considered and balanced review that includes a range of 
arguments, factors or hypotheses. Opinions or conclusions 
should be presented clearly and supported by appropriate 
evidence.
Evaluate 2,3 Make an appraisal by weighing up the strengths and 
limitations.
Examine 2,3 Consider an argument or concept in a way that uncovers the 
assumptions and interrelationships of the issue.
Explain 1,2,3 Give a detailed account including reasons or causes.
Explore 2,3 Undertake a systematic process of discovery.
Interpret 1,3 Use knowledge and understanding to recognize trends and 
draw conclusions from given information.
Investigate 1,2 Observe, study, or make a detailed and systematic examination, 
in order to establish facts and reach new conclusions.
Justify 1,2,3 Give valid reasons or evidence to support an answer or 
conclusion.
Present 3 Offer for display, observation, examination or consideration.
Appendices
Glossary of command terms
67 Language A: language and literature guide
Command term Assessment 
objective levelDefinition
To what extent 1,2,3 Consider the merits or otherwise of an argument or concept. 
Opinions and conclusions should be presented clearly and 
supported with appropriate evidence and sound argument.Glossary of command terms
68 Language A: language and literature guide
This  bibliography  lists  the principal  texts  used  to inform  the curriculum  review  and  the texts  cited  in the 
guide.  It is not an exhaustive  list and  does  not include  all the literature  available:  judicious  selection  was 
made  in order  to better  advise  and  guide  teachers.  This  bibliography  is not a list of recommended 
textbooks.
Abbott, H. Porter. 2002. The Cambridge Introduction to Narrative . Cambridge. Cambridge University Press.
Appleman, D. 2009. Critical Encounters in High School English. Teaching Literary Theory to Adolescents. Second 
edition. Urbana, IL. NCTE.
Atwood, M. 2010. "Spelling". Eating Fire: Selected Poetry 1965- 1995. London. Virago.
Beach,  R. & Myers,  J. 2001.  Inquiry-Based  English  Instruction:  Engaging  Students  in Life  and  Literature . New 
York, New York. Teachers College Press.
Beaty,  J and  J. P. Hunter.  (Eds.)  1998.  The  Norton  Introduction  to Literature.  Seventh  edition.  New  York,  NY. 
W.W. Norton & Company.
Blau, S.D. 2003. The Literature Workshop: Teaching Texts and their Readers. Portsmouth, NH. Heinemann.
Branston, G and Stafford, R. 2010. The Media Student’s Book . 5th edition. Abingdon, UK. Routledge.
Chomsky,  N. 2004.  "Language  as a Key to Human  Nature  and  Society".  Language  and  Politics.  Ed. C.P. Otero. 
Oakland, CA. AK Press.
Choo,  SS. 2013 . Reading  the World,  the Globe,  and  the Cosmos:  Approaches  to Teaching  Literature  for the 
Twenty-first Century . New York. Peter Lang.
Choo,  SS. 2014a.  "Cultivating  a Hospitable  Imagination:  Re-envisioning  the World  Literature  Curriculum 
Through a Cosmopolitan Lens". Curriculum Inquiry . Vol 44, number 1. Pp 68–89.
Choo,  SS. 2014b.  "Towards  a Cosmopolitan  Vision  of English  Education  in Singapore".  Discourse:  Studies  in 
the Cultural  Politics  of Education . Vol 35, number  5. Pp 677–691.  Article  available  online  at: https://
www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/01596306.2014.921994
Culler, J. 2000. Literary Theory. A Very Short Introduction. Oxford. Oxford University Press.
Culler, J. 1981. The Pursuit of Signs: Semiotics, Literature, Deconstruction. Ithaca, NY. Cornell University Press.
Damrosch, D. 2003. What is World Literature?  Princeton, NJ. Princeton University Press.
Damrosch, D. 2009. How to Read World Literature . Sussex, UK. Wiley-Blackwell.
Damrosch, D.  (Ed.). 2009. Teaching World Literature . New York. MLA.
Damrosch, D. (Ed.). 2014. World Literature in Theory . Malden, MA. Blackwell.
Damrosch, D. and Spivak, G. 2011, April. Comparative Literature/World Literature.  Dialogue delivered orally at 
the American Comparative Literature Association Conference. Vancouver, Canada.
Daniels, H. and N. Steineke. 2004. Mini-lessons for Literature Circles. Portsmouth, NH. Heinemann.
Eagleton,  T. 1996.  Literary  Theory:  An Introduction  (second  edition).  Minneapolis,  MN,  USA.  The University  of 
Minnesota Press.
Eagleton, T. 2009. Trouble with Strangers: A Study of Ethics . Malden, MA, USA. Wiley-Blackwell.
Erickson,  H.L, Lanning,  L.A, and  French,  R. 2017  2nd  ed. Concept-based  Curriculum  & Instruction   for the 
Thinking Classroom. California: Corwin Press Pub.
Felski, R. 2008. Uses of Literature . Oxford. Wiley Blackwell.
Fish,  S. 1980.  Is There  a Text  in this  Class?  The  Authority  of Interpretive  Communities . Cambridge,  MA.  Harvard 
University Press.
Appendices
Bibliography
69 Language A: language and literature guide
Friedman, S. S. 1998. Feminism and the Cultural Geographies of Encounter . Princeton, NJ. Princeton University 
Press.
Hansen,  D. T. 2011.  The  Teacher  and  the World:  A Study  of Cosmopolitanism  as Education . New  York. 
Routledge.
Kohn,  A. 2000  - The  Schools  Our  Children  Deserve:  Moving  beyond  Traditional  Classrooms  and  "tougher 
Standards"  Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2000.
Kristeva,  J. 1980.  Desire  in Language:  A Semiotic  Approach  to Literature  and  Art.  New  York.  Columbia 
University Press.
Leitch, V.B. (Ed.). 2001. The Norton Anthology of Theory and Criticism. New York, NY. W.W. Norton & Company.
Lodge, D. 1992. The Art of Fiction. London. Penguin.
McKeon,  M. (Ed.)  2000.  Theory  of the Novel.  A Historical  Approach.  Baltimore,  MD.  Johns  Hopkins  University 
Press.
Ondaatje, M. 2009. Running in the Family . London, UK. Bloomsbury.
Ott, B. L. and R. L. Mack. 2010. Critical Media Studies: An Introduction.  Oxford. Wiley Blackwell.
Page,  R. and  B. Thomas,  eds.  2011.  New  Narratives:  Story  and  Storytelling  in the Digital  Age. Lincoln,  NE. 
University of Nebraska Press.
Palumbo-Liu,  D. 2012.  The  Deliverance  of Others:  Reading  Literature  in a Global  Age. Durham,  NC. Duke 
University Press.
Ritchhart,  R., M. Church  and  K. Morrison.  2011.  Making  Thinking  Visible.  How  to Promote  Engagement, 
Understanding, and Independence for All Learners. San Francisco, CA. Jossey-Bass.
Rosenblatt, L. M. 1995. Literature as Exploration. Fifth edition. New York, NY. MLA.
Rosenblatt,  L. M. 1994.  The  Reader,  the Text,  the Poem:  The  Transactional  Theory  of the Literary  Work. 
Cardondale, IL. Southern Illinois University Press.
Said, E. W. 1983. The World, the Text and the Critic . Cambridge, MA. Harvard University Press.
Scholes, R. 1985. Textual Power. Literary Theory and the Teaching of English. New Haven. Yale University Press.
Tomlinson,  C. 2001.  How  to Differentiate  Instruction  in Mixed-Ability  Classrooms,  2nd  edition.  Alexandria,  VA. 
ASCD.
Tomlinson,  C. 2014.  The  Differentiated  Classroom:  Responding  to the Needs  of All Learners . 2nd  edition. 
Alexandria, VA. ASCD.
Tyson, L. 2015. Critical Theory Today – A User-friendly Guide. Third edition. New York, NY. Routledge.
Youssef, L. 2010. "A matter of relevance: Teaching Classics in the 21st Century". College Teaching , 58, 28-31.
Zunshine, Lisa. 2006. Why We Read Fiction. Columbus, OH. Ohio State University Press.Bibliography
70 Language A: language and literature guide
