© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Business management
Standard level
Paper 1

28 April 2023

Zone A afternoon   Zone B morning   Zone C morning


1 hour 15 minutes

Instructions to candidates
y   Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y   A clean copy of the business management case study is required for this examination paper.
y   Read the case study carefully.
y   A clean copy of the business management formulae sheet is required for this examination
    paper.
y   Section A: a
                nswer two questions.
y   Section B: a
                nswer question 4.
y   A calculator is required for this examination paper.
y   The maximum mark for this examination paper is [40 marks].




                                                                                             2223 – 9228
       3 pages                                           © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
                                                 –2–                                           2223 – 9228


                                             Section A

Answer two questions from this section.

1.   (a)	Outline two disadvantages for SVT’s employees of the new flexible-working contract
          (lines 60–62).                                                                              [4]

     (b)   Explain the factors that SVT should consider when deciding on a pricing strategy for
           the WF15 water purifier (lines 126–131).                                                   [6]


2.   (a)	Outline one advantage and one disadvantage for SVT of Ariadne’s leadership style
          (lines 21–26).                                                                              [4]

     (b)   Explain different distribution channels that SVT could use for the WF15 water purifier
           (lines 132–133).                                                                           [6]


3.   (a)	Outline two non-financial rewards that SVT could have used for the long-serving
          employees that wanted to leave the company because of the implementation of the
          flexible-working contract (lines 56–64).                                                    [4]

     (b)   With reference to STEEPLE factors, explain changes in the external environment that
           may have affected SVT (lines 20–21).                                                       [6]
                                                   –3–                                             2223 – 9228


                                               Section B

Answer the following question.

4.   In 2022, the global home water filter market was $14 billion.

     SVT’s product penetration in Europe and the United States of America (USA) is high and
     growing but low in the rest of the world. In 2022:
     y SVT’s total sales revenue from home water filters was $4.9 billion
     y the average revenue earned per water filter was $20
     y 90 % of SVT’s home water filter sales were to Europe and the USA.

     In 2022, SVT announced the closure of its European and USA water filter manufacturing
     factories. Water filter profit margins had fallen for three years, partly because of increasing
     costs of energy, rent and labour. SVT has since built a huge new factory in Asia to
     manufacture home water filters.

     SVT’s market research, using quota sampling, found that 80 % of households that purchased
     an SVT water filter:
     y had an above-average income
     y owned two or more cars.

     In January 2023, SVT:
     y launched an advertising campaign in Europe and the USA highlighting the lack of potable water
        for millions of people in less economically developed countries (LEDCs)
     y announced a 5 % worldwide increase in the price of its home water filters.

     SVT committed to use the revenue from the 5 % price increase to provide two million free
     WF15 water purifiers annually to charities in LEDCs. It costs SVT $10 to make a water purifier.

     Some disagreement occurred among the board of directors regarding this price increase.
     Some directors felt it would highlight SVT’s vision and commitment to helping people
     in LEDCs, but others believed sales might fall, impacting profits in SVT’s Consumer
     Products Division.

     (a)   Define the term quota sampling.[2]

     (b)   (i) 	Calculate SVT’s home water filter market share in 2022 (show all your working).[2]

           (ii)   Calculate the number of home water filters SVT sold in 2022 to the rest of the
                  world (excluding Europe and the USA) (show all your working).[2]

     (c)   Explain two factors that SVT would have needed to consider when deciding where to
           open the new factory in Asia.                                                                  [4]

     (d)   Discuss whether SVT should have increased the price of its home water filters.               [10]




