© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Business management
Case study: Skandvig Terra PLC


For use in May 2023




Instructions to candidates
y Case study booklet required for higher level paper 1 and standard level paper 1 business
  management examinations.




                                                                                              2223 – 5001
     5 pages                                              © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
                                                  –2–                                           2223 – 5001


                                      Skandvig Terra PLC (SVT)

     Skandvig Terra PLC (SVT) initially specialized in producing and delivering potable water in Norway.
     Its vision statement, “Making the world a safer place”, has remained unchanged since the founding
     of the company.

     SVT currently supplies potable water to over one million people in Norway and to millions of
 5   households in over 20 other countries. SVT builds and operates water treatment plants to purify
     the water and is responsible for maintaining the regional water supply networks in these countries.
     SVT has a regional monopoly in each country in which it operates. In the 1980s, SVT expanded
     into other business sectors, including desalination and household water treatment products, by
     acquiring other companies.

10   SVT is organised into four divisions based on product:
     y The Fresh Water Division, which supplies potable water
     y The Desalination Division, which constructs and operates desalination plants
     y The Engineering Division, which manufactures water treatment equipment and power turbines
     y The Consumer Products Division, which manufactures home water filters

15   Each division is headed by a director with operational and tactical authority, enabling quick
     decision making. For example, in response to climate change causing shortages of potable water
     in some countries, Yannick Pedersen, the director of the Fresh Water Division, was able to quickly
     find alternative sources of potable water.

     The leadership styles of the directors differ between the divisions. Yannick has a situational
20   leadership style that works well in a division that has to respond quickly to unexpected changes
     in the external environment. His leadership style contrasts with the style adopted by Ariadne
     Johansen, the director of the Engineering Division. Many employees view Ariadne’s leadership
     style as autocratic, a style that may have led to the Engineering Division being one of the industry
     leaders in productivity per employee. However, Yannick has clashed with Ariadne on several
25   occasions, as he feels that machinery needed to update water treatment plants has been delayed
     due to Ariadne having different priorities.

     Fresh Water Division

     This division sources, treats, stores and transports water from the environment (surface water
     deposits, rivers and subterranean aquifers) for distribution to populations. The water is collected
30   and stored in large manufactured reservoirs. The division, which supplies potable water to nearly
     200 million people around the world, has increased in size through both internal and external
     growth strategies. Its most recent acquisition was Geng PLC, a major water supplier in the
     United Kingdom (UK).

     Desalination Division

35   Desalination is a process that removes salts and other minerals from sea water to produce water
     that is suitable for human consumption or irrigation on farmland. SVT’s Desalination Division
     manufactures and operates desalination plants around the world, providing two income streams.
     The division provides 15 % of the world’s desalination capacity.

     The market for desalination is growing rapidly, and some estimates suggest that the global water
40   desalination market will double in the next 10 years. SVT currently operates desalination plants
     in 19 of the 120 countries that use such plants, including Australia, China, Greece, India, Japan,
     Portugal, Saudi Arabia, Spain and the United Arab Emirates.
                                                   –3–                                            2223 – 5001


     The Desalination Division also manufactures much smaller desalination plants, which are installed
     on seagoing vessels. The large increase in the demand for cruise holidays in the last 20 years has
45   boosted SVT’s sales of these plants by 300 % since 2015.

     Engineering Division

     This division manufactures equipment and machinery for SVT’s water treatment plants, with
     factories in Norway, Germany and the UK.

     To broaden its product range, SVT completed a takeover of a rival engineering company, H4 PLC,
50   in 2015. H4 manufactures steam and gas turbines in four factories in the UK. These turbines
     produce electricity. Originally a family-owned business, H4’s board of directors had been reluctant
     to embrace change. Its factories operated five days per week, with a single shift that ran from
     8.00 am to 5.00 pm each day. H4 employees were paid competitive salaries, similar to those
     offered by rival businesses, but the company never made use of any other financial or non-financial
55   methods of motivation for its employees.

     Following the takeover of H4, SVT undertook a modernization programme and reorganization of
     the operations of H4’s UK factories, achieving economies of scale. SVT wanted the H4 factories
     to operate 24 hours a day, every day of the week, with three eight-hour shifts per day. However,
     SVT’s human resources (HR) department met resistance to this change from a significant number
60   of long-serving employees. To overcome this resistance, SVT offered a one-time incentive payment
     to employees who agreed to sign a new flexible-working contract, which would include accepting a
     new shift pattern every six months. Employees who did not want to sign this contract were offered
     generous payments to leave SVT. Approximately a quarter of the employees, with an average age
     of 61, turned down the flexible-working contract and left the company.

65   As a result of this significant exodus of former employees from H4, SVT’s HR department
     organized recruitment to fill the 300 vacancies that were created. SVT wanted to appoint
     employees who worked well within a team environment. These vacancies were for a variety of
     different jobs, but all required highly skilled and specialized employees. People with these skills
     were in very short supply in the UK. The HR department chose carefully where to advertise the
70   vacancies, and all vacancies were filled within three months. New employee induction training
     included a visit to SVT’s flagship factory in Norway, which utilizes innovative technologies to
     enhance the speed and quality of production.

     The modernization programme of the former H4 factories was completed successfully in 2016.
     The objective—to operate these factories 24 hours a day, seven days a week, with three shifts per
75   day—was met. In the last six years, labour productivity has improved, unit costs have fallen, and
     labour turnover figures in these factories have been consistently below the national average. In
     2022, the smallest of the former H4 factories manufactured SVT’s first wind turbine. Wind turbines
     can be located on land or in the sea (offshore) and generate electricity from the wind. This factory
     has the capacity to manufacture 10 large (2.5 megawatt) turbines per year and already has a
80   full order book for 2023. The demand for wind turbines is expected to grow each year as more
     countries seek methods of generating electricity that do not rely on burning fossil fuels.




                                                                                                 Turn over
                                                     –4–                                             2223 – 5001


      Consumer Products Division

      The Consumer Products Division manufactures and sells water filters for use at home. The filters
      take potable water and use carbon to remove calcium, chlorine, copper, cadmium and zinc. These
 85   filters, which do not remove bacteria or viruses in the water, are not suitable for use in countries
      that have problems with access to potable water.

      Between 2005 and 2010, SVT’s Consumer Products Division made consistently increasing
      contributions to SVT’s overall profits. In the same time period, SVT’s share price rose by 65 % and
      annual profits doubled, enabling the company to increase its dividends each year.

 90   SVT increased its market share in the home water filter industry by both external and internal
      growth. From 2010, SVT began to take over many small water filter manufacturers in both Europe
      and the United States of America (USA). SVT aims to become the brand leader in this market
      in both Europe and the USA. In 2018 SVT’s board of directors approved a substantial five-year
      marketing budget.

 95   Corporate social responsibility (CSR) – SVT’s Outreach Programme

      SVT set up its Outreach Programme as part of the company’s commitment to helping people in
      less economically developed countries (LEDCs). The programme offers these countries free skilled
      labour provided by SVT employees. After 10 years of continuous employment, all employees are
      offered the opportunity for a three-month paid career break to take part in the programme. SVT
100   pays the employees’ travel expenses and accommodation costs and continues to pay their salary.
      As part of the programme, employees have taught in schools, dug wells, repaired infrastructure
      and provided training to local people in many LEDCs around the world, including Angola, Sudan
      and Yemen. In the last 10 years, 6 000 SVT employees have taken part in the programme. SVT
      works with charities and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to identify projects that would
105   make the best use of SVT employees.

      SVT’s directors can also take part in the programme. One director, Jayne Dees, spent three
      months teaching English in village schools in Sudan in 2019. She saw first-hand that many
      Sudanese people do not have access to potable water and cannot afford water purifiers that
      remove bacteria and viruses from dirty or contaminated water. Some of her students walked
110   miles each day to collect water from ponds and rivers, and the water that they collected was a
      threat to their health. On her return to Norway, Jayne recommended to the board of directors that
      SVT become actively involved in developing low-cost, easily transportable water purifiers for use
      in countries where access to potable water is limited. Her own research suggested that these
      purifiers would need to operate using solar power, be simple to use, cheap to purchase and last for
115   10 years.

      SVT’s board of directors were impressed by Jayne’s idea. It fitted well with SVT’s vision statement.
      In 2020, SVT launched a competition, aimed at inventors and entrepreneurs, to develop a water
      purifier that met strict criteria in terms of cost, usability and longevity. The winner of the competition
      would receive a prize of $100 000. This competition attracted impressive entries from all over
120   the world. In January 2021, the winner was announced: James Azuki, a university student from
      Tanzania. He named his design “WF15”, as it was his fifteenth attempt that finally produced potable
      water in sufficient quantity, and SVT agreed to retain this name for the product.

      A few hours of sunlight can power the WF15 to produce enough potable water each day to
      meet the needs of up to four people. The water produced meets the World Health Organization
125   guidelines for potable water.
                                                   –5–                                            2223 – 5001


      SVT’s Engineering Division began production of the WF15 in 2022. However, board members
      have not yet agreed on a pricing strategy. Several directors believe the WF15 should be a not-for-
      profit operation, and a minority feel that SVT should go further and subsidize the product to make it
      affordable to as many people as possible. Two directors are against subsidizing the WF15, as they
130   believe subsidies will negatively impact SVT’s overall profitability, making other stakeholders in the
      business unhappy.

      A secondary unresolved issue is how SVT would distribute the WF15. SVT has little experience of
      distributing consumer products in LEDCs and no distribution channel in place for this new product.

      SVT’s marketing department recently used secondary market research to investigate the spending
135   patterns of low-income families in LEDCs and their access to media. The findings found that:
      y only a minority of families owned a television set
      y newspapers and magazines were seldom purchased
      y levels of social media usage were fast approaching the levels seen in advanced economies.

      SVT’s board of directors have much to think about. They have to make decisions in key areas of
140   the operation of SVT.


Companies, products, or individuals named in this case study are fictitious and any similarities with
actual entities are purely coincidental.




