© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Economics
Standard level
Paper 2

16 May 2023

Zone A afternoon   Zone B morning   Zone C afternoon


1 hour 45 minutes

Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this paper until instructed to do so.
y You are permitted access to a calculator for this paper.
y Unless otherwise stated in the question, all numerical answers must be given exactly or correct
  to two decimal places.
y You must show all your working.
y Answer one question.
y Use fully labelled diagrams and references to the text/data where appropriate.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [40 marks].




                                                                                              2223 – 5109
      9 pages                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
                                                     –2–                                               2223 – 5109


Answer one question.

1.   Read the extracts and answer the questions that follow.

Text A — Overview of Uruguay

     1   With a population of only 3.5 million, Uruguay is one of the smallest nations in South America.
         Its membership of the MERCOSUR common market allows Uruguayan producers tariff-free
         access to 290 million consumers in Argentina, Brazil and Paraguay.

     2   Agriculture accounts for 8 % of Uruguay’s gross domestic product (GDP) and 65 % of
         its export revenue. Exports have increased since the early 2000s, partly due to China’s
         rising demand for commodities. In particular, Uruguay’s soybean producers benefitted from
         significantly higher prices during the commodity boom. China is now Uruguay’s most important
         export destination, with soybeans accounting for over 50 % of its exports to China.

     3   Uruguay’s real GDP increased by an average of 5.39 % per year from 2005 to 2014. However,
         the economy slowed considerably when the commodity boom ended in 2015. It slowed further
         because of decreased regional demand when the largest members of MERCOSUR, Argentina
         and Brazil, faced a recession in 2017. Uruguay’s real GDP grew on average by 1.04 % per year
         from 2015 to 2018.

     4   With the increasing importance of China and the European Union (EU) as export markets,
         Uruguay has managed to reduce its dependency on MERCOSUR. However, attempts to
         diversify its exports away from agriculture have not been successful. The end of the commodity
         boom contributed to a fall in export revenue and the depreciation of the peso (Uruguay’s
         currency). The currency has lost over 25 % of its value since 2015.

     5   Inflation stayed at a relatively high rate of 8 % in 2018 due to the weaker currency. The
         unemployment rate also increased to 7.9 % as a result of the economic slowdown. The higher
         cost of living and the lower rates of employment could inhibit efforts to reduce inequality and
         poverty levels.

     6   Despite rising inflation and unemployment, Uruguay’s minimal corruption, abundant natural
         resources and access to a large common market continue to attract foreign direct investment
         (FDI). Investments in the paper and wood industries have made forestry one of the country’s
         fastest growing industries. Increased FDI inflows have also prevented the peso from
         depreciating further.

Text B — The EU–MERCOSUR free trade agreement

     1   The EU and MERCOSUR are finalizing the terms of a free trade agreement, which would
         enable Uruguay to increase its exports to the 27 EU member states. The EU currently buys
         11 % of all Uruguayan exports, mostly animal products, paper, vegetables and wood.

     2   Once the free trade agreement comes into effect, almost all agricultural and industrial tariffs
         between the EU and MERCOSUR will be removed. The imports of beef, poultry and sugar will
         not be included in the list of tariff-free products but will be subject to very large quotas. This will
         allow increased exports of these products to EU countries.


(This question continues on the following page)
                                                    –3–                                            2223 – 5109


(Question 1 continued)

   3    The free trade agreement may cause bankruptcies in the manufacturing sector and higher
        structural unemployment in Uruguay. EU exports to Uruguay largely consist of manufactured
        goods, such as chemicals, machinery, transport equipment and plastics, which are in high
        demand despite the current tariffs of up to 35 %.

   4    One third of FDI into Uruguay comes from the EU. Anticipation of the free trade agreement
        has led to more EU investments in Uruguay’s forestry sector. Environmental organizations
        have warned that the free trade agreement could be a threat to sustainability as South
        American forests are cleared to create land for cattle farming, paper and wood production. The
        deforestation might also disrupt water sources that supply rural villages, depriving the villagers
        of clean water.

Text C — Uruguay seeks trade agreements outside MERCOSUR

   1    Members of MERCOSUR have differing views on trade policies. Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay
        believe in trade liberalization and want to increase competition through a reduction of the
        common external tariff. On the other hand, Argentina wants to maintain the high external tariff to
        protect industries from cheap imports from China and to avoid prolonging its current recession.

   2    Uruguay has expressed its desire to seek trade agreements apart from MERCOSUR,
        which is prohibited by the common market’s rules. If Uruguay pursues separate bilateral
        agreements, it is likely to lose its MERCOSUR membership and the benefits of any existing free
        trade agreement.

                       Table 1: Current account data for Uruguay (US$ billion)

                                                             2018               2019

                    Exports of goods and services           18.72               18.52

                    Imports of goods and services           19.15               17.88

                    Net income                              –3.66               –3.05

                    Net current transfers                     0.10               0.19


                              Table 2: Selected income data for Uruguay

                                                  2010                 2015              2019

       Gross national income (GNI)
                                                16 190               19 290             22 810
       per capita (PPP US$)

       Gini index                                    44.5                40.1               39.7

(This question continues on page 5)




                                                                                                   Turn over
  –4–        2223 – 5109




Blank page
                                                     –5–                                            2223 – 5109


(Question 1 continued)

     (a)   (i)	Define the term gross domestic product (GDP) indicated in bold in the text
                (Text A, paragraph 2).                                                                     [2]

           (ii)    Define the term sustainability indicated in bold in the text (Text B, paragraph 4).     [2]

     (b)   (i)	Using information from Table 1, calculate the change in Uruguay’s current
                account balance between 2018 and 2019.                                                     [2]

           (ii)    Using information from Table 1, state whether Uruguay is facing a deficit or a
                   surplus in its balance of trade in goods and services in 2019.                          [1]

           (iii)   Using information from Table 2, sketch the change in Uruguay’s Lorenz curve
                   from 2010 to 2015.                                                                      [2]

     (c)   Using a demand and supply diagram, explain how China might have contributed to the
           Uruguayan soybean producers’ higher (total) revenue (Text A, paragraph 2).                      [4]

     (d)   Using an exchange rate diagram, explain how the end of the commodity boom might
           have contributed to the depreciation of the peso (Text A, paragraph 4).                         [4]

     (e)   Using an appropriate diagram, explain how the MERCOSUR–EU free trade agreement
           may lead to higher structural unemployment in Uruguay (Text B, paragraph 3).                    [4]

     (f)   Using an AD/AS diagram, explain the likely impact of the reduction of the common
           external tariff on Uruguay’s potential (long-term) output (Text C, paragraph 1).                [4]

     (g)   Using information from the text/data and your knowledge of economics, discuss the
           impact of economic integration on the Uruguayan economy.                                      [15]




                                                                                                    Turn over
                                                    –6–                                            2223 – 5109


2.   Read the extracts and answer the questions that follow.

Text D — Overview of Cameroon

     1   Cameroon is a country in Central Africa with a population of 25 million. It is rich in natural
         resources, including oil and mineral ores, and produces a wide range of agricultural products,
         such as cotton and cocoa. Its economic growth is usually driven by the export of oil. The gross
         domestic product (GDP) of Cameroon grew by an average of 5.6 % per year between 2013 and
         2014 when oil prices were high.

     2   Economic growth slowed and the budget deficit increased sharply between 2014 and 2016,
         when oil prices fell by 45 %. Oil production is a major part of the formal economy and is an
         important source of tax revenue for the government of Cameroon. Up to 90 % of the workers in
         other sectors are employed in the informal economy and hence contribute significantly less to
         tax revenue. Increased military spending in response to recent conflicts in the western regions
         of Cameroon further widened the budget deficit.

     3   Since the collapse of oil prices, economic growth has been supported by expansionary fiscal
         policy, which has become increasingly difficult to sustain. The budget deficit has increased to
         around 5 % of GDP and caused government (national) debt to rise to 30 % of GDP.

     4   Although there has been some reduction in absolute poverty in Cameroon, the number of
         people living in relative poverty increased by 12 % to 8.1 million between 2007 and 2014. The
         funds allocated for poverty reduction often go to subsidies for electricity, food and fuel. This
         reduces available funding for education and healthcare, which is insufficient in rural areas where
         poverty is most extreme.

     5   With an abundance of natural resources, Cameroon has the potential to attract foreign direct
         investment (FDI). However, weak governance and the poor business environment have
         deterred foreign investors. Local entrepreneurs are also discouraged by the long wait times for
         obtaining licenses to operate and the difficulties in securing business loans.

     6   Cameroon maintains a fixed exchange rate to the euro, at 1 franc = 0.0015 euro. Because of
         the persistent trade deficit, the franc (Cameroon’s currency) is overvalued at this level. Interest
         rates are kept high to prevent capital flight, which could increase the currency’s overvaluation.

Text E — The Growth and Employment Strategy

     1   The Growth and Employment Strategy is a set of policies adopted by the government of
         Cameroon to encourage diversification and promote efficiency in production. The policies have
         three broad objectives:
         • Create jobs and reduce the size of the informal economy through investment in
            human capital.
         • Increase productivity in agriculture, mining, and selected industries with potential for growth
            (timber, tourism, and information and communication technologies).
         • Encourage private investment and trade through the provision of infrastructure
            (including roads, ports and clean water supply).

     2   Productivity is low, especially in the primary sector. Cameroon has one million small farms
         engaged in traditional agriculture, but has a limited number of workers trained in good farming
         practices and management skills. Unskilled workers often work in the informal economy.


(This question continues on the following page)
                                                 –7–                                          2223 – 5109


(Question 2 continued)

   3   Access to imported fertilizer and lower transportation costs could reduce costs of production
       significantly. Farms also need to increase productivity to reduce labour costs. The monthly
       agricultural wage averages 20 000 francs but the government has recently increased the
       minimum wage to 36 270 francs. This could lead to an improvement in the economic well-being
       of workers in the formal economy but could increase unemployment and force some workers to
       enter the informal economy.

   4   The government remains committed to keeping food prices low in the short term through
       subsidies. Due to improved farming methods, farmers produced better quality cocoa beans
       in 2019, allowing them to charge higher prices on the international market. Over time, the
       increase in productivity should lead to higher incomes, lower prices and higher-quality products.

Text F — Free trade agreements with the European Union (EU) and the United Kingdom (UK)

       Cameroon has signed free trade agreements with the EU and the UK, which allow tariff-free
       access to the EU and the UK markets for products such as bananas, aluminium and processed
       cocoa products. Tariffs on imports into Cameroon of machinery and equipment, vehicles and
       fertilizers were also removed. However, tariffs on textiles and strategic agricultural products
       such as meat products, milk and selected vegetables were maintained.

                                 Table 3: Selected data for Cameroon

                                                 2018                   2019

                 Consumer price
                 index (CPI)                   115.8                   118.6
                 (base year = 2010)

                 Nominal interest
                                                  6.39                   7.94
                 rate* (%)

               * charged by financial institutions on loans


                          Table 4: Cameroon’s main export markets (2019)

                                                Share of export revenue (%)

                         EU and UK                            42.48

                         China                                18.10

                         India                                 7.63

                         USA                                   6.02

(This question continues on page 9)




                                                                                              Turn over
  –8–        2223 – 5109




Blank page
                                                     –9–                                            2223 – 5109


(Question 2 continued)

     (a)   (i)	Define the term relative poverty indicated in bold in the text (Text D, paragraph 4).      [2]

           (ii)    Define the term infrastructure indicated in bold in the text (Text E, paragraph 1).     [2]

     (b)   (i)	Using the information in Table 3, calculate the inflation rate in Cameroon in 2019.        [1]

           (ii)    Using the information in Table 3 and your answer to (b)(i), calculate the real
                   interest rate in Cameroon in 2019.	                                                     [1]

           (iii)   Using an appropriate diagram, illustrate the unemployment which may arise from
                   the imposition of a minimum wage (Text E, paragraph 3).                                 [3]

     (c)   Using an AD/AS diagram, explain how expansionary fiscal policy has supported
           economic growth in Cameroon (Text D, paragraph 3).                                              [4]

     (d)   Using an exchange rate diagram, explain how capital flight may increase the
           overvaluation of the franc (Text D, paragraph 6).                                               [4]

     (e)   Using a demand and supply diagram, explain how government subsidies may help to
           keep food prices low (Text E, paragraph 4).                                                     [4]

     (f)   Using an international trade diagram, explain the effect of removing tariffs on the
           imports of fertilizer into Cameroon (Text F).[4]

     (g)   Using information from the text/data and your knowledge of economics, discuss the
           need for a balance between market-oriented policies and government intervention to
           promote economic development in Cameroon.                                                     [15]
Disclaimer:
Content used in IB assessments is taken from authentic, third-party sources. The views expressed within them belong to their
individual authors and/or publishers and do not necessarily reflect the views of the IB.

References:
Text A		      The World Bank, 2022. [online] Available at: https://data.worldbank.org/ [Accessed 14 March 2022]
              Source adapted.
Text B		     European Commission, n.d. [online] Available at: https://ec.europa.eu/trade/policy/countries-and-regions/
              countries/uruguay/ [Accessed 14 March 2022] Source adapted.
		            McGuinness, R., 2019. Macron minister dashes EU hopes as France refuses to ratify EU-Mercosur trade deal
              [online] Available at: https://www.express.co.uk/news/world/1157866/france-news-eu-mercosur-trade-deal-
              emmanuel-macron [Accessed 14 March 2022] Source adapted.
Table 1       The World Bank, 2022. [online] Available at: https://data.worldbank.org/ [Accessed 14 March 2022]
              Source adapted.
Table 2       The World Bank, 2022. [online] Available at: https://data.worldbank.org/ [Accessed 14 March 2022]
              Source adapted.
Text D		      The World Bank, 2022. The World Bank in Cameroon [online] Available at: https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/
              cameroon/overview [Accessed 15 March 2022] Source adapted.
		           The World Bank, 2022. Cameroon – Fostering skills for inclusive workforce development, competitiveness, and
             growth : a framework for action (French) [online] Available at: https://documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/
             documents-reports/documentdetail/862521468001177532/cameroon-fostering-skills-for-inclusive-workforce-
             development-competitiveness-and-growth-a-framework-for-action [Accessed 15 March 2022] Source adapted.
             CC BY 3.0 IGO.
		           Sellers, K., The Borgen Project, 2018. Top 10 Facts About Poverty in Cameroon [online] Available at:
             https://borgenproject.org/ facts-about-poverty-in-cameroon/ [Accessed 15 March 2022] Source adapted.
Text E		     The World Bank, 2022. Cameroon – Fostering skills for inclusive workforce development, competitiveness, and
             growth: a framework for action (French) [online] Available at: https://documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/
             documents-reports/documentdetail/862521468001177532/cameroon-fostering-skills-for-inclusive-workforce-
             development-competitiveness-and-growth-a-framework-for-action [Accessed 15 March 2022] Source adapted.
             CC BY 3.0 IGO.
Text F		     Bama, C. E., 2021. Cameroon signs an Interim Economic Partnership Agreement with the United Kingdom
             [online] Available at: https://www.tralac.org/blog/article/15168-cameroon-signs-an-interim-economic-partnership-
             agreement-with-the-united-kingdom.html [Accessed 15 March 2022] Source adapted.
Table 3      The World Bank, 2022. [online] Available at: https://data.worldbank.org/ [Accessed 14 March 2022]
             Source adapted.
All other texts, graphics and illustrations © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
