M23/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ1/XX/M




                       Markscheme


                               May 2023


                           Geography


                           Higher level


                               Paper 3




12 pages
                                            –2–                 M23/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ1/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                       –3–                 M23/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ1/XX/M



Paper 3 part (a) markbands

 Marks   Level descriptor
         AO1: Knowledge and understanding of                 AO3: Synthesis       AO4: Selection, use and
         specified content                                   and evaluation       application of a variety of
                                                                                  appropriate skills and techniques
         AO2: Application and analysis of knowledge
         and understanding
   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
  1–3    The response is general, not focused on the question, and lacks detail and structure.
         • The response is very brief or general, listing a • No evidence of • Information is listed but is not
            series of unconnected comments or largely         synthesis or     grouped together in paragraphs,
            irrelevant information. Evidence is general or    evaluation is    or paragraphing is erratic.
            relevant to the topic, but not to the question.   expected.      • If present, the conclusion is brief,
         • Evidence (that is, facts, statistics, examples or                   does not summarize the argument
            theories) is listed, lacks detail, and the                         and/or does not address the
            relevance to the question is unclear.                              question.
         • Evidence is not used to formulate an argument
            or an analysis.
         • Everyday language is used; there is little use
            of geographical terminology or it is used with
            errors in understanding.
  4–6    The response only partially addresses the question; evidence is both relevant and irrelevant and is
         largely unstructured.
         • The response partially addresses the question • No evidence of • Paragraphs do not reflect
           and/or does not meet the requirements of the      synthesis or    grouping of information that
           command term. Key evidence is not included.       evaluation is   addresses a specific element of
         • A mix of relevant and irrelevant evidence is      expected.       the question.
           outlined (that is, facts, statistics, examples or               • If present, the conclusion is one-
           theories) and any links to the question are only                  sided, addressing only part of the
           listed.                                                           question.
         • The evidence presented supports only one
           element or interpretation of the question.
         • Key geographical terms are defined briefly.
           The terminology used is both relevant and
           irrelevant to the question.
  7–9    The response addresses most parts of the question and outlines an analysis supported by relevant
         evidence but may lack clear links between paragraphs.
         • The question is broken down into parts and        • No evidence of     • A series of standalone paragraphs
           most parts of the question are addressed in         synthesis or         each addressing a specific
           the response, with supporting evidence for          evaluation is        element of the question but
           each aspect of the question. The response           expected.            lacking clear links connecting
           meets the requirements of the command term.                              them all into a coherent whole.
         • Relevant evidence (that is, facts, statistics,                         • The conclusion repeats and
           examples or theories) is described, focused                              summarizes the analysis or
           on the question and mostly correct. Links with                           argument, but may contain new
           the question are described.                                              information as well.
         • The analysis outlines a two-sided argument
           briefly (if appropriate) and is mostly
           descriptive, using examples as explanation.
         • Correct definitions are given, and relevant and
           irrelevant specialist geographical terms are
           used with occasional errors; or everyday
           language is used.
                                                           –4–                M23/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


10–12   The response addresses all aspects of the question; the analysis is explained using evidence
        integrated in the paragraphs, and it is well structured.
        • All aspects of the question are addressed        • No evidence of    • Paragraphs focus on a relevant point
          and the response meets the requirements            synthesis or        of the argument and integrate the
          of the command term.                               evaluation is       supporting evidence. Paragraphs
        • Detailed evidence (that is, facts, statistics,     expected.           are linked and support the logical
          examples or theories) are integrated in                                flow of the argument and response.
          sentences and paragraphs, and links made                             • The conclusion summarizes the
          between evidence and the question are                                  evidence and argument, and links all
          explained and relevant.                                                back to the question.
        • The response explains how the two sides
          of the argument (if appropriate) are
          supported by detailed evidence that is
          integrated in sentences.
        • Clear, correct definitions and use of
          geographical language is integrated in the
          sentences and throughout the response.
                                                       –5–                  M23/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


Paper 3 part (b) markbands

 Marks   Level descriptor
         AO1: Knowledge and                    AO3: Synthesis and evaluation           AO4: Selection, use and
         understanding of specified                                                    application of a variety of
         content                                                                       appropriate skills and
                                                                                       techniques
         AO2: Application and analysis of
         knowledge and understanding
   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
  1–4    The response is general, not focused on the question, and lacks detail and structure.
         • The response is very brief or         • No synthesis or evaluation is      • Information is listed but is
            general, listing a series of           expected at this level.              not grouped together in
            unconnected comments or largely • No links are presented between the        paragraphs, or
            irrelevant information. Evidence is    response and (sub)topics in the      paragraphing is erratic.
            general or relevant to the topic,      guide.                             • If present, the conclusion is
            but not the question.                • No valid opinion or perspective on   brief, does not summarize
         • Evidence (that is, facts, statistics,   the issue is formulated.             the argument and/or does
            examples or theories) is listed,                                            not address the question.
            lacks detail, and the relevance to
            the question is unclear.
         • Evidence is not used to formulate
            an argument or an analysis.
         • Everyday language is used; there
            is little use of geographical
            terminology or it is used with
            errors in understanding.
  5–8    The response only partially addresses the question with limited links to the guide; evidence is both
         relevant and irrelevant and is largely unstructured.
         • The response partially addresses • No synthesis or evaluation is       • Paragraphs do not reflect
           the question and/or does not         expected at this level.             grouping of information that
           meet the requirements of the       • The link(s) between the response    addresses a specific
           command term. Key evidence is        and the guide focus on one topic;   element of the question.
           not included.                        other potential links are listed. • If present, the conclusion is
         • A mix of relevant and irrelevant   • A valid but limited opinion or      one-sided, addressing only
           evidence is outlined (that is,       perspective on the issue is         part of the question.
           facts, statistics, examples or       formulated.
           theories) and any links to the
           question are only listed.
         • The evidence presented supports
           only one element or interpretation
           of the question.
         • Key geographical terms are
           defined briefly. Terminology used
           is both relevant and irrelevant to
           the question.
 9–12    The response addresses most parts of the question with developed links to the guide and outlines an
         analysis supported by relevant evidence but may lack clear links between paragraphs.
         • The question is broken down into • Synthesis or evaluation is required • A series of standalone
           parts and most parts of the            at this level.                          paragraphs each
           question are addressed in the        • Links between the response and          addressing a specific
           response, with supporting              the guide refer to multiple topics      element of the question but
           evidence for each aspect of the        and are described.                      lacking clear links
           question. The response meets         • Opinion or perspective presented is     connecting them all into a
           the requirements of the command        aligned with the response but the       coherent whole.
           term.                                  links are not made explicit or the    • The conclusion repeats and
         • Relevant evidence (that is, facts,     link is a general statement.            summarizes the analysis or
           statistics, examples or theories) is   Other perspectives or interpretations   argument, but may contain
           described, focused on the              are listed without details.             new information as well.
           question and mostly correct.
                                                       –6–                  M23/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


          Links with the question are
          described.
        • The analysis outlines a two-
          sided argument briefly (if
          appropriate) and is mostly
          descriptive, using examples as
          explanation.
        • Correct definitions are given, and
          relevant and irrelevant specialist
          geographical terms are used with
          occasional errors; or everyday
          language is used.
13–16   The response addresses all aspects of the question; the analysis is explained and evaluated using
        evidence integrated in the paragraphs, and it is well structured.
        • All aspects of the question are      •   Synthesis and evaluation is           • Paragraphs focus on a
          addressed and the response               required at this level.                 relevant point of the
          meets the requirements of the        •   Links between the response and          argument and integrate the
          command term.                            (sub)topics from the guide are          supporting evidence.
        • Detailed evidence (that is, facts,       explained and supported by the          Paragraphs are linked and
          statistics, examples or theories)        evidence in the response.               support the logical flow of
          are integrated in sentences and      •   The opinion or perspective              the argument and
          paragraphs, and links made               presented is explicitly linked to the   response.
          between evidence and the                 range of evidence included in the • The conclusion
          question are explained and               response, including critical             summarizes the evidence
          relevant.                                analysis of the relative certainty of    and argument, and links all
        • The response explains how the            evidence used, describing other          back to the question.
          two sides of the argument (if            perspectives or interpretations of
          appropriate) are supported by            evidence.
          detailed evidence that is
          integrated in sentences.
        • Clear, correct definitions and use
          of geographical language is
          integrated in the sentences and
          throughout the response.
                                                  –7–                M23/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


1.   (a)   Analyse how global patterns of aid and lending have created a more
           interconnected world.                                                                  [12]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on pages 3 to 4.

           Aid and lending are important global capital flows within global systems. The
           distinction between them is important – insofar as debt must be repaid (unless
           debt cancellation occurs). Aid comes in many different forms e.g. bilateral,
           multilateral, tied, emergency.
           Important global patterns include historical and ongoing capital transfers from a
           global core of higher-income states to the global periphery. Additionally, large transfers
           have taken place between high-income countries (e.g. US lending to UK in 1945). More
           recently, China and other BRIC countries have supplied aid and loans to many other
           countries (so-called ’south–south’ transfers) e.g. China’s Belt and Road project.
           Interconnected world may be analysed in terms of economic links, political
           interactions (including spread of neo-liberal ideas linked with ‘soft power’ of US/IMF).

           Possible links between aid, lending and interconnectivity:
           • International aid fosters linkages between donor and recipient countries/
              organizations (including donations made by governments, MGOs and NGOs).
           • The IMF lends money to states; in return, it usually requires increased
              participation in free trade, contributing to a more interconnected world economy.
           • EU members have access to shared funds/lending as part of a highly
              interconnected MGO.
           • Aid may have conditions attached (e.g. for countries where human rights have
              not been upheld, such as access to education for girls) which may contribute to
              long-term changes in the way one country interacts with others.
           • The UN, MGOs and NGOs have finance, welfare and development staff who
             work overseas, contributing to international migration and diaspora growth.

           Good answers may apply (AO2) a wider range of knowledge and understanding (AO1)
           in a well-structured way (AO4). One approach might be to provide a structured systematic
           analysis of different aid and lending patterns (historical core–periphery flows; more recent
           Belt and Road lending; lending patterns of major NGOs/civil society organizations).
           Another approach might be to provide a structured systematic analysis of different types
           of interconnectivity (e.g. economic and also political interconnectivity due to SAPs and the
           diffusion of neoliberal ideas). Another approach might be to analyse positive and negative
           aspects of interconnectivity linked with aid and lending (with possible use of subject
           literature e.g. models of Frank, Wallerstein).

           Responses which do not focus on aid/lending (and may instead erroneously use
           examples of inward investment by TNCs, etc.) may still access the 1-3 or 4-6 bands
           provided explicit analysis (AO2) of the concept of an interconnected world features
           as part of a knowledgeable (AO1) and well-structured (AO4) response.

           For 4–6 marks, expect some weakly evidenced outlining of two or more instances
           of aid and/or lending.

           For 7–9 marks, expect a structured, evidenced analysis of:
           • either global patterns of aid and lending (do not expect perfect balance)
           • or ways in which the world has become more interconnected due to
             aid and/or lending.

           For 10–12 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                              –8–                M23/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


(b)   To what extent have national governments and multi-governmental organizations
      (MGOs) lost control of global interactions?                                                [16]

      Credit all content in line with the markbands. Marks should be allocated according to
      the markbands on pages 5 to 6. Credit unexpected approaches wherever relevant.

      National governments and multi-governmental organizations include state actors
      (e.g. nationally or regionally powerful countries such as US, China, Australia, Japan, UK)
      and global/regional organizations such as the G7/8/20, OECD, OPEC, UN, EU, IMF,
      BRICs, WHO among many others.
      Control of global interactions includes the laws, rules, enforcements, incentives and
      sanctions that are used to manage/restrict/encourage different global flows of people,
      money, information, commodities etc. Many factors make regulation a challenge. Global
      development and population growth are linked with movements of people, commodities and
      ideas that can be difficult to control, including organized criminal
      networks and refugee flows.

      Possible applied themes (AO2) include knowledge and understanding (AO1) of how:
      • Superpower states influence global interactions using hard and soft power [Guide 4.1]
      • EU members have controlled internal trade, migration, investment etc. OPEC countries
         use their collective power to help influence global energy prices [Guide 4.1]
      • Shrinking world technologies are difficult to control for a range of reasons [Guide 4.3]
      • TNCs, especially technology companies, have enormous power on account of their
         investments and the ideas and cultures that spread via different forms of trade,
         including music, language, food and clothing. These changes may be hard for
         governments to control and resist [Guide 5.2]
      • Civil society organizations and protest groups may challenge the actions of national
         governments, especially in relation to internet censorship [Guide 5.3]
      • Hacking and identity theft may be hard to monitor and deal with [Guide 6.1]
      • Profit repatriation and tax avoidance by TNCs and wealthy individuals [Guide 6.1]
      • However, states are now using a range of new technologies and approaches to
         counter various risks (cybersecurity, e-passports) [Guide 6.3]
      • Nationalism/populism, re-shoring, Brexit and other developments show state government
         are re-asserting sovereignty and control over global interactions in varying contexts.

      Good answers may synthesize (AO3a) three or more of the above (or other) themes in
      a well-structured (AO4) way.

      Good answers may additionally offer a critical evaluation (AO3b) of the statement that
      discusses the different processes of control in contrasting contexts (e.g. laws, agreements,
      uses of technology). Another approach might be to evaluation the extent of any loss of
      control for different countries or places with varying power over global interactions. A good
      evaluation may conclude with a substantiated final judgement on the overall degree to which
      the statement is true given the diversity of different global interactions and national contexts.

      For 5–8 marks, expect weakly evidenced outlining of two or three relevant themes.

      For 9–12 marks, expect:

      • either a structured synthesis that links together several well-evidenced themes from
        the Guide
      • or a critical conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) informed by geographical concepts
        and/or perspectives.

      For 13–16 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                   –9–                M23/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


2.   (a)   Using examples, analyse the influence of diaspora populations on the cultural identity of
           different places.                                                                    [12]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on pages 3 to 4.

           Diaspora is a spread/scattered population of common ancestry or heritage. Widely
           used examples include the Brazilian, Chinese, Indian, Jewish, Nigerian and
           Scottish diasporas, amongst many others. A country’s diaspora consists of its own
           overseas citizens, and citizens of other countries who are descended from earlier
           generations of migrants.
           The cultural identity of different areas (landscape elements) - and their societies
           (music, food, language) - may become modified by diaspora growth.
           Places in ‘host’ and ‘source’ countries alike, and at varying scales, may become
           altered. Influence may be far greater on some neighbourhoods than it is on
           larger-scale cities as a whole through the creation of ethnic villages (but
           ghettoization could limit cultural influence on other parts of the same local place).

           Possible influences of diaspora populations on cultural identity:
           • By their presence, diaspora populations increase cultural diversity in particular
             places where they have become established.
           • Diaspora populations may help to modify the culture of particular places as
             part of a “melting pot” effect; cultural traits including music, language, food and
             clothing may all be modified by the arrival of migrants and establishment of
             diaspora communities (US culture can be analysed as a hybrid culture made
             up of traits contributed by many different diasporas).
           • The physical landscape can be modified by the construction of places of
             worship or specialist ethnic retailers and restaurants.
           • The cultural identity of source countries is affected too: tourism in countries
             such as Ireland caters to the expectations of visitors from the diaspora,
             possibly resulting in the fossilization of source countries’ cultures.

           Good answers may apply (AO2) a wider range of knowledge and understanding
           (AO1) in a well-structured way (AO4). One approach might be to provide a
           structured systematic analysis that clearly analyses different ways in which
           cultural identity is influenced, including a range of cultural traits. Another
           approach might be to analyse the influence of diasporas on different countries,
           including the source country. Another approach might be to systematically
           analyse different examples of diasporas in varied geographic contexts.

           For 4–6 marks, expect some weakly evidenced outlining of the way one or more
           diaspora populations have influenced local places.

           For 7–9 marks, expect a structured, evidenced analysis of:
           • either the varied ways in which local cultures have been influenced by the
             presence of different diaspora populations
           • or the influence on local culture of diasporas in different geographical
             contexts, such as source and host countries.

           For 10–12 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                             – 10 –              M23/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


(b)   Discuss ways in which global financial flows can be affected by the actions of governments.
                                                                                              [16]

      Credit all content in line with the markbands. Marks should be allocated
      according to the markbands on pages 5 to 6. Credit unexpected approaches
      wherever relevant.

      Financial flows include trade, capital movements, aid and debt payments and
      remittances. These flows can be increased or decreased according to the political
      frameworks they must operate in at varying scales. Governments may be
      national but there are also local governments and multi-governmental
      organizations to consider. Actions include incentives but also penalties and
      sanctions.

      Possible applied themes (AO2) include knowledge and understanding (AO1) of:
      • The political opening-up of emerging economies/new superpowers (India, China) with new
        markets for exploitation [Guide 4.1]
      • National investment rules and laws that allow TNCs to deploy (or not) financial strategies
        such as mergers and acquisitions and joint ventures [Guide 4.3]
      • Political actions to lower production costs for TNCs in export processing zones [Guide 4.3]
      • MGOs and the opportunity to operate within trading blocs with low tariff barriers [Guide 4.3]
      • Political decisions by governments to opt out of globalization/global data flows (e.g. US
        technology companies cannot invest or sell their services easily in China) [Guide 5.3]
      • Political decisions by governments to provide aid and loans [Guide 5.1]
      • Political decisions by governments affecting migration, which in turn fosters
        remittances [Guide 5.3].

      Good answers may synthesize (AO3a) three or more of the above (or other)
      themes in a well-structured way (AO4).

      Good answers may additionally offer a critical evaluation (AO3b) of the
      statement, which discusses how government actions connect and interact with
      the financial decisions of other stakeholders e.g. TNCs. Another approach might
      be to critically discuss how financial flows linking particular places might be either
      increased or decreased. Another approach might be to discuss the relative
      importance of government actions at different scales. A good discussion may
      conclude with a substantiated final judgement on the relative importance or
      significance of different kinds of action.

      Do not over-credit a detailed discussion of the actions of non-governmental stakeholders
      (TNCs, NGOs, etc.) unless the account is logically linked with government actions and
      attitudes (e.g. discussion of how governments allow or disallow FDI, free trade etc).

      For 5–8 marks, expect weakly evidenced and/or imbalanced outlining of two or
      three relevant themes.

      For 9–12 marks, expect:
      • either a structured synthesis that links together several well-evidenced themes
        from the Guide
      • or a critical conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) informed by geographical
        concepts and/or perspectives.

      For 13–16 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                   – 11 –              M23/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


3.   (a)   Analyse how people’s perception of a “shrinking world” has been
           influenced by different transport and communications technologies.                          [12]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on pages 3 to 4.

           Transport and communications technology includes: shipping, railways and
           airplanes, spanning civilian, commercial and military spheres of activity; telephone
           and broadband services, and the growth of different social media platforms and
           services. The timeline of innovation stretches back over centuries or thousands of
           years.

           The shrinking world effect is the perception that distant places feel closer together
           and more closely interconnected in ‘time-space’ than in the past when travel times
           were longer.

           People’s perception is shaped in a range of ways, including their participation in
           tourism and travel (i.e. flows of people); receipt of goods and services from distant
           places (i.e. flows of trade); global social networking and use of global
           entertainment platforms e.g. Amazon, Netflix (i.e. flows of ideas). People’s
           perceptions depend additionally on: their local geographical and developmental
           context; their age and other identity criteria; their access to and use of online/digital
           technologies such as Zoom and Teams (or lack of access in some countries and
           contexts).

           Likely themes for analysis include:
           • Successive revolutions in sail and steam technology, and the falling time
               taken to circumnavigate the globe by sea.
           • The telegraph, telephone and internet; accelerated use of teleworking and
               online learning during lockdowns.
           • The importance of air travel in reducing time travel between continents, and
               increasing access to low-cost air travel over time.
           • The key role of the motor car for individuals and societies with a growing
               middle-class of consumers.
           • Other key breakthroughs such as: high-speed rail travel; space travel
               (photographs of planet Earth and their influence on culture and people’s
               perceptions).

           Good answers may apply (AO2) a wider range of knowledge and understanding
           (AO1) in a well-structured way (AO4). One approach might be to provide a
           structured systematic analysis of the way different technologies, in chronological
           order, have influenced the shrinking world effect as experienced by connected groups
           of people. Another approach might be to analyse the relative importance of different
           technologies. Another approach might be to analyse the varying perceptions of
           different communities in located contexts.

           For 4–6 marks, expect some weakly evidenced outlining of the way two or more
           types of transport/technology have connected people and places in generalized ways.

           For 7–9 marks, expect a structured, evidenced analysis of:
           • either a range of technologies that allow people to experience the shrinking world
             effect (for example via travel, trade and information exchange)
           • or the varying perceptions of different individuals and societies with varying access
             to, or use of, technologies.

           For 10–12 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                             – 12 –             M23/3/GEOGR/HP3/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


(b)   To what extent have people in wealthy countries benefitted from global interactions?        [16]

      Credit all content in line with the markbands. Marks should be allocated according to
      the markbands on pages 5 to 6. Credit unexpected approaches wherever relevant.

      People may benefit in varied ways– including positive and quantifiable changes in
      income/wealth, health and welfare, rights and freedoms, along with harder-to-
      quantify/subjective benefits such as happiness and sense of belonging/identity/culture.
      Global interactions and flows have multiple dimensions, spanning trade, lending,
      migration, information exchanges, governance etc. One view is that some local societies
      in wealthy countries have experienced economic losses due to de-industrialization, while
      the opposing view is that the global shift of polluting industries has benefited HICs. Views
      diverge (e.g. in UK, US) on whether cultural and political globalization is beneficial
      /desirable.
      Wealthy countries is a broad category which includes high-income countries (HICs) and
      might also include emerging economies (EEs) and OPEC countries - a wide range of
      interpretations are allowed. Differing experiences of people can be explored at local scales
      (urban and rural areas). Impacts on particular societies may not be uniform: improvements
      (or otherwise) may vary according to income, race and other identity criteria.

       Possible applied themes (AO2) include knowledge and understanding (AO1) of the
       diverse challenges and opportunities associated with:
      • global governance to tackle climate change which affects all countries [Guide 2.3]
      • the actions of TNCs, including inward investment, outsourcing, offshoring and
          glocalization, and their impact on the lives of societies in HICs and EEs [Guide 4.2]
      • new technologies and benefits (and challenges) they bring [Guide 4.3]
      • economic migration and remittance flows, and their links with the societies and
          economies of wealthy countries [Guide 4.2]
      • global and local cultural changes (linked with music and social media for example),
          loss of sovereignty, and varying perspectives on these changes [Guide 5.2]
      • technological and environmental risks associated with global interactions (these
          should be explicitly linked with impacts on HICs and/or EEs) [Guide 6.1-6.2]
      • tax avoidance by TNCs could increase personal wealth of some individuals
          (company owners and shareholders) but governments lose income [Guide 6.1].

      Good answers may synthesize (AO3a) three or more of the above (or other) themes
      in a well-structured (AO4) way. Good answers may additionally offer a critical
      evaluation (AO3b) of the statement that critically discusses different perspectives on
      which changes are most beneficial – and which are not. Another approach might be
      to evaluate the extent to which the most powerful wealthy countries have benefited
      most (e.g. comparing the US with China). Another approach might be to evaluate the
      contribution made by different global processes (trade, migration, data flows etc.) to
      quality of life improvements in specified local places. A good evaluation may conclude
      with a substantiated final judgement on the overall impact of global interactions on the
      societies and environments of wealthy countries.

      For 5–8 marks, expect weakly evidenced and/or imbalanced outlining of two
      or three relevant themes.

      For 9–12 marks, expect:
      • either a structured synthesis that links together several well-evidenced
        themes from the Guide
      • or a critical conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) informed by geographical
        concepts and/or perspectives.

      For 13–16 marks, expect both of these traits.
