M23/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                               May 2023


                         Global politics


           Higher level and standard level


                               Paper 2




19 pages
                                            –2–                  M23/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                 –3–                M23/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The paper is marked using the generic markbands on the following page, and the paper specific
markscheme that follows. The markscheme for this paper is the same for HL and SL.

 Markbands for paper two

   Marks                                        Level descriptor

     0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

             The response reveals limited understanding of the demands of the question.
             The response is poorly structured, or where there is a recognizable essay structure
    1–5       there is minimal focus on the task.
             There is little relevant knowledge, and examples are either lacking or not relevant.
             The response is mostly descriptive.

             The response indicates some understanding of the demands of the question.
             There is some evidence of an attempt to structure the response.
             Some relevant knowledge is present, and some examples are mentioned but they are
   6–10       not developed or their relevance to arguments is not clear.
             The response demonstrates limited understanding of the key concepts of the course.
             There is limited justification of main points.
             Counterclaims, or different views on the question are not considered.

             The demands of the question are understood and mostly addressed but the implications
              are not considered.
             There is a clear attempt to structure the response.
             The response is mostly based on relevant and accurate knowledge of global politics,
   11–15
              and relevant examples are given and support arguments.
             The response demonstrates some understanding of the key concepts of the course.
             Many of the main points are justified and arguments are largely coherent.
             Some counterclaims, or different views on the question are considered.

             The demands of the questions are understood and addressed, and most implications
              are considered.
             The response is well-structured.
             The response demonstrates relevant and accurate knowledge and understanding of
   16–20
              global politics, and relevant examples are used in a way that strengthens arguments.
             The response demonstrates a good grasp of the key concepts of the course.
             All or nearly all of the main points are justified and arguments are coherent.
             Counterclaims, or different views on the question are explored.

             A very well structured and balanced response that addresses the demands and
              implications of the question.
             Comprehensive knowledge and in-depth understanding of global politics is applied in
   21–25      the response consistently and effectively, with examples integrated.
             The response demonstrates a very good grasp of the key concepts of the course.
             All of the main points are justified. Arguments are clear, coherent and compelling.
             Counterclaims, or different views on the question are explored and evaluated.
                                                   –4–                 M23/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The content listed indicates possible areas candidates might cover in their answers. They are not
compulsory points. They are only a framework to help examiners in their assessment. Candidates may
take a different approach, which if appropriate, should be rewarded. Examiners should not expect all of
the points listed and should allow other valid points.

An understanding of, and an ability to work with, the key concepts of the course are particularly important
in this paper. Whether or not the key concepts are explicitly mentioned in a question, students are
expected to draw on their conceptual understanding of global politics and are invited to draw on any
political concepts that are relevant to the arguments they put forward.

Power, sovereignty and international relations

1.   “State sovereignty remains the key concept in understanding global politics.”
     Discuss this view.

     Responses should demonstrate a clear understanding of the concept of sovereignty – implying that
     the state or government has supreme authority. Sovereignty characterizes a state’s independence,
     its control over territory and its ability to govern itself. How states use their sovereign power is at
     the heart of many important issues in global politics. Candidates could discuss how state
     sovereignty could have two dimensions – one, state as the sole author of laws within its territory
     (internal sovereignty) and two, the capacity of each state to act independently and autonomously
     on the world stage (external sovereignty). Candidates could discuss the Westphalian notion of
     state sovereignty with its emphasis on non-interference and the kind of changes it has been
     undergoing. Candidates should be able to discuss to what extent they believe that state
     sovereignty remains the key concept in understanding global politics. The underlying assumption is
     that state sovereignty has been and remains the key concept in understanding global politics.

     Arguments in favour of the claim that state sovereignty remains the key concept in understanding
     global politics may include:
      The state remains the primary actor and unit of analysis in global politics and therefore state
        sovereignty as a concept is intrinsic to understanding state behavior which in turn will impact
        politics at the regional, international, and global level. All matters related to global politics
        converge around the sovereign state and its behavior. Ultimately state sovereignty is central to
        a state’s very survival or existence.
      Although variables such as globalization and the emergence of non-state actors are often said
        to erode the primacy of state sovereignty, sovereign states remain key decision makers: they
        make decisions keeping in mind their national interest and choose to insulate themselves from
        outside influence when required. For instance, supranationality and membership of international
        and regional groupings is optional, and states may choose to either not join these or withdraw,
        e.g., the UK leaving the EU (Brexit), Burundi and the Philippines withdrawing from the Rome
        Statute.
      The concept of state sovereignty is critical in understanding different facets of global politics. For
        instance, the state is the most important decision maker when it comes to the pursuit of
        development – in all its forms ranging from economic to social and human. The state makes
        policies based on its supreme authority within its borders as well as based on its ability to act
        independently on the world stage to fulfil this purpose.
      State sovereignty forms the basis of situations and decisions related to both peace and conflict.
        States use their sovereign control over their territory to make laws and use their institutions to
        ensure peace. At the same time, they make attempts to keep their citizens protected from
        conflict or may choose to get into a conflict if their interests are being harmed.
      State sovereignty gives the state a legal status. International norms and institutions are all a
        manifestation and product of state sovereignty. In fact, the very foundational principle of the
        post-World War Two international system, according to the United Nations, is the "sovereign
        equality of all its members.” In fact, even non-state actors such as terror groups aim and aspire
        to get the legal status of a state and gain the resultant sovereignty that comes with it, e.g., ISIS
        in Syria and Iraq.
                                                    –5–                 M23/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Arguments against the claim that state sovereignty remains the key concept in understanding global
politics may include:
        Many more concepts or issues are more important than state sovereignty in developing an
          understanding of global politics. In fact, power is the key concept in the study of global politics.
          Politics is all about the ability of one actor to make the other do what it would not do otherwise.
          Global politics is based on this power play between states, making it the most essential concept
          in understanding global politics.
        Globalization is challenging the traditional notion of state sovereignty and transforming it,
          whereby states have new ways of governance in tandem with the changes brought about by the
          phenomenon. Therefore, in today’s world, globalization holds more significance than state
          sovereignty. Aspects of globalization such as global communication and trade cannot always be
          completely controlled by states. For example, global financial flows often elude the control of
          states.
        The emergence of non-state actors such as non-governmental organizations, multinational
          organizations and even terror groups as significant variables on the global stage has diluted the
          significance of state sovereignty. All these actors pose a big challenge to state sovereignty,
          watering down the importance traditionally given to state sovereignty, e.g., Al Shabaab in
          Somalia and Boko Haram in Nigeria.
        Issues and concepts of identity, sustainability and human development are increasingly gaining
          prominence in the study of global politics. These are issues that transcend man-made
          boundaries and threaten the very existence of human beings making them more critical than
          state sovereignty.

      Responses should contain references to specific examples of why state sovereignty has always
      been and remains the key concept in understanding global politics. Sovereign states focus on the
      pursuit of their national interest. States such as the U.S., China and India have chosen to exercise
      their sovereignty and refused to sign international treaties (Rome Statute 1998) when they felt their
      national interests were being compromised. Similarly, even to be a member of any regional or
      global intergovernmental organization, it is imperative that a unit is recognized as a sovereign
      state. Candidates could also discuss how the perception of erosion of parliamentary sovereignty of
      the UK is cited as a reason behind Brexit. On the contrary, candidates may provide examples of
      how other issues and concepts such as globalization are becoming more important than state
      sovereignty and may even be rendering sovereignty less significant. For instance, they could
      discuss how in an interdependent world, states join intergovernmental organizations at both the
      global and regional level (such as the UN, ASEAN, the International Monetary Fund and European
      Union) for both security and economic development. Besides, pressing transnational issues such
      as transborder terrorism cannot be managed without cooperation and coordination amongst states.
      Also, candidates may highlight how the quest for power, resources and hegemony is driving states
      such as U.S., China, and India to formulate policies and take decisions beyond protecting their
      sovereignty. The South China Sea dispute between China and some Southeast Asian countries is
      an example. Candidates may also argue that while state sovereignty is very important to the
      understanding of global politics, it is not the most significant concept. In fact, one key concept
      cannot define or form the basis of understanding global politics but a range of concepts such as
      hegemony, interdependence, balance of power, legitimacy, power, identity etc. Better responses
      may question or critique the underlying assumption that state sovereignty has always been the key
      concept in understanding global politics.

      Responses should include a conclusion on whether the candidate agrees that state sovereignty
      remains the key concept in understanding global politics.
                                                –6–                M23/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   “The contribution of states to sustainable development is greater than that of non-
     governmental organizations (NGOs).” Evaluate this view.

     Responses are likely to include a brief description of states and non-governmental organizations
     (NGOs). They may define states as institutions of government with the purpose of ensuring the
     establishment of order and security, laws and their enforcement. The state is sovereign and
     operates within its geographic boundaries. A non-governmental organization could be described as
     a group of citizens that works independently of the government, is non-profit and works towards
     social and political issues. They may then discuss some the primary areas of work of NGOs and
     provide a few examples, e.g., World Wildlife Fund and conservation. Candidates are also likely to
     explain their understanding of the term sustainable development as “development that meets the
     needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own
     needs” (UN). Any other appropriate definitions or explanations of states and sustainable
     development will be acceptable and rewarded accordingly. Students may provide a benchmark or
     their perspective on how they will assess or quantify ‘contribution’ through providing real world
     examples to support their arguments.

     Arguments in favour of the claim that the contribution of states to sustainable development is
     greater than that of NGOs may include:
      States and state actors possess more power and resources than NGOs to implement
        sustainable development projects. Unless the state itself is powerful, capable of good
        governance, and committed to sustainable development, achieving it is not possible. NGOs
        often face funding issues that may become a major obstacle in their activities. Besides,
        sovereign states are powerful enough to make it difficult for NGOs to operate or even force
        them to curb their operations.
      Sustainable development largely depends on policies formulated and implemented by states,
        making them primary actors managing the trajectory of sustainable development. NGOs drawn
        from civil society, can, at best, help bridge gaps or supplement the state’s efforts.
      A state’s contribution to sustainable development at the national level is significant because
        they make policies, allocate funding, human capital and resources to further sustainable
        development. NGOs do not have the same level of infrastructure or power to make policies or
        resources to implement them.
      At the international level, states work with other countries through IGOs and regional
        organizations, sign sustainable development policies and treaties. These may help them
        procure expertise, funds, and other kinds of support from other countries who may have better
        technology or ideas in the field. In some states, NGOs can at best act as pressure groups and
        help spread awareness, but not do much in terms of concrete action on the ground.
      States can facilitate coordination and cooperation amongst key actors such as public sector,
        business community and society at the state and national levels to further sustainable
        development in different sectors. NGOs do not possess the resources or power to do the same.
                                            –7–                 M23/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Arguments against the claim that the contribution of states to sustainable development is greater
than that of NGOs may include:
 NGOs can work closer to the ground and their aim is to pursue inclusive growth. They can fill
   gaps left by the failure of states in taking effective steps towards the goal of sustainable
   development. Often state machinery is unable to reach people at the grassroots level. For
   example, it is usually local NGOs that help implement the UN’s SDGs on the ground.
 NGOs can be more effective than the state they are operating within because they are not
   subject to the same bureaucratic procedures as states and their relevant departments. As a
   result, action can be taken more quickly than it can be by a state.
 NGOs can act as pressure groups and raise awareness about the need to focus on sustainable
   development. They can effectively change public opinion and pressurize states into changing
   policies that clash with sustainable development. The participation of civil society is key to
   furthering sustainable development. For example, a diverse range of NGO’s act as observers at
   COP meetings.
 NGOs have made notable contributions in developing sustainable development systems by
   raising international awareness, influencing global policy agendas. This makes them important
   contributors even at a regional or global level that could impact decisions affecting many states
   at a time. For example, many environmental NGOs have consultative status in ECOSOC.
 Some NGOs are more likely to be inclusive when it comes to marginalized communities and
   sustainable development. States could have their own political agendas which could be divisive.
   They may also choose to appease and cater to certain groups. It could mean destabilizing
   societies and neglecting certain groups, eg, sustainable fishing/farming amongst indigenous
   groups.
 States do not always prioritize sustainable development and may focus only on economic or
   traditional forms of development over sustainable development. Some states aim for short term
   economic gains over longer-term sustainable development goals, e.g., China until relatively
   recently. They often follow special interest groups such as corporations or energy companies,
   which influence their economic or development policies, e.g., the Biden administration’s
   approval of the Willow project in Alaska.

Responses should make some reference to specific examples of how the contribution of states to
sustainable development is greater than that of NGOs. An example of a state successfully
contributing to sustainable development is Costa Rica’s promotion of ecotourism and net zero
carbon policy. On the other hand, candidates may provide examples where NGOs have not been
able to contribute much towards promoting sustainable development. For instance, NGOs in
Jamaica were unable to curb the destruction of coral reefs. Besides, the asymmetry in terms of
finances and hard power between NGOS and states is reflected in how their presence and
functioning in a state is itself dependent on the discretion of the state. For example, the Indian
government cancelled Greenpeace’s license to operate, citing financial fraud and falsification of
data leading to Greenpeace’s withdrawal from India. The Indian government has accused other
NGOs of trying to hamper projects on social and environmental grounds. On the other hand,
Greenpeace has led successful campaigns in countries like Philippines, Thailand and Indonesia
preventing the entry of radioactive shipments, stopping polluting technologies and promoting
sustainable agriculture and renewable energy.

Responses should include the candidate’s evaluation of the view that the contribution of states is
greater than that of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in sustainable development.
                                                   –8–                  M23/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Human rights

3.   “It is evident that international human rights laws and treaties have failed given the
     persistence of clear human rights violations.” Discuss this view.

     Responses are likely to include a definition of human rights as basic claims and entitlements that,
     many argue, one should be able to exercise simply by virtue of being a human being, which are
     inalienable and essential for living a life of dignity. Candidates should refer to specific international
     human rights laws and/or treaties (eg, the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of
     the Crime of Genocide, the 1979 Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
     against Women, the 1984 Convention against Torture) as well as specific instances of human
     rights violations around the world and the extent to which their continuing presence undermines the
     effectiveness of international human rights laws and treaties.

     Arguments in favour of the view that international human rights laws and treaties have failed given
     the persistence of clear human rights violations may include:
      The principle of sovereignty allows states to violate human rights laws and treaties with relative
        impunity within their borders, eg, according to Amnesty International despite the Convention
        against Torture governments in some 150 countries use torture, not much different from when
        the treaty came into force in 1987.
      Despite the widespread ratification of core human rights laws/treaties, there is little evidence
        that these have been responsible for any of the positive developments in global politics in recent
        decades, eg, 168 countries are party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
        which has been in effect since 1976 yet, according to Freedom House, by 2020 only 83
        countries were classified as ‘free’.
      Some of the rights included in international human rights laws and treaties are defined in
        relatively general terms and so it is unsurprising that these rights are often perceived to be
        violated, eg, both the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights as well as the ASEAN
        Human Rights Declaration proclaim a right to a clean environment but this is very difficult to
        define per se.
      The politicization of human rights sees different countries prioritizing different rights and the lack
        of consensus among states means that human rights violations continue, eg., European
        countries and the US have emphasized in recent years the rights of women and the
        environment while China and Russia have emphasized development and respect for
        cultural/religious traditions.
      In a similar sense, the universal nature of many international human rights laws and treaties
        may be undermined by reference to the principle of cultural relativism, I.e., some countries may
        defend apparent human rights violations by classifying them as cultural traditions. For example,
        the persistence of the practice of female genital mutilation by some cultural groups.
      Human rights laws and treaties are too ambitious and too ambiguous, they overwhelm states
        with obligations they cannot possibly keep and provide no clear method for evaluating whether
        governments act reasonably or not.
      Furthermore, many human rights laws and treaties are ineffectively enforced providing the
        space and opportunity for gross violations to occur, eg, the increased use of drone technology
        and collateral loss of life.
                                              –9–                   M23/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Arguments against the view that international human rights laws have failed given the persistence
of clear human rights violations may include:
 Human rights laws and treaties codify a widely endorsed set of principles whose legitimacy is
   widely accepted even by those who violate them, eg, government officials rarely plead that they
   have actually violated such laws but instead seek to cast doubt on the veracity of any
   allegations.
 There is clear evidence that at least some human rights laws and treaties have made a
   discernible difference at the national level, eg, Chile and Argentina cited human rights treaties to
   strike down military self-amnesties for mass atrocities while Kenya cited CEDAW to grant
   women equal access to inheritances and the European Convention on Human Rights led
   Ireland to decriminalize homosexual acts.
 Human rights laws and treaties are effective even when domestic courts are too weak to
   enforce them because they codify a public’s view about how its government should behave, ie,
   local rights groups are able to work with international partners like Human Rights Watch to
   generate pressure on their government to respect treaties signed and ratified.
 It is not that human rights laws and treaties have failed but that states have lacked the political
   will or capacity to enforce them and/or fulfill their aspirational goals, eg, the inconsistent
   application of humanitarian intervention in the face of egregious human rights violations.
 On a similar note, some states have decided not to prosecute those who have violated human
   rights laws and/or treaties in order to achieve transitional justice, eg, apartheid is a crime
   against humanity, defined as such in a 1973 UN convention, but South African decided not to
   pursue individual criminal prosecution in favour of a Truth and Reconciliation Commission.
 Regardless of the persistence of human rights violations, human rights laws and treaties are a
   tool for people worldwide to hold their own governments to account, eg, the cases of Cao Shunli
   and Liu Xiaobo in China.

Responses should contain references to specific examples. Arguments in favour of the view could
reference any number of contemporary human rights violations such as the genocide of the
Rohingyas by the Myanmar government despite the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide being the oldest post-World War Two treaty. Arguments
against the view may reference the widespread ratification of the core human rights laws/treaties
as evidence of the legitimacy of the international human rights system and, broadly, the norms on
which it is based being accepted; there can be no doubt that human rights around the world have
improved over time. For example, in recent decades, China has curbed its use of the death
penalty, has abolished re-education through labour, liberalized the one-child policy and started
efforts to limit the use of torture for confessions ostensibly all as a result of its international human
rights treaty commitments whereas Saudi Arabia has taken a few minor steps towards greater
freedom for women. These and any other valid approach should be evaluated positively.

Responses should include a conclusion on the degree to which the candidate agrees with the view
that it is evident that international human rights laws and treaties have failed given the persistence
of clear human rights violations.
                                                 – 10 –              M23/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   To what extent does the protection and enforcement of universal human rights depend on
     the achievement of a positive peace?

     Responses are likely to include a definition of human rights as basic claims and entitlements that,
     many argue, one should be able to exercise simply by virtue of being a human being, which are
     inalienable and essential for living a life of dignity. Candidates may refer to one of the core human
     rights treaties as a benchmark for universal human rights (eg, the International Covenant on Civil
     and Political Rights (1966) or the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
     (1966). Candidates are likely to discuss the various ways in which the protection and enforcement
     of human rights can be achieved. Candidates should also provide a definition of positive peace as
     not only the absence of conflict and violence but also as the presence of a state of harmonious
     relations. Students may conceptualise conflict more abstractly as the presence of structural and/or
     cultural violence. Students may also briefly establish some benchmark(s) by which one can
     determine the degree of dependence between the protection and enforcement of human rights and
     the achievement of a positive peace.

     Arguments in favour of the claim that the protection and enforcement of universal human rights
     depends on the achievement of a positive peace may include:
      In the absence of a positive peace, structural and/or cultural violence exists both of which
        threaten the protection and enforcement of human rights, eg, the Black Lives Matter movement
        in the US.
      In the absence of a positive peace there is always the threat of (violent) conflict and preparing
        for/defending against this potential diverts funds and attention away from the protection and
        enforcement of universal human rights.
      Positive peace is centered on improving human conditions and so is intimately linked to the
        protection and enforcement of universal human rights, i.e., peaceful countries often have formal
        laws that guarantee basic human rights and freedoms, and the informal social and cultural
        norms that relate to behaviours of citizens. Positive peace represents the capacity of a society
        to meet the needs of its citizens thus protecting and enforcing some core human rights.
      A positive peace involves a robust civil society and inclusive, permanent, and independent
        institutions, which guarantee that human rights will be protected and enforced, eg, Senegal’s
        relative stability and peacefulness in a region marred by political violence has seen it establish
        strong and independent institutions that protect the human rights of its ethnic and religious sub-
        national groups.
      Empirically, there is a strong correlation between peacefulness and human rights, ie, the IEP’s
        2020 Global Peace Index reveals that those countries with the most solid human rights records
        are the most peaceful.
      The UN General Assembly has affirmed peace as a human right in the 1978 Declaration on the
        Preparation of Societies for Life in Peace, which was further affirmed in both the African Charter
        on Human and Peoples’ Rights (1981) as well as the ASEAN Charter (2007).
                                           – 11 –               M23/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Arguments against the claim that the protection and enforcement of universal human rights
depends on the achievement of a positive peace may include:
 The protection and enforcement of universal human rights depends more on the presence of
   negative peace than positive peace as the most egregious violations of human rights often
   occur as a consequence of direct violence, eg, the genocide of the Rohingya by the Myanmar
   state or the incarceration of over one million Uighurs in ‘re-education camps’.
 There is the concern that human rights violations have, in some cases, been used to justify
   politically motivated foreign interventions and regime change undermining peace, eg, the 2011
   NATO-led intervention in Libya.
 Some human rights may need to be violated or certain human rights violations may need to be
   overlooked for a positive peace to be attained, eg, responsibility to protect (R2P) or instances
   where security concerns may override the protection and enforcement of certain human rights.
 There may be tension between achieving justice in the form of prosecuting human rights
   violations and the reconciliation that is generally thought of as a key component of positive
   peace. For example, while human rights advocates often push for accountability for crimes
   committed and punishment to deter further abuses, conflict resolution advocates worry that
   punishing the perpetrators might further splinter the society, making the healing process and the
   achievement of a positive peace more difficult.
 The international community plays a key role in determining whether human rights and conflict
   resolution practices compete or collaborate, eg, the RUF and the Sierra Leonean government -
   the latter saw the international community undermining local efforts to achieve a lasting,
   sustainable peace with the UN withholding support for the granting of amnesty for human rights
   violations.
 It is conceivable that structural violence may be so extreme that a limited war must be deemed
   a lesser evil, if there is no other way to end or mitigate the structural violence – hence the
   achievement of a positive peace may require human rights violations, eg, the wars of liberation
   from colonial rule or the overthrow of a repressive regime

Candidates should include reference to specific examples to support their evaluation of the claim in
the question. Arguments against the claim may reference any number of alternative factors upon
which the protection and enforcement of universal human rights depends, for example, the
presence of strong international institutions and/or engagement on the part of powerful states, eg,
the distinction that is often made between lack of international reaction to the genocide in Rwanda
(1994) versus NATO’s 1999 intervention on behalf of the Kosovars. Further, some candidates
could argue that both ‘positive peace’ and ‘human rights’ may be defined differently by different
groups, particularly with respect to the different generations (civil-political vs. social-economic-
cultural) in order to serve ideological purposes. Candidates may also argue that a positive peace is
aspirational rather than pragmatic and consequently that it can never be fully achieved; as such,
the prompt is flawed. Some responses may invert the prompt and argue that a positive peace, in
fact, depends on the protection and enforcement of human rights as evidenced by the creation of
both the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide being among the first international documents adopted by
the UN following the end of World War II. These and any other valid and relevant approaches and
examples should be evaluated positively.

Responses should include a conclusion on the degree to which the protection and enforcement of
universal human rights depends on the achievement of a positive peace.
                                                 – 12 –               M23/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Development

5.   “The lack of a universally accepted model of development has hindered development.”
     Discuss this view.

     Responses should include definitions of development and an explanation of at least one of the
     models or theories which have been suggested, such as Rostow, Sen, modernisation theory,
     dependency theory, Washington Consensus, Beijing Consensus, etc. These models may be used
     to support or contradict the view. It might also be argued that there has been a “best” or at least a
     prevalent model in the form of Neo-Classical market friendly liberalisation, even though some of
     the most successful developed countries departed from it to succeed, eg, state subsidization of
     exports and credit and controls on foreign ownership and investment in Japan and Korea.

     Arguments that support the claim that the lack of a universally accepted model of development has
     hindered development may include:
      Models have tended to emerge from within particular political contexts, rendering them
        suspicious, outdated, or inappropriate to those following other political ideologies in subsequent
        years. For example, Rostow’s Stages of Growth was a product of the Cold War and subtitled
        “A Non-Communist Manifesto” yet is still discussed as a viable model.
      Models have tended to favour free market approaches or state intervention approaches.
        The bipolar nature of the world after 1945 has meant that developing countries have been made
        to favour one to the exclusion of the other. For example, structural adjustment programmes
        fostered and made conditional by the IMF have forced developing countries into privatizations
        and dependency. The lack of a model which combines the positive aspects of free markets and
        state intervention has hindered development.
      Development has proved to be unpredictable in its outcome in different countries, rendering a
        universal model or theory unlikely. Some have developed slowly to an advanced level
        (UK, USA, 200 years or more), others have experienced rapid development (South Korea,
        China, less than 100 years) and some not at all, where obstacles to development have
        prevented it happening (approximately 20 failed states). The lack of a model which can explain
        all development may have contributed to the latter’s failure to achieve the level of development
        aspired to.
      Development itself is a contestable concept. To an economist successful development is
        measured in indicators of growth and living standards, while geographers might measure the
        responsible use of resources and other social scientists in terms of wellbeing and freedoms,
        though all these priorities overlap. Academic rivalries add to the contestable nature of
        development and the lack of consensus makes a universal pathway or theory less likely,
        hindering a clear path to development.
      Countries vary so much in their natural endowment of resources, geography and human capital
        that no one pathway or theory is appropriate for all. For example, a city-state like Singapore has
        focused on state investment in urban infrastructure to promote its development, while oil and
        mineral-rich countries have relied on multinational corporations to promote development for
        them. These very different pathways suggest that a universal model would have little meaning
        for countries with different factor endowments.
                                            – 13 –               M23/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Arguments against the claim that the lack of a universally accepted model of development has
hindered development may include:
 Development has not been hindered in modern times: over the last 70 years the average
   human being has increased in income 4.4 times while global population has tripled. In the last
   20 years development has accelerated with global poverty rates falling by a half, and
   undernourishment by a fifth.
 Each country is unique in its natural and human endowment and nearly every country has found
   its own unique formula for development, so an agreed development model or theory would be
   inappropriate if it existed. For example, Myanmar’s development has depended heavily on illicit
   crops (opium) tolerated by a military leadership; Japan and South Korea developed using heavy
   industrialisation but no natural resources; Hong Kong and Singapore have developed through
   international trade and favourable tax status. These unique pathways to development have
   been very successful due to local decision making rather than the adoption of set models.
 It can be argued that there is an ideologically accepted common pathway through market
   friendly liberalisation and outward orientation, as demonstrated for example by India’s sudden
   switch to it outward orientation in 1991 and the resulting acceleration in economic development.
 Development in the form of industrialisation and urbanisation started a hundred years before
   any model of development emerged and was poorly recorded, so models have been retrofitted
   to the experience of development rather than suggested as blueprints for the future, leaving
   plenty of room for data conflict arguments and whether past experience provides helpful
   signposts for future development. In this light, models have been rather irrelevant to economic
   development. Models are derived from lived experience and so do not in themselves bring
   about development, only explain what has occurred.
 Once development occurs it sets visible standards for emulation for less developed countries
   regardless of models due to globalization. Multinational corporations offer consumer goods that
   create desire and induce markets.

Responses should make reference to specific examples. Arguments in favour of the argument
might refer to the fact that Rostow’s model, despite being over 60 years old continues to be a
popular example of modernisation theory, even though it is an historical retrofit linked to the early
industrial revolution and most apt for Britain, the USA Germany and Japan. Arguments against the
argument might mention Dependency Theory, a reaction to modernisation theory, which seems to
accurately capture the experiences and situation of many countries in the Global South with its
notions of centre and periphery and the idea that the rich get richer at the expense of the poor.

Responses should include a conclusion on the degree to which the candidate agrees with the view
that that the lack of a universally accepted model of development has hindered development.
                                                – 14 –               M23/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


6.   Examine the view that development is the strongest motivation for cooperation
     between states.

     Responses should include a definition of development, recognising that this is a multidimensional
     and contested concept. There could also be some context for cooperation between states, such
     as treaties, collective security, strategic alliances, intergovernmental organisations, economic
     cooperation, and informal cooperation. Arguments for and against the view may depend on how
     development is viewed and defined, i.e., in its economic, human, social, or sustainable dimensions.
     Aspects of cooperation, peacemaking, and peacebuilding such as positive peace, reconciliation,
     negotiations, and treaties may also be relevant.

     Arguments that support the view that development is the strongest motivation for cooperation
     between states may include:
      Development leads to higher living standards but depends on international trade and supply
        chains which cross borders. Development through cooperation is thus an imperative to achieve
        everything from food security to higher living standards. For example, countries which import
        around half or more of their food include Japan, South Korea, and Mexico, all of whom have
        extensive trade cooperation agreements.
      In a globalised world, advanced levels of development are visible to all and set standards for
        emulation for LEDCs, whose populations may press for political reforms and international
        cooperation to promote development and the availability of consumer goods. Multinational
        corporations link markets in developed and developing countries, whose governments may be
        forced to accommodate them or even try to attract them through free trade zones such as those
        in Pakistan, Mexico, and Brazil.
      Development enhances the power and influence of countries, whose leadership may seek
        cooperation to raise opportunities for regional dominance, leading to subsequent cooperation in
        other fields such as education, soft power, science, technology, and finance.
      Development leads naturally to cooperation in trade at regional level in trade blocs such as
        USMCA, a free trade area between Canada, the United States, and Mexico. Once established,
        this cooperation may progress towards deeper arrangements such as a customs union like
        Caricom and a single market such as the EU.
      Development leads to ever closer forms of cooperation in the form of interdependence.
        For example, cars and aircraft are assembled with components from different countries in
        Europe and North America. The extent of interdependence arising from development can be
        seen in the disruption to trade, travel, leisure, etc caused by the Coronavirus pandemic in 2020–
        2021.
      The desire for sustainable development has led to international cooperation between states at
        the Paris Agreement in 2015 and ongoing discussions on climate change.
                                            – 15 –              M23/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Arguments against the view that development is the strongest motivation for cooperation between
states may include:
 Collective security may be an even stronger motivation for international cooperation than
   development. For example, NATO’s Article 5 was invoked following the September 11 attacks
   in the United States, leading to seven NATO members joining the US in the War on Terror
   in Afghanistan.
 International cooperation for humanitarian disaster relief may be temporarily prioritised over
   development by sudden external shocks such as natural disasters, pandemics and climate
   change, eg the NATO Response Force humanitarian operation launched to assist the Pakistani
   government after a major earthquake in 2005.
 Regional conflicts which occur irrespective of national boundaries require international
   cooperation yet eliminate development from the cooperation agenda. There has been an
   average of 24 million people displaced each year between 2008 and 2018. An example is the
   Lake Chad Basin crisis, affecting Nigeria, Cameroon, Chad, and Niger. Crisis level acute food
   shortages affected 113 million people in 2018 alone, leading to international cooperation
   through food aid programmes, both official and through NGOs.
 In parts of the world which are subject to geopolitical superpower rivalry, such as the Indo-
   Pacific, cooperation is more likely to be based on military preoccupations than development.
   The relations between the US and Taiwan and the Philippines are at odds with China’s
   ambitions in the region so the emphasis is likely to be greater on human capital through
   education, training, soft power and aid than development explicitly.
 International crime may be the basis for state cooperation rather than development. Countering
   drugs, arms trafficking, human trafficking ,and money laundering of illegal funds requires states
   to co-operate to disrupt such illicit activities. The UN and US have focused much effort on
   eliminating the drugs trade in Colombia, Peru, and Bolivia. The EU links money laundering to
   terrorist finance and lists states’ degree of compliance to encourage cooperation, e.g., Albania.
   States may cooperate for reasons other than development, for example to exchange
   information and improve inter-regional dialogue on governance agendas, to advance mutual
   understanding and collaboration at the inter-regional level on democracy through intellectual
   and people-to-people exchanges or on specific issue like gender equality. Examples of such
   organisations are the Council of Europe, the African Union, the Organisation of American
   states.

Responses should make reference to specific examples. For instance, candidates could discuss
states which made development their priority and pursued it via international cooperation and
integrating into the global economy such as Taiwan and Singapore in the recent past. Candidates
may argue that the strongest reason for cooperation is environmental protection and conservation
of natural resources. Destruction of our ecosystem will end development if not addressed, and
climate change is making this more urgent. An example of a state which has tried to prioritise
environmental responsibility through cooperation is Costa Rica. It aimed to be greenhouse gas-
neutral by 2021 in collaboration with the International Climate Initiative, COP24 and Germany.

Responses should include a conclusion on the degree to which the candidate agrees with the view
that development is the strongest motivation for cooperation between states.
                                                   – 16 –               M23/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Peace and conflict

7.   Evaluate the view that contemporary conflicts are more about power than achieving justice.

     Responses are likely to include a definition of conflict as the dynamic process of actual or
     perceived opposition between individuals or groups, which may be violent or non-violent in nature.
     Candidates are also likely to offer a definition of power and/or identify different dimensions of
     power (hard, soft, smart) or types of power (military, economic, politics, etc.) Likewise, candidates
     are also likely to offer an interpretation of justice as being closely associated with the idea of
     fairness and/or of individuals getting what they deserve. Candidates should also offer some
     understanding of the possible causes of modern conflicts including but not limited to: greed vs.
     grievance; territorial control; material interest; resource scarcity; ideology; threatened identity; and
     (mis)perception.

     Arguments in favour of the view that contemporary conflicts are more about power than achieving
     justice may include:
      Even when rival parties in a conflict claim to be upholding order or fighting ‘terrorism’ in reality
        they seek to extend national influence and/or economic advantage, eg, the Yemeni civil war that
        began in 2014 can be viewed a battle for regional hegemony between Saudi Arabia and Iran.
      The relative collapse of western-led consensus favouring multilateral, collaborative approaches
        to international problems, which has been matched by the parallel rise of populist regimes has
        seen narrow national interests prioritized over perceptions of the common good, eg, rival third
        party involvement in the Libyan and Syrian civil wars.
      Declining American engagement has rendered global politics more anarchical thus allowing
        ambitious states to project their power and seek to dominate neighbours, e.g., China’s territorial
        claims in the South China Sea and the rise of other revisionist regional powers like Russia
        and Turkey.
      Inter- or intra-state violence is increasingly rooted in the climate crisis and demographic
        changes with the resulting resource scarcity, poverty and dislocation frequently driving modern
        conflicts, eg, the Democratic Republic of Congo since 2016 or the potential for interstate conflict
        in the newly accessible Arctic.
      On a related note, many contemporary conflicts arise over material interests and/or access to
        resources, eg, conflicts over intellectual property or access to rare earth minerals as a means to
        bolstering power.
                                              – 17 –               M23/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Arguments against the view that contemporary conflicts are more about power than achieving
justice may include:
 Many contemporary violent conflicts are rooted in a desire on the part of ordinary people to
   change dictatorial regimes and associated institutions which infringe upon their rights, eg,
   the Syrian civil war was initially a peaceful uprising against the autocratic al-Assad presidency
   and institutional or structural inequalities in Syria.
 Non-violent conflict, particularly that which occurs within a state, is often mostly moral in nature
   and focused on improving equality in terms of capabilities or well-being outcomes, eg, the civil
   rights/Black Lives Matter movement in the US or the global #metoo movements.
 Some of the most long-running contemporary conflicts are grounded in moral retribution, eg,
   the conflict in Afghanistan initially aimed to kill or capture the al-Qaida terrorists responsible for
   the September 11, 2001 attacks.
 In a similar vein, some of the most long-running contemporary conflicts possess a clear
   ideological basis and different conceptualisations of justice, e.g., the Yemeni civil war is a proxy
   battle between Shia (Iran and the Houthi rebels) and Sunni (Saudi Arabia and the UAE)
   traditions within Islam.
 Given the increasing complexity of modern conflicts it may be impossible to determine which
   single cause is most prevalent in any conflict, eg, the recent conflict in the Ukraine is seen by
   many Western countries as nothing more than an attempt by Russia to project its power
   whereas President Putin has categorized the annexation of the Crimea as a humanitarian
   intervention to protect the rights of Russian citizens and Russian speakers in the region.

Responses should contain references to specific examples. Arguments in favour of the view could
reference any number of contemporary conflicts in which increased power or material interests
dominate such as the Chinese government establishing a military presence in the resource-rich
Spratly Islands or the involvement of external actors in both the Syrian and Libyan conflicts as they
seek to increase their relative power and influence. Arguments against the view may reference
non-violent conflict within countries which find their basis in moral/ethical concerns such as the
worldwide Youth Strikes for Climate or Extinction Rebellion actions to raise awareness of climate
change/global heating. Candidates may argue that it is not so much about power vs. justice but,
rather, about power and justice, ie, achieving justice may act as the basis for the acquisition of soft
power or that expressions of hard power may be necessary to achieve justice. It may be the case
that a candidate structures their response around an interrogation of the degree to which any
single cause can be said to carry more weight than another when it comes analysing modern
conflicts. These and any other valid approach should be evaluated positively.

Responses should include a conclusion on the degree to which the candidate agrees with the view
that contemporary conflicts are more about power than achieving justice.
                                                  – 18 –              M23/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


8.   “The most important cause of conflict in the 21st century is globalization.” To what extent
     do you agree with this claim?

     Responses are likely to include a definition of conflict as the dynamic process of actual or
     perceived opposition between individuals or groups, which may be violent or non-violent in nature.
     Candidates may also offer some understanding of the possible causes of conflict in global politics
     including but not limited to: greed vs. grievance; territorial control; material interest; resource
     scarcity; ideology; threatened identity; and (mis)perception. Candidates are also likely to provide a
     definition of globalization as the process by which the world’s local, national, and regional
     economies, societies and cultures are becoming increasingly integrated and connected and/or as
     the shrinking of time and space. Students may further acknowledge that the processes surrounding
     globalization possess both drawbacks and benefits, the latter of which are not evenly distributed.

     Arguments in favour of the claim that the most important cause of conflict in the 21st century is
     globalization may include:
      Globalization, as a system of economic and information interdependence, breeds insecurity
        thereby increasing the potential for conflict between and within nation-states, eg the 2020
        Covid-19 pandemic highlighted some of the pitfalls of global supply chains in terms of medical
        supplies and food security while online platforms propagate hate, terror and populist
        propaganda.
      The incorporation into the global economy of billions of low-paid workers from the developing
        world has led to a protracted squeeze on working- and middle-class incomes in developed
        countries which has deepened divides and increased conflict within the latter, eg, the rise of
        populist, often nativist parties, such as the AfD in Germany or PIS in Poland.
      Globalization disrupts the cultural and socio-economic divisions that define conventional
        patterns of politics giving rise to more exclusive modes of identification, which are usually
        manifest in racial and/or xenophobic tendencies and which amplify the potential for conflict, eg,
        Hindu nationalism under Narendra Modi, global Islam or anti-immigrationism in Europe.
      Globalization is uneven both in its processes and in its effects, giving rise to winners and losers
        both within and between states with increased inequalities and poverty acting as the engine for
        social and political conflict, eg, the gilet jaunes protests in France.
      The forces associated with globalization have weakened the power and legitimacy of nation-
        states facilitating social breakdown and increasing the incidence of intrastate conflict in the 21st
        century, eg, austerity measures following the 2008 Global Financial Crisis saw violent anti-
        austerity protests erupt in Greece between 2010-2012.
      While it may be true that globalization has reduced the incidence of interstate conflict it has
        increased the incidence of ‘new wars’ – characterized by genocide, ethnic cleansing, terrorism,
        and other low intensity conflicts, eg, the struggle for resources continues to create ethnic
        tensions that lead to violent conflict – the Liberian civil war and blood diamonds or the ongoing
        conflicts in the DRC.
      Conversely, globalization has created new spheres of conflict, eg, cyberwarfare and a new arms
        race in space.
                                             – 19 –              M23/3/GLPOL/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Argument against the claim that the most important cause of conflict in the 21st century is
globalization may include:
 By breaking down the barriers that would otherwise separate states and creating incentives that
   discourage hostility, globalization has significantly reduced conflict in the 21st century, eg, the
   incidence of conflict in sub-Saharan Africa has declined rapidly as globalization there has
   increased significantly.
 Globalization via transporting and communicative technologies encourages a global ‘collective
   consciousness’ that breaks down localized ethnic identities and replaces them with loyalties to
   larger communities, e.g., the Fridays for Future school strikes.
 Globalization has increased the opportunity cost of interstate conflict as countries now have
   more to lose in terms of political allies, social gains and trade benefits, i.e., globalization has
   made global trade more frictionless by harmonising international regulatory frameworks.
 Globalization generates a negative effect on militarised interstate conflict by encouraging a
   common peaceful disposition among national leaders, who are then less likely to resort to arms
   in times of crisis.
 Globalization in the form of international institutions acts as a brake on conflict, eg, the
   mediation of Liberia’s long-running civil war in 2003, the successful conclusion of the conflict in
   Aceh in 2005 and the EU’s steps to prevent a full-scale civil war in Macedonia in 2001.
 Globalization can be associated with a significant reduction in absolute poverty over the past
   two decades and this has reduced conflict over resources. Other causes of conflict such as
   resource scarcity or territorial disputes may be more significant causes of contemporary conflict,
   eg, the potential for conflict between Egypt, Sudan, and Ethiopia over the latter’s construction of
   a massive dam on the Blue Nile.
 A developing country’s integration into the global markets will bring both economic and political
   gains and reduce government interventions in the economy which can, in turn, mitigate conflict.
   For example, regional and global integration was often initiated to satisfy political and security
   needs, i.e., the EU.

Candidates should include reference to specific examples from the 21st century to support their
evaluation of the claim in the question. Arguments in favour of the claim might centre on the
fragmenting effects of globalization and how conflicts arise in the form of resistance to the actual or
perceived loss of particular forms of identity and patterns of life threatened by the juggernaut of
globalized economic, political and cultural flows, eg, the Occupy movement. Arguments against the
claim might emphasize the cosmopolitan and homogenizing effects of globalization to argue that a
world more interconnected by technology (eg, the Internet and transportation), culture (eg, Netflix,
Starbucks, tourism) and education (eg, international students and online learning) are less likely to
foster conflict. Similarly, responses might note that while globalization may act as a ‘trigger’ for
conflict its effects are mitigated by other factors, such as the role of state institutions and the
degree of representation afforded to important minorities within a state, and so it is not the single
most important cause of conflict. Some candidates may argue that globalization is both creative
and destructive and involves both homogenization and localization; as such, it may be impossible
to distinguish between its positive and negative effects so far as conflict/peace is concerned. This
and any other valid and relevant approaches and examples should be evaluated positively.

Responses should include a conclusion on the degree to which the candidate believes that the
most important cause of conflict in the 21st century is globalization.
