M23/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                               May 2023



                         Global politics



          Higher level and standard level


                               Paper 1




8 pages
                                            –2–                   M23/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                   –3–                  M23/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

Unit 3     Development

Bulleted lists in this markscheme indicate likely points that candidates may include in their answer: they
are not exhaustive, and examiners should credit other valid points not listed.

Debates surrounding development: challenges of globalization, inequality and sustainability

1.   Identify three aspects of inequality represented in Source A.                                           [3]

     Answers may include the following:
     • The photograph suggests vastly different qualities of water used around the globe and a
       link between development and water consumption. A smaller family in a more developed
       country use far more water.
     • Niger 12l per person per day, USA 333l per person per day of water consumed. Vastly
       different amounts
     • The left image suggests that water is not of the same quality. Cleaner water is being
       consumed in the image from the US.
     • The images suggest that families have different ease of access to water. The Niger water
       may be drawn from a local source. The US water will have required significant
       transportation.
     • Answers may include observations about other aspects of potential inequality and
       compare an affluent suburb with a rural dwelling for example.
     • The photographs have been used as part of an awareness campaign on
       sustainability/equality (not just repetition of source provenance)

     Award [1] for each relevant point up to a maximum of [3]. Other relevant points not listed can
     also be rewarded.
                                                 –4–                 M23/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

2.   With explicit reference to Source B and one example you have studied, explain why water is
     important to sustainable development.      [4]

     Answers may include, but are not limited to:
     • Source B frames water as a one the sustainable development goals created by the UN –
       indicating that it is a foundation.
     • Source B highlights the health risks associated with unclean water. The grave hazard this
       poses will undermine any development efforts. Disrupted education and poor literacy and
       hindrances to development.
     • Source B states that water is linked to production of food and energy and to economic
       growth.
     • Source B states that sustainable development is interlinked – ie. clean water is necessary
       to good health and to gender equality.

     Valid examples from own knowledge may include, but are not limited to:
     • Water is a shared resource. Upstream activities ie. irrigation or pollution can compromise
       people who also depend on it. ie Blue Nile
     • Climate change and uncertainty can be shown to impact on future development (Cape
       Town; South Africa water shortages, and Queensland; Australia flooding; recent Pakistan
       flooding; cloud seeding to ‘make rain’ by richer countries e.g. UAE).

     Other relevant points not listed can also be rewarded. Candidates are not expected to make
     four separate points in order to achieve full marks. For each valid point a maximum of [2] may
     be awarded, up to a total of [4]. If there is no reference to another example studied award a
     maximum of [3].
                                                 –5–                  M23/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

3.   Using Source C and Source D, compare the challenges of equality for
     sustainable development.                                                                       [8]

     Potential points of comparison:
     • Sources C and D make references to wealth inequality holding back development. Source
       C says that poorer people (women) have less control over water access and Source D
       suggests that poorer communities are being left behind by wealthier communities.
     • Source C and D emphasize a rights-based approach. Source C advocates water as a
       human right, and Source D emphasizes the importance of political commitment to water
       for all.
     • Source C shows that not all members of society use water proportionally. Women are
       disproportionality involved in water collection and consumption, and women’s needs are
       important in the management of water for all. Source D also states that it is mostly women
       who fetch water.
     • Both sources mention social divisions and inequality. Source C emphasizes women’s
       unequal power in comparison to men and shows that some communities are marginalized
       or voiceless in securing water. Source D also shows that despite progress there is
       ongoing marginalization through gender, class, caste or disability.
     • Both sources make reference to participation and inclusion. Source C mentions decision-
       making mechanisms and Source D emphasizes a lack of political will
     • Both sources make reference to the power of business. Source C mentions the
       commodification of water and Source D suggest that industry and agriculture are not using
       water sustainably.
     • Sources C and D are written some time apart but share the same observations –
       suggesting that priorities are not easily achieved and require more political will.

     If the view of only one source is discussed award a maximum of [4]. For a response which
     focuses significantly on one source with only minimal reference to the other source, award a
     maximum of [5]. For responses that discuss the sources separately, rather than in a running
     comparison, award a maximum [6].

     Award [2] per effective point of comparison up to a maximum of [8]. For an [8] response
     expect detailed comparison but do not expect all of the points above, and allow other valid
     points.
                                                  –6–                 M23/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

4.   “Political factors represent the greatest threat to sustainable development.” Discuss this
     claim using all the sources and your own knowledge.                                       [10]

     Question 4 is assessed according to the markbands that follow, in conjunction with these
     marking notes.

     Source material may include, but is not limited to:

     Source A
     • Source A is drawn from a major political campaign by UNICEF and suggests that
       everyday families in developed nations are yet to recognise that they consume more water
       than they need and that political power is instrumental in showing this.
     • Source A does not represent or draw attention to traditional political factors thus
       diminishing the threat of the political.
     • As a counterclaim the argument might be made that consumption is personal not political,
       or that future families can manage on far less water and that sustainability is already
       possible.

     Source B
     • Source B shows that clean water is one of United Nations’ new Sustainable
       Development Goals (SDGs) and that the issue is already the subject of much political and
       global agreement.
     • A counter point may be made that as a political actor, The UN is advocating for an
       approach that is not yet established and that political power is weak on this issue.
     • Related to this, Source B shows that 1.8 million people’s basic needs are not being met
       and notes that civil society will play a role in convincing stakeholders.
     • Source B states that water and sanitation is a key foundation for achieving the Sustainable
       Development Goals, including good health and gender equality.
     • As a counter point answers may note the reverse - that gender equality is also key to
       securing development and note that there is little political agreement on this.

     Source C
     • Source C suggests that debates on gender equality have only been given attention
       relatively recently and that political change is valued and needed in institutions committed
       to sustainable practice (ie training of personnel and consultation with women on the
       ground).
     • As a counterclaim, Source C illustrates how social factors such as gender and
       empowerment undermine efforts to secure water.
     • Source C highlights the increasing commodification of water in tension with a rights-based
       approach which is demanded of, and by political actors such as the UN.

     Source D
     • Source D makes clear that there is a lack of political will to foster sustainable development
       for all, showing that political action is a solution, and political inaction is a threat.
     • Source D shows that social factors such as gender also present threats.
     • Similarly, source D shows that there is not agreement on water as a global right or regime.
       Agriculture, and factories producing goods for wealthier consumers, place increasing
       pressure on natural resources. Economic forces are drivers and political commitment to
       sustainability regulation is inadequate.
     • Source D, by contrast shows progress in improving access to water by the world’s two
       most populous developing nations – suggesting some political approaches are working.
                                             –7–                  M23/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M

Own knowledge may include, but is not limited to:
• Answers may discuss what is meant by “political” or consider that an absence of political
  representation is itself as problem and note how different actors or ideologies might
  represent political factors as obstacles. Students may point out that political power is
  accessed and used differently depending on context
• The importance of politics and of international institutions, regimes and cooperation to
  development can be made. By its own admission – The first UN MDG framework did not
  address the full water and development agenda. Emphasis on “sustainability” was not
  included and human rights and inequalities were not given enough attention.
• Examples may be given of other resources or global commons which need to be valued
  differently within debates on development and require political will to be managed
  sustainably.
• Examples of the power of economic actors and the relative lack of regulation in a
  globalising world can be given to evidence the scale of the political challenge. Privatisation
  of utilities. Desalinisation by wealthy states.
• Students might suggest that economic, social, institutional and environmental factors are
  more of a threat and NOT political factorsStudents may give examples of ‘stealing water’
  by states in certain regions or with states by diverting water courses/dams etc. Sometimes
  for the water sometimes for power generation.


If only source material or only own knowledge is used, the response can only be awarded a
maximum of [6]. To achieve the maximum [10], responses must refer to all four sources.

Do not expect all of the above, and reward other relevant points not listed.
                                             –8–                  M23/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M
Markbands for question 4

        Marks                                  Level descriptor

          0      • The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

                 • There is little relevant knowledge and a very limited awareness of the
                   demands of the question.
                 • There is little or no attempt to synthesise own knowledge and source
         1–2
                   material.
                 • Responses at this level are often largely descriptive and contain unsupported
                   generalizations.

                 • There is limited awareness of the demands of the question or the question is
                   only partially addressed.
         3–4     • There is some knowledge demonstrated, but this is not always relevant or
                   accurate, and may not be used appropriately or effectively.
                 • Responses at this level are often more descriptive than evaluative.

                 • Answers show some awareness of the demands of the question.
                 • Knowledge is mostly accurate and relevant, and there is some limited
         5–6
                   synthesis of own knowledge and source material.
                 • Counterclaims are implicitly identified but are not explored.

                 • Answers are focused and show good awareness of the demands of the
                   question.
         7–8     • Relevant and accurate knowledge is demonstrated, there is some synthesis
                   of own knowledge and source material, and appropriate examples are used.
                 • The response contains claims and counter claims.

                 • Answers are clearly focused and show a high degree of awareness of the
                   demands of the question.
                 • Relevant and accurate knowledge is demonstrated, there is effective
        9–10       synthesis of own knowledge and source material, and appropriate examples
                   are used.
                 • The response contains clear evaluation, with well-balanced claims and
                   counter claims.
