© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Global politics
Higher level and standard level
Paper 1

4 May 2023

Zone A morning   Zone B afternoon   Zone C morning


1 hour 15 minutes

Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y Answer all the questions.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [25 marks].




                                                                                             2223 – 5951
      5 pages                                            © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
                                                   –2–                                          2223 – 5951


Unit 3: Development

       Debates surrounding development: challenges of globalization, inequality and sustainability.

Read all the sources carefully and answer all the questions that follow.

Source A               Adapted from “#WaterIs a family affair”, photographs from a photo essay used by
                       UNICEF to raise awareness of water consumption around the world in 2015.



                                                                       Niger: Family of five
                                                                       uses 60 litres per day




               US: Family of three
             uses 1000 litres per day
                                                    –3–                                            2223 – 5951


Source B                Adapted from United Nations document published in 2015, outlining the new
                        17 goals essential to achieving sustainable development by 2030.

   United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 6: Clean Water And Sanitation:

What’s the goal here?
To ensure access to safe water sources and sanitation for all.

Why?
Access to water, sanitation and hygiene is a human right, yet billions are still faced with daily challenges
accessing even the most basic of services. Around 1.8 billion people globally use a source of drinking
water that is fecally* contaminated. Some 2.4 billion people lack access to basic sanitation services,
such as toilets or latrines. Water scarcity affects more than 40 per cent of the global population and is
projected to rise.

What are the effects of this?
Water and sanitation related diseases remain among the major causes of death in children under five.
Proper water and sanitation are a key foundation for achieving the Sustainable Development Goals,
including good health and gender equality. By managing our water sustainably, we are also able to
better manage our production of food and energy and contribute to economic growth. Moreover, we can
preserve our water ecosystems, their biodiversity, and act on climate change.

What can we do?
Civil society organizations should work to keep governments accountable, invest in water research
and development, and promote the inclusion of women, youth and indigenous communities in water
resources governance.



* feces: bodily waste or excrement from humans and animals




                                                                                                  Turn over
                                                   –4–                                            2223 – 5951


Source C                Adapted from “Gender & Water”, a training guide for the Swiss Agency for
                        Development and Cooperation (SDC), Switzerland’s agency for international
                        cooperation in the Department of Foreign Affairs (2005).

Water resource management is incomplete without a gender perspective because:

Women and men have different and changing gender roles which are bound up with relations of
unequal power. Women are often the primary users of water – in households, subsistence agriculture,
health and sanitation. Women in many cases also take the primary role in educating children, in child
and family health and in caring for the sick. Understanding gender roles will help to plan responses and
policies related to water.

Women and men have different access to power and assets. Poor women often use more
“common property” resources such as rivers and lakes than men or better-off women. The commercial
value of water may mean that particular genders or classes are not recognized in their claims to their
right to water. A gender perspective can be applied to policy, finance, infrastructure investments and
the impact of large-scale water resource management projects. A rights-based approach must prioritise
equal access to water by all social groups, inclusive participation in decision-making about water,
and accountability of public institutions. The human right to water entitles everyone to sufficient, safe,
acceptable, physically accessible and affordable water for personal and domestic uses.


Source D                Adapted from “More than 800m people need to travel 30 mins for safe water,
                        report finds.” The Guardian newspaper (2018).

Water inequality is increasing in the world’s most environmentally stressed nations, warn the authors of
a report that shows more than 800 million people need to travel for at least 30 minutes to access safe
supplies. Gender is also a key factor because it is mostly women who fetch water. The UN recommends
at least 50 litres per day for a family of four. Despite an overall increase in provision of tap water, the
study—the State of the World’s Water 2018—charts the gaps within and between nations, as poor
communities face competition over natural water supplies with agriculture and factories producing
goods for wealthier consumers. “Inequality in access to water is growing primarily as a result of a lack of
political will,” said the director of policy and advocacy for WaterAid, an international non-governmental
organization (NGO) focussed on water, sanitation and hygiene.

There have been improvements. The greatest progress has been in big, fast-growing developing nations.
China has seen an extra 334 million people get access to water between 2000 and 2015, followed
by India with 301 million. WaterAid’s senior policy analyst on water security and climate change said
that, “Those marginalised by age, gender, class, caste or disability, or living in a slum or remote rural
community, are hardest to reach and will continue to suffer as long as governments do not prioritise
and fund access to water for all, and while disproportionate use of water by industry and agriculture
continues.”
                                                  –5–                                    2223 – 5951


1.   Identify three aspects of inequality represented in Source A.                              [3]


2.   With explicit reference to Source B and one example you have studied, explain why
     water is important to sustainable development.                                             [4]


3.   Using Source C and Source D, compare the challenges of equality for
     sustainable development.                                                                   [8]


4.   “Political factors represent the greatest threat to sustainable development.”
     Discuss this claim using all the sources and your own knowledge.                         [10]




Disclaimer:
Content used in IB assessments is taken from authentic, third-party sources. The views expressed within them belong to their
individual authors and/or publishers and do not necessarily reflect the views of the IB.

References:

Source A      © UNICEF/UNI191744/Gilbertson VII Photo.
              © UNICEF/UNI191744/Gilbertson VII Photo.

Source B      United Nations. n.d. Clean Water and Sanitation: Why it Matters. [pdf] United Nations. Available at:
              https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/6_Why-it-Matters_Sanitation_2p.pdf
              [Accessed 1 November 2019]. Source adapted.

Source C      Sever, C., 2005. Gender & Water: Mainstreaming gender equality in water, hygiene and sanitation interventions.
              [pdf] Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC). Available at: https://static1.squarespace.com/
              static/536c4ee8e4b0b60bc6ca7c74/t/53c54145e4b0d5974bbf10c6/1405436229252/SDC+gender++water.pdf
              [Accessed 1 November 2019]. Source adapted.

Source D      Watts, J., 2018. More than 800m people need to travel 30 mins for safe water, report finds. [online] Available at:
              https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2018/mar/21/more-than-800m-people-need-to-travel-30-mins-
              for-safe-water-report-finds [Accessed 1 November 2019]. Source adapted. Copyright Guardian News & Media Ltd
              2023.
