© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Information technology in a global society
Higher level
Paper 1

18 May 2023

Zone A afternoon   Zone B afternoon   Zone C afternoon


2 hours 15 minutes

Instructions to candidates
y   Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y   Section A: a
                nswer two questions.
y   Section B: a
                nswer one question.
y   Each question is worth [20 marks].
y   The maximum mark for this examination paper is [60 marks].




                                                                                               2223 – 5511
      11 pages                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
                                                     –2–                                              2223 – 5511


                                                   Section A

Answer two questions. Each question is worth [20 marks].

1.   Intelligent transport monitoring

     The government of the Republic of Uganda has required all motor vehicles to be fitted with a
     global positioning system (GPS) device. The government has adopted this strategy to reduce
     crimes that often involve the use of motor vehicles. Figure 1 shows that a GPS device can
     be hidden inside a car.

                         Figure 1: How the transport monitoring system works




                           Monitoring centre




                                       ABC 1234
           Car number plate                    5




                                                                          GPS device hidden
                                                                          inside the car


     The GPS device within the vehicle will communicate with a monitoring centre to send the
     data from the car using mobile/cellphone technology. If the device is disconnected from the
     vehicle, an alert will be sent to the monitoring centre.

     In addition to the information captured by the GPS device, there are roadside cameras that
     capture images of the number plates of passing cars.

     This initiative is called the Intelligent Transport Monitoring System (ITMS).

     However, civil liberty groups in the Republic of Uganda have raised concerns about the
     Intelligent Transport Monitoring System.

     (a)   (i)     State two file formats that could be used for the images of car number plates.            [2]

           (ii)    Identify two pieces of information, in addition to the location of the vehicle, that
                   could be communicated from a vehicle to the monitoring centre.                            [2]

           (iii)   The government is considering using the data from the Intelligent Transport
                   Monitoring System (ITMS) to create a model of the traffic patterns in a city.

                   Identify two factors that should be taken into account when developing this model. [2]

(This question continues on the following page)
                                                     –3–                                         2223 – 5511


(Question 1 continued)

     (b)   (i)	The government also wants to use the Intelligent Transport Monitoring System
                (ITMS) to produce a simulation of traffic patterns.

                   Explain one benefit of producing a simulation of traffic patterns.                   [2]

           The Ugandan government is outsourcing the development of the Intelligent Transport
           Monitoring System (ITMS) to a technology company in another country. This company
           will also develop and operate the software that monitors vehicles in the system (ITMS).

           (ii)    Explain one advantage of outsourcing the development and operation of the
                   Intelligent Transport Monitoring System (ITMS) to a company in another country.      [2]

           (iii)   Explain one disadvantage of outsourcing the development and operation of the
                    Intelligent Transport Monitoring System (ITMS) to a company in another country.     [2]

     (c)   Discuss whether the advantages for the government of monitoring the movement of
           vehicles in the Republic of Uganda outweigh the disadvantages.                               [8]




                                                                                                Turn over
                                                 –4–                                        2223 – 5511


2.   EyesOnU

     EyesOnU is a facial recognition website that allows people to upload a picture of a person
     and find matching images on the World Wide Web. Each image found is given a rating based
     on how similar it is to the uploaded picture (see Figure 2).

                     Figure 2: Example of a search on the EyesOnU website


                                             EyesOnU

         Uploaded photo:




              Matches found...




                        06/02/2022                                12/11/2022
                      URL: www.facebook.com/...                 URL: www.twitter.com/...



                        20/01/2022                               22/03/2022
                      URL: www.twitter.com/...                  URL: www.tik-tok.com/...



     EyesOnU is marketed as an online tool that allows a user to see if somebody else has used
     an image that includes them without their permission.

     EyesOnU aims to encourage its users to behave ethically.

     EyesOnU stores the data in a relational database (see Figure 3).

                        Figure 3: Part of the EyesOnU relational database

                              Users                             Images

                              UserID                            ImageID

                            FirstName                           UserID

                             Surname                         DateAndTime

                           DateOfBirth                            …

                                 …


(This question continues on the following page)
                                                    –5–                                               2223 – 5511


(Question 2 continued)

     (a)   (i)     State the primary key in the Users table in Figure 3.[1]

           (ii)    State the relationship between the Users table and Images table in Figure 3.[1]

           (iii)   Identify two reasons for using a relational database to store this information.           [2]

           (iv)    Describe the difference between the internet and the World Wide Web.                      [2]

     (b)   The EyesOnU facial recognition tool has drawn criticism from privacy campaigners who
           say that the tool could be used to compromise a user’s privacy. EyesOnU has stated
           that their privacy policy will prevent this.

           Explain three rules that could be included in a privacy policy for EyesOnU.[6]

     (c)   There have been concerns raised about the way people use facial recognition sites
           like EyesOnU.

           To what extent is it the responsibility of the website owners and the users of EyesOnU
           to ensure that users act ethically?                                                               [8]




                                                                                                      Turn over
                                                –6–                                             2223 – 5511


3.   Fake news

     In 2021, 96 % of Brazilians with access to a smartphone used free internet messaging apps
     as their only method of communication and obtaining news (see Figure 4).

                 Figure 4: An example of a smartphone with a free messaging app




                                        MessageApp
                                             CHATS       CALLS


                                              Community


                                              Mary


                                              Jose


                                              Family


                                              Crafting




     However, these messaging apps are leading to the spread of false information. This is
     because messages are often forwarded many times, especially when users are using
     messaging groups that allow messages to be shared between several people. These
     forwarded messages may not have been written by a member of the group. Being able to
     check whether the information in the messages is true can be very difficult.

     One of the issues that has arisen as a result of false information being spread by such
     groups is that people in communities far from large towns are refusing medical treatment
     (such as vaccinations against preventable diseases).

     The messaging app company has said that, because the messages on its platform are
     encrypted, there is nothing it can do to remove messages containing false information
     (see Figure 5).

(This question continues on the following page)
                                                   –7–                                              2223 – 5511


(Question 3 continued)

                  Figure 5: An example of a message spreading false information




                                                Community

                                            Mary            forward
                                            Scientists have
                                            brought back
                                            dinosaurs!




                                            Oh dear! What
                                            should we do?




     (a)   (i)    State two output devices on a smartphone.                                                [2]

           (ii)   Identify the steps used in public and private key encryption.                            [4]

     (b)   It has been proposed that the following measures could be introduced to reduce the
           risk of users spreading false information:
           y Limiting the size of messaging app groups.
           y Limiting the number of times a message can be forwarded.
           y Labelling messages as being forwarded.

           Analyse this proposal.                                                                          [6]

     (c)   To what extent is it the responsibility of the individuals within these communities to
           address the issue of false information being spread on social media?                            [8]




                                                                                                    Turn over
                                                   –8–                                         2223 – 5511


                                               Section B

Answer one question. Each question is worth [20 marks].

4.   SLF Law

     SLF Law, a legal firm, is planning to modernize their business. They intend to purchase
     software from Legal Help, a software development company, which will enable them to
     conduct research into legal cases.

     The software, called Quick Research, consists of an expert system with the addition of
     natural language processing. The natural language processing software uses machine
     learning. It can be used by lawyers for legal searches but can also be used to provide
     information or advice to clients on a self-serve* basis.

     Legal Help plans to use a Gantt chart rather than a PERT chart to manage the development
     of the software.



* self serve: (self-service) a system in which a customer uses the software themselves
  without assistance

     (a)   (i)     Identify two components of an expert system.                                       [2]

           (ii)    Outline one advantage of using a Gantt chart rather than a PERT chart.             [2]

           (iii)   Identify two types of machine learning.                                            [2]

     (b)       Figure 6 shows part of a decision tree where a person has been in an accident
           (i)	
               and may need a lawyer.

                   Study the rules below, then copy and complete the decision tree.

                   y A person has been in an accident.
                   y If the person has been in an accident and has been accused of causing the
                     accident, they will need a lawyer.
                   y If the person does not meet both these requirements, they will receive the
                     following message: “You do not require a lawyer”.                               [3]

(This question continues on the following page)
                                                  –9–                                 2223 – 5511


(Question 4 continued)

                         Figure 6: Part of the decision tree used by SLF Law


                                                    Have you been in
                                                      an accident?




           (ii)   Distinguish between white-box testing and black-box testing.               [3]

     (c)   SLF Law have decided to purchase the Quick Research expert system.

           To what extent will the use of an expert system like Quick Research be beneficial to
           SLF Law?[8]




                                                                                     Turn over
                                                    – 10 –                                         2223 – 5511


5.   Recruiting new staff for TS Employment

     TS Employment is planning to purchase software that uses artificial intelligence (AI). This will
     enable them to speed up the recruitment of new staff.

     The software will allow TS Employment to input the information provided by the job
     applicants and recommend the ones that should be invited to a face-to-face interview. Each
     job application would include details about the applicant like their age, gender and ethnicity,
     as well as a photo.

     However, the software developers are aware that machine learning algorithms can replicate
     bias of various kinds, so they are looking for ways to prevent this. After research, they
     have concluded that the tendency to offer employment to particular groups may be due to
     inappropriate data in the initial data training sets or bias in the algorithms.

     (a)   (i)     Identify two characteristics of an algorithm.                                          [2]

           (ii)    Identify two types of feasibility study that the software developers might use in
                   the development of this software.                                                      [2]

           (iii)   Identify two activities that may take place in the maintenance phase of the
                   system development life cycle (SDLC).                                                  [2]

     (b)   (i)	Concerns have been raised about information technology (IT) projects that are
                completed in a very short time.

                   Explain one reason why completing IT projects in a short time may lead
                   to problems.                                                                           [3]

           (ii)    Explain why the software developers have chosen the agile (scrum) development
                   methodology for this project.                                                          [3]

     (c)   Two additional processes have been proposed during the development of the artificial
           intelligence (AI) software. They are:
           1. Involving end users at all stages of the project.
           2. Checking that the data being input into the system is not biased.

           Discuss whether these two processes should be included in the development of the
           AI software.                                                                                   [8]
                                                    – 11 –                                        2223 – 5511


6.   Autonomous tanks

     Many armies have replaced traditional tanks with robots that resemble tanks but are not
     manned by any military personnel (see Figure 7). The robots are equipped with a variety of
     weapons and sensors.

     The robots are controlled by military personnel and can do all the tasks that a traditional tank
     can do. They can also drag wounded soldiers to safety.

     A stakeholder analysis and feasibility studies were carried out during the development of the robots.

     There are plans to make the robots fully autonomous.

                                          Figure 7: A robotic tank




     (a)   (i)	Identify two methods of data collection that could be used for a stakeholder
                analysis during the development of the robots.                                           [2]

           (ii)    State two information technology (IT) personnel who would be involved in the
                   development of the robots.                                                            [2]

           (iii)   Identify two characteristics of an autonomous robot.                                  [2]

     (b)   (i)     Multiple stakeholders will be affected by this project.

                   Explain why a stakeholder analysis will lead to better project outcomes.              [3]

           (ii)    Explain why user acceptance testing is a critical part of the development of
                   the robots.                                                                           [3]

     (c)   There have been concerns raised about the use of autonomous robots in war.

           Discuss whether it is acceptable to use autonomous robots in war.                             [8]



Disclaimer:
Content used in IB assessments is taken from authentic, third-party sources. The views expressed within them belong to their
individual authors and/or publishers and do not necessarily reflect the views of the IB.

References:
Figure 1      Anon, n.d. [Vector image of car]. [online] Available at: https://publicdomainvectors.org/en/free-clipart/Green-car-
              vector-image/10093.html [Accessed 7 March 2022]. Public domain.
              Anon, n.d. [Vector image of a building]. [online] Available at: https://publicdomainvectors.org/en/free-clipart/
              Building-3D-graphics/70653.html [Accessed 7 March 2022]. Public domain.
Figure 5      Mike, 2017. Brown T-rex statue. [online] Available at: https://www.pexels.com/photo/brown-t-rex-statue-410856/
              [Accessed 7 March 2022]. Source adapted.
All other texts, graphics and illustrations © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
