© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Information technology in a global society
Higher level and standard level
Paper 2 – article

19 May 2023

Zone A afternoon   Zone B morning   Zone C morning


1 hour 15 minutes

Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this booklet until instructed to do so.
y This booklet contains the article required for information technology in a global society higher
  level and standard level paper 2.




                                                                                                2223 – 9232
      3 pages                                               © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
                                                 –2–                                               2223 – 9232


         Theme: Business and employment, environment, home and leisure

IT system: QR codes, global positioning systems (GPS)

        Electric transportation is increasingly becoming part of our lives. With the aim of combatting
        climate change and improving air quality in cities, more people are choosing to use electric
        scooters (e-scooters). Companies such as CityScoots, who provide e-scooters for hire, can be
        found in most major cities.

    5   Justine is a new customer with CityScoots. Before hiring an e-scooter, she must download the
        app1 and complete an online registration form where she provides her bank account details and
        other information. Once registered, each time she wants to hire an e-scooter she must scan its
        QR code2 (see Figure 1). At the end of her journey, Justine must leave the scooter and scan
        the QR code again. This action results in the cost of her journey being deducted from her bank
  10    account. The cost of the journey is calculated based on its duration.

                            Figure 1: The CityScoots e-scooter and app

                                                                       9:41


                                                                                   Ride
                                                                              You c
                                                                                    an fin
                                                                              QR co        d the
                                                                                     de he
                                                                                            re
                                        ts
                                     oo
                                   Sc




                                                                1234
                                 ty
                                Ci




        Customers can also use the CityScoots app to locate the nearest e-scooter by looking at the
        map on their cellphone (mobile phone). The app also provides possible routes to reach the
        e-scooter and its remaining battery life (see Figure 2).
                                                         –3–                                  2223 – 9232


                                    Figure 2: Locating an e-scooter


                                    9:41

                                                       Find scooter




                                 Ba
                                    c
                                   ca
                                    lau
                                        re a
                                                                      15

                                         te
                                          Ro
                                             a
                                                   9
                                               d                      e
                                                                   nu
                                                                 ve
                                                               SA
                                                            IBI


                                                                           1




                                                             CityScoots 0003
                                                                   9 km
                                          Reserved            START RIDE
                                             for                €0.90 +
                                          00:05:45             €0.09/min




         As e-scooters have become more popular, the number of accidents has increased. In many
    15   cases, the scooter rider who caused the accident has not been identified. Some riders just
         abandon the e-scooter at the side of the road.



1
    app: small specialized program run on mobile devices, the internet, a computer or
    other electronic device
2
    QR code: a machine-readable optical label that contains information about the item
    to which it is attached
Disclaimer:
Content used in IB assessments is taken from authentic, third-party sources. The views expressed within them belong to their
individual authors and/or publishers and do not necessarily reflect the views of the IB.

References:

© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
