M23/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                               May 2023


                 Information technology
                    in a global society


               Higher and standard level


                               Paper 2




14 pages
                                            –2–                  M23/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                    –3–                  M23/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


Using assessment criteria for external assessment

For external assessment, a number of assessment criteria have been identified. Each assessment
criterion has level descriptors describing specific levels of achievement, together with an appropriate
range of marks. The level descriptors concentrate on positive achievement, although for the lower levels
failure to achieve may be included in the description.

Examiners must judge the externally assessed work at SL and at HL against the four criteria (A–D) using
the level descriptors.

• The same assessment criteria are provided for SL and HL.

• The aim is to find, for each criterion, the descriptor that conveys most accurately the level attained by
  the candidate, using the best-fit model. A best-fit approach means that compensation should be made
  when a piece of work matches different aspects of a criterion at different levels. The mark awarded
  should be one that most fairly reflects the balance of achievement against the criterion. It is not
  necessary for every single aspect of a level descriptor to be met for that mark to be awarded.

• When assessing a candidate’s work, examiners should read the level descriptors for each criterion
  until they reach a descriptor that most appropriately describes the level of the work being assessed.
  If a piece of work seems to fall between two descriptors, both descriptors should be read again and
  the one that more appropriately describes the candidate’s work should be chosen.

• Where there are two or more marks available within a level, examiners should award the upper marks
  if the candidate’s work demonstrates the qualities described to a great extent. Examiners should
  award the lower marks if the candidate’s work demonstrates the qualities described to a lesser extent.

• Only whole numbers should be recorded; partial marks, that is fractions and decimals, are not
  acceptable.

• Examiners should not think in terms of a pass or fail boundary, but should concentrate on identifying
  the appropriate descriptor for each assessment criterion.

• The highest level descriptors do not imply faultless performance but should be achievable by
  a candidate. Examiners should not hesitate to use the extremes if they are appropriate descriptions of
  the work being assessed.

• A candidate who attains a high level of achievement in relation to one criterion will not necessarily
  attain high levels of achievement in relation to the other criteria. Similarly, a candidate who attains a
  low level of achievement for one criterion will not necessarily attain low achievement levels for the
  other criteria. Examiners should not assume that the overall assessment of the candidates will
  produce any particular distribution of marks.

• The assessment criteria must be made available to candidates prior to sitting the examination.
                                                   –4–                  M23/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


     Theme: Business and employment, environment, home and leisure
Criterion A — The issue and stakeholder(s)                                                         [4]

1.    (a)   Describe one social/ethical concern related to the IT system in the article.

            Note to examiners: The concern may relate to its impact or result or consequences
            or effect or outcome.
            Award [1] for identifying the concern (which does not have to be stated explicitly).
            Mark the first concern only (if there are two or more).
            Award [2] for a description of the concern that must be stated explicitly.

            Social/ethical concerns may include the following:
            • Reliability: CityScoots devices might fail, problems with the app, user’s
              phone/camera, company server.
            • People and machines: availability 24 hours/7 days a week).
            • Privacy: as details may be shared by the app.
            • Security: hacking banking information.
            • Security: credit card is stolen and used, and/or false email address is used as
              well, the wrong person will be blamed for any accidents and damage and
              fines.
            • Anonymity: as scooter riders involved in accidents may be identified.
            • Digital divide: you need a smartphone, cellular connection, digital literacy.
            • Policies: government regulation about the appropriate use of CityScoots,
              concerns about how the CityScoots has been introduced and issues from lack
              of regulations. Especially concerning the speed of the scooters and the lack of
              protection for riders who often do not use a helmet or protective equipment
              like motorbike riders use, and the use of scooters on paths also used by
              pedestrians, and the use of scooters in fast flowing traffic, often ignoring road
              rules.
            • Policies: Discarded e-scooters may exposing others to a potentially
              hazardous environment - "Some riders just abandon the e-scooter at the side
              of the road." - consequence for pedestrians if on pavements/sidewalks.
                                                 –5–                 M23/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M



(b)       Describe the relationship of one primary stakeholder to the IT system in the
          article.

          Note to examiners
          Award [1] for identifying the stakeholder (who). Mark the first stakeholder only (if
          there are two or more).
          Award [2] for describing how the stakeholder interacts with the IT system or what
          part of the IT system relates to the stakeholder.

          Primary stakeholders may include:
          • User/CityScoots rider/Justine: Using the mobile app, entering their information
             and use of the CityScoots device. Personal and private information could be
             hacked by third parties.
          • Operators of the service.
          • Governing bodies that permit the service (city/government): Policies and
             regulations to the proper use of the IT system.
          • CityScoots company owner: Maintenance and user’s data security.
          • CityScoots manufacturer: Reliability of the device.
          • Mobile app software developer: Reliability of the interconnectivity and banking
             information security.

          Examiners should reward suitable responses that are not included in this mark
          scheme. Before awarding marks, please check with team leader.

          Do not accept the following as primary stakeholders as they are not directly
          involved with the IT system (but can be used in Criterion C).
          • Pedestrians and car drivers
          • CityScoots competitors
          • E-scooters can be left and abandoned on streets, parks, in rivers, etc. which
              then requires clean-up crews, to be paid for by CityScoots or the city
              authorities.


Marks                                            Level descriptor

      0          The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

                 Either an appropriate social/ethical concern or the relationship of one primary
      1
                 stakeholder to the IT system in the article is identified.

                 Either an appropriate social/ethical concern or the relationship of one primary
      2
                 stakeholder to the IT system in the article is described or both are identified.

                 Either an appropriate social/ethical concern or the relationship of one primary
      3
                 stakeholder to the IT system in the article is described; the other is identified.

                 Both an appropriate social/ethical concern and the relationship of one primary
      4
                 stakeholder to the IT system in the article are described.
                                                  –6–                 M23/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


Criterion B — The IT concepts and processes                                                              [6]

2.   (a)   Describe, step-by-step, how the IT system works.
           IT system: QR codes, global positioning systems (GPS)

           The major steps are the use of the components of the IT system: smartphone,
           texting, GPS positioning.

           Award [1]: There is some understanding of the process but NOT in a step-by-step
           approach using the information within the article with some steps missing.
           Award [2]: There is a logical step-by-step account using the information within the article
           (but it may lack some detail).
           Award [3]: A step-by-step account that identifies how the IT system works that goes
           beyond the article.
           Award [4]: A step-by-step account of how the IT system works with descriptions that go
           beyond the article.

           The user sees on their screen the ride time cost charged to their account.

           Answers provided in the article include:
           • Download the app.
           • Complete an online registration form / create a user account.
           • Provides payment/banking information.
           • Locate the e-scooter on the app map, find out how to get to the scooter, and
             check device’s battery life (route-finding, GPS navigation).
           • User needs to scan the QR code of the CityScoots at the start of the rental
             period.
           • To end the rental service, user needs to scan again the QR code of the e-
             scooter.
           • Rental cost is deducted from user's account.
                                      –7–                 M23/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M



Additional information that goes beyond that provided in the article may
include:
• Access to a smartphone with storage capacity, and cellular data (e.g. 3G, 4G,
   GPS).
• Download/install the app from the Apple or Play Store after user
   authentication/biometric identification.
• Using the touch screen/on screen keyboard as an input device (e.g., user
   login details).
• Other information such as username/password for profile, email, consent for
   privacy policy, GPS tracking access/share location, access to camera
• Mobile app verifies user account funds and/or credit limit by connecting with
   the corresponding bank and or PayPal company.
• User opens the mobile app and uses the navigation map to locate the nearest
   e-scooter.
• GPS process (CityScoots locations, searching e-scooters nearby). How GPS
   works technically is not required, only the use; however, accept an explanation
   of how it works and accept as extra information. For incorrect explanations of
   how GPS works, e.g. the GPS sends signal to the satellite, do not award as
   extra information beyond the article.
• A client server is used – mobile app user as client and CityScoots company as
   server where user information is recorded and updated.
• Database to store information about the hire (such as eScooter and the
   customer)
• A confirmation of rental period ending is shown in mobile app and record is
   linked in the database to the records of the e-scooter and the user.
• The mobile app calculates the number of minutes the CityScoots has been
   used to calculate the rental cost.
• eScooter availability removed from map when hired by users/comes online
   when QR code scanned after use.
• Rental cost is deducted from the user account (bank information system,
   PayPal).
• The number of minutes is multiplied by the fee per minute to calculate the total
   charge.
• The QR code is read by the camera in the phone in order to extract data
   containing bike details.
• The QR code data, plus pickup/drop off times will be sent to the server.
• Details of the ride (pickup time/drop off time/total cost) are displayed on the
   user’s phone.
                                             –8–                  M23/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


(b)    Explain the relationship between the IT system and the social/ethical concern
       described in Criterion A.

       Note to examiners
       Explaining the link between the concern and specific parts, or whole, of the IT system
       means the candidate must include how or why the concern has arisen from the use of
       the IT system. The concern identified in Criterion A may be implicit.
       There must be a link to the concern identified/described in Q1(a).

       Award [1] If the relationship between the concern and the IT system is identified. This
       may be a repeat, or rewording, of the response to Q1(a) or lack of detail for the how or
       why. If there is more than one concern identified in Q1(a) accept any concern (i.e.,
       preventing a follow through error).

       Award [2] if how or why the concern that has arisen is explained. Appropriate IT or ITGS
       terminology is used.
       For example, using a privacy concern, responses need to explain:
       •   HOW the data can be accessed (e.g., interception of the WiFi signal is achieved)
           OR
       •   WHY it is possible to access the data (e.g., lack of encryption of the WiFi signal)

       • Reliability (CityScoots devices might fail).
       • People and machines (ease of use, availability 24/7, concerns about how the
         CityScoots has been introduced and issues from lack of regulations).
       • Privacy (as details may be shared by the app).
       • Security (hacking banking information).
       • Anonymity (as scooter riders involved in accidents may be identified).
       • Digital divide (you need a smartphone, cellular connection, digital literacy).
       • Policies (government regulation about the appropriate use of CityScoots).

      The following are examples the students may use. They may present other
      reasons.
       • How – Reliability, CityScoots might fail due to hardware malfunction.
       • Why – Phone camera malfunction.
       • How – Software, CityScoots might have an unreadable bar code.
       • Why – Users would not be able to hire a scooter.
       • How – Hardware, can't access server / out of WiFi range
       • Why – unable to verify customer/determine total cost.
       • How – People (and machines) using the CityScoots inappropriately.
       • Why – Users might use the e-scooters in ways that affect their safety and that
               of pedestrians.
       • How – Privacy of users’ data collected by CityScoots and shared with
               third-parties.
       • Why – Because CityScoots collects personal and travel information
                and CityScoots may benefit from sharing this information.
       • How – a scooter is in an accident/damaged and rider is anonymous.
       • Why – someone else hires the scooter using Justine’s account by illegally
         accessing her mobile phone.
                                             –9–                  M23/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


       Candidates are expected to make reference to the relevant stakeholders,
       information technologies, data and processes. Candidates will be expected to
       refer to “how the IT system works” using appropriate IT terminology.

Marks                                         Level descriptor

  0           The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

              There is little or no understanding of the step-by-step process of how the
              IT system works and does not go beyond the information in the article.
 1–2
              The major components of the IT system are identified using minimal technical
              IT terminology.

              There is a description of the step-by-step process of how the IT system works
              that goes beyond the information in the article.
              Most of the major components of the IT system are identified using some
 3–4          technical IT terminology.
              The relationship between the IT system referred to in the article and the
              concern presented in criterion A is identified, with some use of
              ITGS terminology.


              There is a detailed description of the step-by-step process that shows a clear
              understanding of how the IT system works that goes beyond the information in
              the article.
              The major components of the IT system are identified using appropriate
 5–6
              technical IT terminology.
              The relationship between the IT system referred to in the article and the
              concern presented in criterion A is explained using appropriate
              ITGS terminology.
                                                  – 10 –               M23/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


Criterion C — The impact of the social/ethical issue(s) on stakeholders                               [8]

3.   Evaluate the impact of the social/ethical issues on the relevant stakeholders.

      Note to examiners
      Mark holistically using a two-step process:
        1.   Determine the markband the response falls into.
        2.   Determine the level within the markband using the guidelines below.
      Impact - result/consequence/effect/outcome on stakeholder which can be positive or
      negative


      The evaluation should focus on the overall impact on the stakeholders. Evaluative
      comments may be within the body of the analysis or as a final summary.


      Band 1-2
      Award [1] for at least one impact identified.
      Award [2] for at least one impact described or more than one impact identified


      Band 3-5
      Award [3] for a limited analysis (such as the division into groups (privacy issues, security
      issues), or the impact on different stakeholders).
      Award [4] for an incomplete analysis (such as mostly positives or mostly negatives).
      Award [5] for a balanced analysis that includes connections (such as between positive and
      negatives or between impacts on different stakeholders). There may be limited evaluative
      statements.


      Band 6-8
      At least two stakeholders are required
      Award [6] for a balanced analysis of the impacts that includes substantiated evaluative
      comments.
      Award [7–8] for an overall evaluation supported by explicit references to the analysis of the
      impacts (this is not a repetition or summary of the analysis). The evaluation shows evidence
      of insightful thinking.
                                            – 11 –              M23/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M



Users
Positive impacts may include:
• Users find it easy to use the CityScoots, with high availability around the city to
  commute short distances.
• Accidents involving CityScoots users and pedestrians can be resolved easily as the
  CityScoots user identity and private information can be provided by the CityScoots
  company to the authorities.

Negative impacts may include:
• Safety and security of CityScoots users and pedestrians.
• Lack of e-scooter riding policies and government regulation.
• Data been shared, loss of privacy.
• Some people will not have the IT skills/mobile phone to use this service
• A person might be wrongly blamed for an accident if the e-scooter is stolen, or some
  other way of using it e.g. stolen bank details/credit card, and has an accident.

CityScoots company
Positive impacts may include:
• Use of data to inform (data analytics) policies, IT system improvement and
   marketing
• Competitive advantage that could lead to financial gains.
• Innovators reputation.

Negative impacts may include:
• Cost of the app development and/or e-scooter device, return on investment
• Additional cost of maintenance, re-charge of e-scooters, repair, loss, theft
• Accountability gap – risk liability (user, company, pedestrian?).
• Lack of data security policies and procedures – third-party companies. If there is a
  leak of information, who is liable?

Government agencies
Positive impacts may include:
• Reduce traffic.
• Improve air quality.
• Combat climate change.

Negative impacts may include:
• Change current traffic policies and regulations.
• Urban planning change.
• Recycling and disposal of e-waste.

Examiners should reward suitable responses that are not included in this mark
scheme. Before awarding marks, please check with team leader.

Please see the criterion level descriptors on page 12
                                        – 12 –                M23/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


Marks                                    Level descriptor
  0     The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
        The impact of the social/ethical issues on stakeholders is described but not
 1–2    evaluated. Material is either copied directly from the article or implicit references
        are made to it.

        The impact of the social/ethical issues on stakeholders is partially analysed, with
        some evaluative comment. Explicit references to the information in the article are
 3–5
        partially developed in the response. There is some use of appropriate ITGS
        terminology.

        The impact of the social/ethical issues on stakeholders is fully analysed and
        evaluated. Explicit, well developed references to information in the article are
 6–8
        made appropriately throughout the response. There is use of appropriate ITGS
        terminology.
                                                   – 13 –                M23/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M



Criterion D — A solution to a problem arising from the article                                      [8]

4.   Evaluate one possible solution that addresses at least one problem identified in
     Criterion C.

     Note to examiners
     The problem should be stated in the box above the response. However, if this is not done, a
     solution can be evaluated that addresses any problem identified in Criterion C.
     The solution must be feasible.
     If there is more than one solution, mark the first solution only.
     Mark holistically using a two-step process:
      1.   Determine the markband the response falls into.
      2.   Determine the level within the markband using the guidelines attached.
     The solution may be a series of related measures that address the problem identified. For
     example, if the candidate identifies a problem such as security and then includes a range of
     security measures that are grouped together, this is acceptable.
     If there are more than one solution, and there is no explicit connection between them, only
     mark the first solution.

     Band 1 - 2
     The link to the problem may be implicit.
     Award [1] if a solution is identified.
     Award [2] if a solution is described.

     Band 3 - 5
     The solution is explicitly linked to the problem.
     Award [3] if the solution described and there is at least one evaluative statement (the
     application of the solution to the problem or a strength/weakness of the solution)
     Award [4] if the solution described has limited evaluative comments about the strengths
     and/or weaknesses of the solution.
     Award [5] if the solution described has evaluative comments that address a range of
     strengths and weaknesses.

     Band 6 -8
     There are explicit references to the article throughout the response.
     Award [6] for an overall judgement about the effectiveness of the solution.
     Award [7-8] for an overall judgement about the effectiveness of the solution that is
     supported by the evaluation of its strengths and weaknesses. Future developments
     may be proposed and/or insightful thinking demonstrated.
                                            – 14 –                M23/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M



Answers may include the following:
Data security
• Data sharing agreement with other citywide authorities.
• Right to anonymity.
• Data encrypted during transfer.
• Links to policies such as GDPR.

Safety and security of CityScoots users – expectations
• Use of a helmet by the driver is often required.
• The e-scooter should be equipped with LED lights, in the front, and back, and a
  horn.
• Insurance by CityScoots company is a must-have (for user and third party).

Lack of e-scooter riding policies and government regulation
• Establish a minimum age to use the e-scooters.
• Establish circulation paths (bicycle lanes) and restrict its use on sidewalks, parking
  spaces for e-scooters and set speed limits.
• Integrated transport system / sustainable innovation.
• Login credentials must be kept safe and secure.

Lack of IT skills
• CityScoots website could include a video/pictures to guide users through the process
  of hiring the scooter.

Examiners should reward suitable responses that are not included in this mark
scheme. Before awarding marks, please check with team leader.



Marks                                         Level descriptor

  0         The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

            One feasible solution to at least one problem is proposed and described. No
 1–2        evaluative comment is offered. Material is either copied directly from the article or
            implicit references are made to it.

            One appropriate solution to at least one problem is proposed and partially
 3–5        evaluated. The response contains explicit references to information in the article
            that are partially developed. There is some use of appropriate ITGS terminology.

            One appropriate solution to at least one problem is proposed and fully evaluated,
            addressing both its strengths and potential weaknesses. Areas for future
 6–8        development may also be identified. Explicit, fully developed references to the
            information in the article are made appropriately throughout the response. There
            is use of appropriate ITGS terminology.
