© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Philosophy
Higher level
Paper 3

5 May 2023

Zone A afternoon   Zone B morning   Zone C morning


1 hour 15 minutes

Instructions to candidates
y Do not turn over this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y Read the text and write a response.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [25 marks].




                                                                                               2223 – 5603
      2 pages                                              © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
                                                             –2–                                                     2223 – 5603


Unseen text – exploring philosophical activity

Compare and contrast the view(s) of philosophical activity presented in the text below, with your
own experience and understanding of what is involved in doing philosophy [25 marks].

                  Is there conscious life elsewhere in the universe? Lately this question has become a
          scientific one, exciting because science just might be able to answer it […] The scientist’s
          mixture of knowledge, ignorance and curiosity can go to work on the technical challenge.
                  The philosopher’s curiosity has a different focus. “Conscious life” embraces all sorts of
     5    other possibilities and, on reflection, we do not know where the limits might lie.
                  Questions have a purpose and this purpose is older than the technical curiosity of
          recent science. One enduring purpose of a philosopher’s curiosity has been to understand
          how human consciousness fits into the larger cosmos or order of things.
                  Wonder at an unknown cosmos is as old as the sight of the stars from the mouth of the
    10    cave – wonder about what there is and how it moves and why the gods have ordered it so.
          Out of that wonder comes a puzzle that philosophers embrace about consciousness itself and
          a sense of an inner cosmos in uneasy relation to the cosmos outside.
                  Human beings carry a world within them, different from the everyday world of the senses
          and imperfectly continuous with it. So, up to a point at least, do animals. They too are sentient,
    15    ingenious, purposive and organize a communal life. Perhaps they even dream. Yet they do
          not record the past in song and do not spy death coming nor wonder what lies beyond death.
          This is a profound difference […] But meanwhile it is marked by our human awareness of
          contrast between inner and outer worlds, a sense of self apart from experience, which is very
          hard to pin down, but which philosophers explore.
    20            Since long ago, then, philosophers have tried to understand nature for reasons other than
          making life easier and more convenient. There has also been the challenge of our own human
          nature. We stand somehow at the intersection of inner and outer worlds, creatures of both body
          and spirit, subject to laws of nature yet making our own way. We are both part of the order of
          nature and separate from it; and the cosmos we glimpse is also the cosmos which we impose
    25    after our own manner of understanding.
                  Is there conscious life elsewhere in the universe? There is a question of fact here, one
          which would be settled if we happened to find beings just like us in other planetary systems.
          But it is, at best, an imprecise question […] Some of the imprecision could be removed by
          defining the terms “conscious” and “life” exactly. But this is not just a matter for philosophers of
    30    defining them as we please, since it needs to be possible that discoveries in space will increase
          our understanding of conscious life. Part of the imprecision reflects our puzzlement about the
          nature of consciousness. Yet it is a curious puzzlement seeing that we live among conscious
          beings and have had many centuries to study ourselves. Hence, there is another sort of
          question involved, not wholly one of fact, nor of words but, obscurely as yet, of how to think.
    35    It is this kind of question, born in wonder but probing for order in matters of fact, which I shall
          pick out as typical of philosophy.




Disclaimer:

Content used in IB assessments is taken from authentic, third-party sources. The views expressed within them belong to their
individual authors and/or publishers and do not necessarily reflect the views of the IB.


References:

Used with permission of Wiley; Blackwell Publishers Ltd., from Invitation to Philosophy, Hollis, M., 1997.; permission conveyed
through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.
