© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Philosophy
Standard level
Paper 1

4 May 2023

Zone A morning   Zone B afternoon   Zone C morning


1 hour 45 minutes

Instructions to candidates
y   Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y   Section A: a
                nswer one question.
y   Section B: a
                nswer one question.
y   The maximum mark for this examination paper is [50 marks].




                                                                                               2223 – 5604
      5 pages                                              © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
                                                    –2–                                              2223 – 5604


                                                Section A

Answer one question from this section. Each question in this section is worth [25 marks].

Core theme: Being human

1.   Read the following excerpt and develop your response as indicated below.



          I was on a work break during this past Spring semester. But how can one truly
          take a break when there is so much unrest in the world? One key idea about the
          nature of a break itself became highlighted, that is, that the worth of my life and
          the worth of your life are not rooted in work or production. Breath running through
          our bodies means that we are worthy and we are valuable, not due to anything we
          produce but just because we are people, humans.

          I have worth because I am a human being. I don’t have to do anything to gain
          worth. I can just be. Just be me. Unlike the Nike motto says (“just do it”), just be it.
          Just be you. Just be. We are human beings, not human doings.



     With explicit reference to the stimulus and your own knowledge, discuss a philosophical issue
     related to the question of what it means to be human.
                                                –3–                                          2223 – 5604


2.   Look at the following image and develop your response as indicated below.




     With explicit reference to the stimulus and your own knowledge, discuss a philosophical issue
     related to the question of what it means to be human.




                                                                                             Turn over
                                                    –4–                                            2223 – 5604


                                               Section B

Answer one question from this section. Each question in this section is worth [25 marks].

Optional theme 1: Aesthetics

3.    Evaluate the claim that works of art are like flowers: we can enjoy them without knowing about
      soil, air, moisture, and seeds.


4.    Evaluate the claim that art is not a mirror held up to reality, but a hammer with which to shape it.



Optional theme 2: Epistemology

5.    Explain and discuss the role of what other people tell us in knowledge development.


6.    To what extent is the world as it appears?



Optional theme 3: Ethics

7.    To what extent could it be argued that what is best is what is right?


8.    Evaluate the claim that moral language has no special basis on which it can be judged to be
      true or not.



Optional theme 4: Philosophy and contemporary society

9.    Evaluate the claim that the power of national culture can be seen as a response to globalization.


10.   Evaluate the claim that fake news is a philosophical problem, and not a technical problem.



Optional theme 5: Philosophy of religion

11.   Evaluate the view that religious experience provides a motivation for belief.


12.   Evaluate the coherence of the characteristics and attributes of God(s).
                                                     –5–                                          2223 – 5604


Optional theme 6: Philosophy of science

13.   Evaluate the claim that experimentation is the central feature of science.


14.   Evaluate the view that scientific research should be guided by ethical and social responsibility.



Optional theme 7: Political philosophy

15.   Evaluate the claim that the state has authority over its citizens in a civil society.


16.   Evaluate the claim that promoting the rights of specific groups involves an unacceptable assault
      on fairness.




Disclaimer:
Content used in IB assessments is taken from authentic, third-party sources. The views expressed within them belong to their
individual authors and/or publishers and do not necessarily reflect the views of the IB.

References:
1.		 Powery, L. A., 2020. Just be. The Chronicle, [online] Available at: https://www.dukechronicle.com/article/2020/10/
     just-be-faith-luke-powery-duke-chapel [Accessed 20 May 2021]. Source adapted.
2.		          Cortes, F., n.d. Child robot. [image online] Available at: https://www.shutterstock.com [Accessed 30 October 2020].

All other texts, graphics and illustrations © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
