M23/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                               May 2023



                           Psychology



              Higher and Standard level



                               Paper 2




20 pages
                                            –2–      M23/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                     –3–   M23/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 2 assessment criteria

Criterion A — Focus on the question            [2]

To understand the requirements of the question students must identify the problem or issue being raised
by the question. Students may simply identify the problem by restating the question or breaking down the
question. Students who go beyond this by explaining the problem are showing that they understand the
issues or problems.

 Marks       Level descriptor

    0        Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.

    1        Identifies the problem/issue raised in the question.

    2        Explains the problem/issue raised in the question.


Criterion B — Knowledge and understanding                  [6]

This criterion rewards students for demonstrating their knowledge and understanding of specific areas of
psychology. It is important to credit relevant knowledge and understanding that is targeted at
addressing the question and explained in sufficient detail.

 Marks       Level descriptor

    0        Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.

             The response demonstrates limited relevant knowledge and understanding.
  1–2
             Psychological terminology is used but with errors that hamper understanding.

             The response demonstrates relevant knowledge and understanding but lacks detail.
  3–4
             Psychological terminology is used but with errors that do not hamper understanding.

             The response demonstrates relevant, detailed knowledge and understanding.
  5–6
             Psychological terminology is used appropriately.
                                                 –4–      M23/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion C — Use of research to support answer           [6]

Psychology is evidence based so it is expected that students will use their knowledge of research to
support their argument. There is no prescription as to which or how many pieces of research are
appropriate for their response. As such it becomes important that the research selected is relevant and
useful in supporting the response. One piece of research that makes the points relevant to the answer
is better than several pieces that repeat the same point over and over.

 Marks       Level descriptor

    0       Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.

            Limited relevant psychological research is used in the response.
  1–2
            Research selected serves to repeat points already made.

            Relevant psychological research is used in support of the response and is
  3–4       partly explained.
            Research selected partially develops the argument.

            Relevant psychological research is used in support of the response and is
  5–6       thoroughly explained.
            Research selected is effectively used to develop the argument.
                                                   –5–      M23/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion D — Critical thinking           [6]

This criterion credits students who demonstrate an inquiring and reflective attitude to their understanding
of psychology. There are a number of areas where students may demonstrate critical thinking about the
knowledge and understanding used in their responses and the research used to support that knowledge
and understanding. The areas of critical thinking are:

•   research design and methodologies
•   triangulation
•   assumptions and biases
•   contradictory evidence or alternative theories or explanations
•   areas of uncertainty.

These areas are not hierarchical and not all areas will be relevant in a response. In addition, students
could demonstrate a very limited critique of methodologies, for example, and a well-developed
evaluation of areas of uncertainty in the same response. As a result a holistic judgement of their
achievement in this criterion should be made when awarding marks.

    Marks     Level descriptor

      0      Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.

             There is limited critical thinking and the response is mainly descriptive.
    1–2
             Evaluation or discussion, if present, is superficial.

             The response contains critical thinking, but lacks development.
    3–4
             Evaluation or discussion of most relevant areas is attempted but is not developed.

             The response consistently demonstrates well-developed critical thinking.
    5–6
             Evaluation or discussion of relevant areas is consistently well developed.


Criterion E — Clarity and organization                [2]

This criterion credits students for presenting their response in a clear and organized manner. A good
response would require no re-reading to understand the points made or the train of thought underpinning
the argument.

    Marks     Level descriptor

      0       Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.

              The answer demonstrates some organization and clarity, but this is not sustained
      1
              throughout the response.

      2       The answer demonstrates organization and clarity throughout the response.
                                                  –6–      M23/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Abnormal psychology

1.   Contrast two or more classification systems for abnormal behaviour. [22]
     Refer to the paper 2 assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “contrast” requires candidates to give an account of the differences between
     two or more classifications for abnormal behaviour, referring to both (all) of them throughout.

     Classification systems for psychological disorders include, but are not limited to:
     ● DSM-5 (American Psychiatric Association, 2013)
     ● The International Classification of Diseases (ICD-11, World Health Organization, 2018)
     ● The Chinese Classification of Mental Disorders (CCMD-3, Chinese Society of
         Psychiatry, 2001)

     Responses contrasting two versions of one classificatory system (for example: DSM IV and V) may
     be awarded up to full marks.

     Contrasting points may include, but are not limited to:
     ● reliability of diagnosis
     ● cross-cultural validity in diagnostic conceptualization
     ● examining the underlying assumptions
     ● degree of supporting research
     ● language and multidiscipline covered
     ● symptomology versus causation or explanation versus description
     ● difference in cost
     ● approval and acceptance

     Relevant research may include, but is not limited to:
     ● Hafstad et al.’s (2017) comparison of ICD-11 and DSM-5 criteria for diagnosis of PTSD
     ● First et al.’s (2021) comparative study on category-level diagnostic requirements for
         mental disorders in ICD-11 and DSM-5.
     ● Evans et al.’s (2020) Global field study for the reliability of diagnostic classification for
         irritability under ICD 11 with ICD 10 and DSM 5
     ● Andrews et al.’s (1999) comparison of ICD-10 and DSM-IV diagnoses
     ● Haroz et al. (2017); Cheah & Roy’s (2001) studies for differentiation of symptoms of
         depression in a cultural context
     ● Nicholls et al.’s (2000) evaluation of diagnostic reliability for ICD and DSM
     ● Zheng et al.’s (1994) comparison of CCMD-2 and DSM-III-R systems.

     If the candidate provides only an implicit contrast, the response should be awarded up to a
     maximum of [2] for criterion D: critical thinking. All remaining criteria should be awarded marks
     according to the best fit approach.
                                                  –7–      M23/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   To what extent do cognitive factors explain the etiology of abnormal psychology?     [22]
     Refer to the paper 2 assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “to what extent” requires candidates to consider the contribution of
     cognitive factors to the etiology of abnormal psychology.

     Cognitive factors include, but are not limited to:
     ● cognitive schemas and maladaptive thoughts
     ● cognitive appraisal and irrational beliefs
     ● cognitive distortions
     ● intrusive memories: flashbacks.

     Candidates may address one cognitive factor to demonstrate the depth of knowledge or may
     address a larger number of cognitive factors to demonstrate the breadth of knowledge. Both
     approaches are equally acceptable.

     It is appropriate and useful for candidates to address biological and sociocultural factors to respond
     to the command term “to what extent”.

     The extent to which cognitive factors influence the etiology of the disorder may be addressed by
     referring to, but not limited to:
      ● Research findings tend to suggest that an analysis of cognitive factors helps clinicians
          understand the etiology, symptoms, and personality of individuals with a certain disorder.
      ● Claims that cognitive explanations fail to provide any explanation of why these distortions arise
          and why some people use them while others do not claim that it is difficult to establish cause
          and effect relationships.
      ● The onset and development of the disorder is a result of complex interactions between
          biological, cognitive and/or sociocultural factors. For example, responses may claim that
          females are more likely to suffer from some eating disorders than males, suggesting that
          hormonal fluctuations are related to women’s greater vulnerability. Further elaboration may
          argue that the reasons for the disorder are rooted more in social causes than in cognitive
          ones.
      ● Research findings on the effectiveness of CBT may be included but the information must be
          "shaped" and clearly linked to the etiology of abnormal behaviour.

     Relevant research may include, but is not limited to:
     ● El Leithy et al.’s (2006) study on the role of counterfactual thinking and posttraumatic
         stress reaction
     ● Cockram et al.’s (2010) study that suggests early maladaptive schema have an important
         role in the development and maintenance of PTSD
     ● Haeffel and Hames’s (2014) study investigating cognitive vulnerability to depression
     ● Tchanturia et al.’s (2011) study that explored the cognitive flexibility in a large dataset of
         people with eating disorders
     ● Myers and Wells’s (2003) study on the role of intrusive thoughts in PTSD.
                                                 –8–      M23/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   Discuss one or more research methods used in studies investigating the treatment
     of disorders. [22]
     Refer to the paper 2 assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered review of one or
     more research methods used in the study of the treatment of disorders.

     Research methods used in the study of the treatment of the disorders could include, but are not
     limited to:
     ● Experiment
     ● Case study
     ● Interview (focus group, semi-structured)
     ● Observation
     ● Correlational studies (surveys).

     Discussion points may include, but are not limited to:
     • Methodological issues and the use of alternative/additional methods (triangulation)
     • Applications of the empirical findings
     • Assumptions and biases within the findings of the research
     • Causation or exploration
     • Implications of the findings
     • Supporting and/or contradictory findings
     • Sample choice and size and the generalizability of findings
     • Short term vs. long term effects of treatments
     • Ethical considerations related to how/why research method has been chosen and applied to the
        treatment of disorders (confidentiality, deception, causing harm, right to withdraw, how
        effectiveness of treatment is decided, etc)

     Relevant research may include, but is not limited to:
     ● Experiment: Singh’s (2016) randomized placebo-controlled study to explore intravenous
       Ketamine doses frequency for the treatment of resistant depression; Davison et al.’s (2001)
       double-blind randomized controlled for treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder
     ● Interview: Ma et al.’s (2006) study on the effectiveness of family therapy for anorexia nervosa;
       Lock et al. (2006) compared the short-term and long-term courses of family-based therapy
       (FBT) for anorexia nervosa
     ● Quasi-experiment: Signal et al.’s (2013) study for the efficacy of equine facilitated therapy
       for the reduction of depressive symptoms.
     ● Case study: Rauthbaum’s (1999) virtual reality exposure therapy for post-traumatic stress
       disorder; Ma’s (2008) case study on parent-child conflict in family therapy for anorexia nervosa;
       Hatala and Waldram’s (2016) study on the role of sensorial processes in Q’eqchi’Maya healing
       in depression and bereavement
     ● Correlational study: Hoffman et al. (2011) examined the effectiveness of Zoloft use or
       an exercise programme for major depressive disorder.

     Candidates may discuss one research method to demonstrate the depth of knowledge or may
     discuss a larger number of research methods to demonstrate the breadth of knowledge. Both
     approaches are equally acceptable.

     The main focus of the response should be on the research methods used in the studies cited, not
     on the studies themselves.

     For questions asking for discussion or evaluation of research methods, marks awarded for criterion
     B should refer to definitions of terms and concepts relevant for research methodology. Overall, this
     includes some knowledge of the specific topic (treatment of disorders) and general knowledge and
                                           – 9 – M23/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


understanding related to research methods and ethics (for example definitions of relevant terms in
research methodology or ethics in research).

Marks for criterion B should be awarded as follows:
• 1–2 General knowledge of topic (treatment of disorders)
• 3–4 Knowledge of general research terms and concepts is provided but lacks detail. Some
  minor errors might be present
• 5–6 Relevant knowledge of specific research methods material is utilized and concepts are
  defined within the context of the specific study.

Marks awarded for criterion C assess the quality of the description of a study/studies and assess
how well the student linked aspects of the study to the question.
                                                 – 10 – M23/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Developmental psychology

4.   Discuss one or more theories/models of cognitive development.          [22]

     Refer to the paper 2 assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term "discuss" requires candidates to offer a considered review of one or
     more theories/models of cognitive development.

     Theories/models may include, but are not limited to:
     • Piaget's theory of cognitive development
     • Vygotsky's theory of sociocultural theory
     • Bruner's theory suggesting that thinking is the result of cognitive development
     • the information-processing approach to cognitive development
     • neurobiological explanations of cognitive development.

     Relevant studies may include, but are not limited to:
     • Piaget and Inhelder's (1956) three mountain study
     • Bower and Wishart's (1977) study on object permanence
     • Samuel and Bryant's (1984) study on conservation experiment
     • Chi's (1978) study on processing skills
     • Giedd's (2004) MRI studies on normal brain development
     • Saxe et al.'s (1987) study on the zone of proximal development
     • Wood et al.'s (1976) study on the role of tutoring in problem solving.

     Discussion may include, but is not limited to:
     • methodological and ethical considerations related to the research into cognitive development
     • stages versus continuous process
     • how the findings of research have been interpreted and applied
     • implications of the findings
     • assumptions and biases
     • areas of uncertainty
     • supporting and/or contradictory evidence
     • alternative theories/explanations
     • comparing and contrasting different theories
     • practical applications and real-world implications.

     Candidates may discuss one theory/model of cognitive development in order to demonstrate
     depth of knowledge, or may discuss a larger number of theories/models in order to demonstrate
     breadth of knowledge. Both approaches are equally acceptable.
                                                  – 11 – M23/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



5.   Discuss the development of empathy and/or theory of mind.                                        [22]

     Refer to the paper 2 assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered review of the development
     of empathy and/or theory of mind. Candidates may discuss only the development of a theory of
     mind or only the development of empathy or may discuss the development of both of them.
     These approaches are equally acceptable.

     The theory of mind is the ability to understand and attribute a particular mental state to a certain
     behaviour. Empathy is a similar concept but slightly different in that it refers to the ability to
     infer another's emotional state.

     Research relevant to the theory of mind may include, but is not limited to:
     • Wellman, Cross and Watson (2001) ‘Meta-analysis of theory-of-mind development: the truth
       about false belief’
     • Byom and Mutlu (2013) ‘Theory of mind: mechanisms, methods, and new directions’
     • Happé (1995) ‘The role of age and verbal ability in the theory of mind task performance
       of subjects with autism’
     • Wellman and Gelman (1992) ‘Cognitive development: Foundational theories of core domains’
     • Peterson et al. (2016) ‘Peer Social Skills and Theory of Mind in Children with Autism, Deafness,
       or Typical Development’
     • Buttelmann et al. (2007) ’Chimpanzees’ ability to understand intentions’
     • Krupenye et al (2016) ‘Understanding false beliefs in great apes’
     • Baron-Cohen, Leslie and Frith (1985) ‘Understanding false beliefs in human children’.

     Research relevant to the development of empathy may include, but is not limited to:
     • Bischof-Köhler (1991) ‘The Development of Empathy in Infants’
     • van der Mark et al. (2002) ‘Development of Empathy in Girls During the Second Year
       of Life: Associations with Parenting, Attachment, and Temperament’
     • Damon and Hart (1992) ‘Self-understanding and its role in social and moral development’
     • McDonald and Messinger (2011) ‘The Development of Empathy: How, when and why’
     • Moore (1990) ‘The origins and development of empathy’
     • Meltzoff (1995) ‘Representation of intentions in human children’.

     Relevant areas of discussion may include, but are not limited to:
     • the social and cultural influences (e.g. Astington and Gopnik, 1991; Dunn et al., 1991;
       Harris, 1989)
     • the biological influences (e.g. Saxe and Powell, 2006; Gallagher et al., 2003)
     • the deficits in social insight, for example in autism spectrum disorders (e.g. Baron-Cohen,
       2001; Frith, 1994; Leslie and Frith, 1988)
     • the presence or absence of empathy or theory of mind in non-human animals (e.g. Penn
       and Povinelli, 2007; Heyes, 1998; Premack and Woodruff, 1978)
     • practical applications/real world implications (e.g. child rearing strategies, education, treatment
       of autism etc)

     Responses referring to animal research are acceptable as long as they are linked to human
     behaviour.

     Responses referring to cognitive development are not acceptable and should not earn marks
     unless specifically tied to the development of theory of mind/empathy.
                                         – 12 – M23/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Candidates may discuss one aspect of development of empathy and/or theory of mind in order
to demonstrate depth of knowledge, or may discuss a larger number of aspects of development
of empathy and/or theory of mind in order to demonstrate breadth of knowledge. Both approaches
are equally acceptable.
                                              – 13 – M23/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


6. To what extent does childhood trauma affect development?                                      [22]

  Refer to the paper 2 assessment criteria when awarding marks.

  The command term “to what extent” requires candidates to consider the impact of
  childhood trauma on development.

  Relevant studies include, but are not limited to:
  •    the effects of deprivation in critical periods (the cases of Genie/Anna/Isabelle)
  •    PTSD as a consequence of trauma (Feldman and Vengrober, 2011; Luo et al., 2012)
  •    Rutter et al.’s (2001) and Rutter’s (1981) studies on the consequences of deprivation
  •    Cockett and Tripp’s (1994) study on long-term attachment deprivation effects
  •    Koluchova’s (1972; 1976) study showing the possibility of reversing the effects of deprivation
  •    Fieldman and Vengrober’s (2011) study on post-traumatic stress disorder in children
       living in the Gaza strip.

  When responding to the command term “to what extent”, considerations may include, but are
  not limited to:
  •      long-term / short-term effects
  •      methodological considerations related to the research into the effect(s) of childhood trauma
  •      how the findings of research have been interpreted and applied
  •      implications of the findings
  •      assumptions and biases
  •      areas of uncertainty
  •      supporting and/or contradictory evidence
  •      alternative explanations or factors
  •      resilience and protective factors.
                                                 – 14 – M23/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Health psychology

7. To what extent have one or more health promotion programmes been effective in promoting
   health?                                                                                            [22]

  Refer to the paper 2 assessment criteria when awarding marks.

  The command term “to what extent” requires candidates to consider the impact of one or more health
  promotion programmes in promoting health. Responses may address the influence of
  health promotion programmes on physiological, cognitive and/or social aspects of health.

  Examples of health promotion programmes may include, but are not limited to:
  • food labelling programmes
  • stress reduction programmes such as mindfulness-based stress reduction or yoga
  • health education campaigns such as the TRUTH anti-tobacco campaign (USA)
  • NHS’s ‘Healthy Child Programme’; keeping children healthy and safe (UK)
  • public health campaigns designed to change beliefs and attitudes
  • NHS’s Diabetes Prevention Programme (UK)
  • taxes and/or subsidies upon products such as sugar, tobacco, or alcohol
  • National Tobacco Campaign (Australia).

  Relevant research may include, but is not limited to:
  • Peckmann and Reibling’s (2006) study of the effectiveness of fear campaigns
  • Yee et al.’s (2006) study of effectiveness of strategies to change behaviours related
    to obesity
  • Sly et al.’s (2002) survey on community-based anti-smoking promotion among teens
  • Holm’s (2002) survey on the efficiency of health campaigns
  • Schum and Gould’s (2007) study of why health campaigns are effective
  • Morris and Wilson (2005) ‘Investigating smoking behaviours and attitudes of nurses and nursing
    assistants using the Health Belief Model’
  • Prochaska and Di Clemente’s (1983) ‘Longitudinal research on the effectiveness of the Integrative
    Model of change for smoking behaviour’
  • Marlatt and Gordon’s (1985) ‘Relapse prevention: maintenance strategies in the treatment
    of addictive behaviours’.

  When responding to the command term “to what extent”, considerations may include, but are
  not limited to:
  • a comparison of the effectiveness of two or more programmes
  • methodological considerations related to the research into health promotion
  • how the findings of research have been interpreted and applied
  • implications of the findings
  • the accuracy and clarity of the concepts
  • assumptions and biases
  • areas of uncertainty
  • supporting and/or contradictory evidence
  • alternative explanations or factors
  • non-effectiveness /harmfulness of programmes
  • Short-term vs. long-term effects.

  It is appropriate and useful for candidates to address other relevant factors (such as biological/genetic
  predisposition and socio-economic factors) in order to respond to the command term “to what extent”.

  Candidates may address one health promotion programme to demonstrate the depth of knowledge or
  may address a larger number of health promotion programmes to demonstrate the breadth of
  knowledge. Both approaches are equally acceptable.
                                                  – 15 – M23/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


8.   Evaluate one or more studies related to risk and/or protective factors in determining health.      [22]

     Refer to the paper 2 assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “evaluate” requires candidates to make an appraisal by weighing up the
     strengths and limitations of one or more studies related to risk and/or protective factors in
     determining health. Although a discussion of both strengths and limitations is required, it
     does not have to be evenly balanced to gain high marks.

     Risk and protective factors may include, but are not limited to:
     •     socioeconomic factors
     •     level of peer support
     •     social isolation
     •     family dysfunction
     •     health beliefs
     •     resiliency traits.

     Relevant studies may include, but are not limited to:
     •    Haines, Neumark-Sztainer, Wall, & Story’s (2012) study of risk and protective factors
          of adolescent weight gain
     •    Padez et al.’s (2005) study on risk and protective factors for overweight and obesity
          in children
     •    Haines et al.’s (2006) study on risk and protective factors for obesity in adolescents
     •    Jesse et al.’s (2005) study of risks and protective factors associated with symptoms of
          depression in low-income African-American and Caucasian women during pregnancy
     •    Tran’s (2014) study of risk and protective factors of Type 2 diabetes among six groups
          of foreign-born Asian-Americans
     •    Unger and Chen’s (1999) study of risk and protective factors related to adolescent
          smoking initiation
     •    Yi, Poudel, and Yasouka’s (2010) study of the role of risk and protective factors in risky
          sexual behaviors in Cambodian high school students.

     Evaluation of the selected studies may include but is not limited to:
     •     methodological and ethical considerations
     •     cultural and gender considerations
     •     contrary findings
     •     the applications of the empirical findings
     •     how the findings of research have been interpreted
     •     implications of the findings.

     If the candidate addresses only strengths or only limitations, the response should be
     awarded up to a maximum of [3] for criterion D: critical thinking. All remaining criteria should
     be awarded marks according to the best fit approach.

     In questions that ask for evaluation of studies, in criterion A we assess to what extent is the
     response focused on the question. Responses that are generic, lack a focus on the specific
     question and seem as pre-prepared essays of relevance to the general topic (but not to evaluation
     of one or more studies) should be awarded [0] for this criterion. If the response identifies which
     studies will be evaluated but there is also extra information that is not relevant or necessary for the
     specific question then [1] should be awarded. Responses that are clearly focused on evaluating
     one or more studies should be awarded [2].
                                            – 16 – M23/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Marks awarded for criterion B should refer to definitions of terms and concepts. Overall this could
include some knowledge of topic but more specifically knowledge and understanding related to
research methods and ethics of chosen studies.

Marks for criterion B should be awarded as follows:
• 1–2 General knowledge of topic (risk and/or protective factors in determining health)
• 3–4 Knowledge of general research terms and concepts is provided but lacks detail. Some
minor errors might be present
• 5–6 Relevant knowledge of specific research methods material is utilized and concepts are
defined within the context of the specific study.

Marks awarded for criterion C assess the quality of the description of as study/studies and assess
how well the student linked the findings of the study to the question - this doesn't have to be very
sophisticated or long for these questions but still the aim or the conclusion should be linked to the
topic of the specific question.

Criterion D assesses how well the student is explaining strengths and limitations of the
study/studies.
                                                 – 17 – M23/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


9.   Discuss prevalence rates of one or more health problems.                                         [22]

     Refer to the paper 2 assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” requires candidates to make a considered review of prevalence
     rates, using one or more health problems as examples.

     Prevalence rates refer to the proportion of a population who have a specific characteristic at
     any given time. Prevalence can be influenced by cultural, gender and lifestyle factors.

     Health problems discussed may include but not limited to stress, addiction, obesity, chronic pain
     and sexual health.

     Relevant research may include, but is not limited to:
     •    Kamen and Seligman’s (1987) longitudinal study of attributional style and health level
     •    Thoits’s (1995) review of studies of gender prevalence in giving and receiving
          social support for coping with stress
     •    Charlton’s (1984) survey of attitudes toward smoking and enjoyment based on cognitive
          and sociocultural factors
     •    Stunkard et al.’s (1990) correlational study comparing genetic and environmental factors
          in obesity
     •    Kolodny et al.’s (2015) review of the opioid and heroin crisis in the USA
     •    Jordan et al.’s (2017) review and meta-analysis of prevalence of prescription opioid misuse
          among under-30s in the USA.

     Critical discussion may include, but is not limited to:
     •      methodological and ethical considerations in relation to investigating prevalence rates
            in health problems
     •      how the findings of research have been interpreted and applied
     •      implications of the findings
     •      areas of uncertainty
     •      age and gender differences
     •      lifestyle (diet; exercise; sleep; relationships)
     •      social and cultural norms
     •      socioeconomic status
     •      mental health issues linked to one or more health problem.

     Responses solely focusing on prevalence rates of mental health issues with no explicit link to
     health problems should be awarded as follows:
     Criterion A: The question is not addressed – [0]
     Criterion B: Knowledge and understanding is not linked to the question – up to a maximum of [2]
     Criterion C: Studies are not used to address the question – up to a maximum of [2]
     Criterion D and E: The whole range of marks can be awarded.

     However, if mental health disorders (e.g. anxiety, depression) are discussed as a factor arising
     from or related to health problems (e.g. stress, obesity) a full range of marks can be awarded for all
     criteria.
                                                  – 18 – M23/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Psychology of human relationships

10.   Discuss one or more factors that may affect the formation of personal relationships.            [22]
      Refer to the paper 2 assessment criteria when awarding marks.
      The command term “discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered review of the formation of
      personal relationships. Candidates may address specific types of personal relationships (eg
      romantic, peer, family) or personal relationships in general. Both approaches are equally
      acceptable.

      Candidates may refer to factors including, but not limited to:
      ● socio-economic factors
      ● learning factors
      ● cognitive factors (fatal attraction theory, internal working model)
      ● evolutionary / biological factors
      ● cultural and gender roles
      ● online dating
      ● communication (social penetration theory).

      Relevant studies may include, but are not limited to:
      ● Flora and Segrin’s (2003) study on the perception of the relationship in married and
          dating couples
      ● Wedekind’s (1995) experiment on mate preference based on genetic makeup
      ● Fisher et al.’s (2005) fMRI investigation into neural mechanisms of mate choice
      ● Johnston et al.’s (2001) experiments investigating the importance of a woman’s hormonal
          state on the attractiveness of men’s faces
      ● Buss et al.’s (1989) cross-cultural study on factors in attraction
      ● Morry (2005); Markey and Markey’s (2007) investigation into the attraction-similarity
          hypothesis
      ● Taylor et al.’s (2011) study testing Matching Hypothesis in the real world
      ● Gupta and Singh’s (1982) study using interviews on arranged marriages in Indian couples.
      ● Hazan’s study (1987) correlational study between one’s attachment style and their satisfaction
          in romantic relationships

      Discussion may include, but is not limited to:
      ●     methodological and ethical considerations related to the research into the formation of
            personal relationships
      ●     cultural and gender considerations
      ●     how the findings of the research have been interpreted and applied
      ●     implications of the findings
      ●     assumptions and biases
      ●     areas of uncertainty
      ●     supporting and/or contradictory evidence
      ●     alternative explanations.
      Candidates may consider a small number of factors to demonstrate the depth of knowledge or may
      consider a larger number of factors to demonstrate the breadth of knowledge. Both approaches are
      equally acceptable

      Responses that focus specifically on maintenance and/or dissolution of relationships and make no
      reference to formation of relationships should not be awarded marks. However, it could be
      appropriate to discuss how factors that affect the formation of relationship may affect the
      maintenance and change of a relationship (e.g. according to fatal attraction theory the factors that
      bring us together are likely to cause the breakup of the relationship later on). For these responses
      a full range of marks can be awarded for all criteria.
                                                   – 19 – M23/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


11.    Discuss prosocial behaviour. [22]
       Refer to the paper 2 assessment criteria when awarding marks.
       The command term “discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered review of
       prosocial behaviour. Since the question is very open there are a number of pathways by which
       discussion could be achieved - marks awarded should reflect the degree to which material is
       used/shaped to the question.

       Responses may refer to factors and/or theories related to prosocial behaviour including, but
       not limited to:
       ●      Dawkins’ selfish gene theory
       ●      Kin selection theory
       ●      Trivers’ reciprocal altruism theory
       ●      Cialdini’s negative-state relief model
       ●      Batson’s empathy-altruism model.
       ●     Promotion of prosocial behaviour
       Relevant studies may include, but are not limited to:
       ●    Piliavin et al.’s (1969) field experiment on factors involved in helping behaviour
       ●    Whiting and Whiting’s (1979) comparison of prosocial behaviour in six cultures as
            a result of child-rearing practices
       ●    Batson et al.’s (1981) experiment on participants' motivation to help if they could escape
            based on the empathy-altruism theory
       ●    Oliner and Oliner’s (1998) study on dispositional factors and personal norms in prosocial
            behaviour in relation to rescuing Jews during the Second World War
       ●    Miller et al.’s (1990) study on the influence of cultural norms and moral values on
            perceptions of social responsibility
       ●    Levine et al.’s (2001) study investigating cross-cultural differences in helping behaviour
       ●    Aknin et al.’s (2013) cross-cultural study on prosocial behaviour spending and wellbeing.
       ●    Crockett et al.’s (2010) study on the effect of serotonin on prosocial behaviour.
       ●    Madsen et al.’s (2007) study on the role of biological kinship in altruistic behaviour.
       ●    Paluck, E.L. (2009) Reducing intergroup prejudice and conflict using the media: A field
            experiment in Rwanda

      Candidates may consider a small number of factors and/or theories to demonstrate the depth of
      knowledge or may consider a larger number of factors and/or theories to demonstrate the breadth
      of knowledge. Both approaches are equally acceptable.

      Responses solely focusing on bystanderism with no explicit link to prosocial behaviour should be
      awarded as follows:
      Criterion A: The question is not addressed – [0]
      Criterion B: Knowledge and understanding is not linked to the question – up to a maximum of [2]
      Criterion C: Studies are not used to address the question – up to a maximum of [2]
      Criterion D and E: The whole range of marks can be awarded.

      However, if bystanderism is discussed and linked to prosocial behavior potentially a full range of
      marks for all criteria can be awarded
                                                    – 20 – M23/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


12.   Discuss the origins of conflict and/or conflict resolution.                                    [22]

      Refer to the paper 2 assessment criteria when awarding marks.
      The command term “discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered review of the origin of
      conflict and/or conflict resolution.

      Origins of conflict may include, but are not limited to:
      ●     realistic conflict theory
      ●     competition
      ●     perceived injustice
      ●     misperception
      ●     minimal group paradigm
      ●     relative deprivation theory
      ●     polarization of views.

      Origins of conflict resolution may include, but are not limited to:
      ●     styles of conflict resolution
      ●     co-operation
      ●     negotiation
      ●     conflict management
      ●     reference made to social cognition theory and Sabido methodology.

      Relevant theories/studies could include, but are not limited to:
      ●    Sherif et al.’s (1961) field experiment on competition and conflict resolution
           between groups
      ●    Esses’s (2010) investigation on the role of perceived competition for resources
           in determining negative attitudes toward immigrants
      ●    Chambers and De Dreu’s (2014) study on conflict and negotiation
      ●    Sternberg and Dobson’s (1987) study on the resolution of interpersonal conflicts
      ●    Sternberg and Soriano’s (1984) study on styles of conflict resolution
      ●    Paluck’s (2009) field experiment in reducing intergroup prejudice and conflict with the
           mass media
      ●    Novotny and Polonsky’s (2011) survey that documented that personal contacts can
           lead to more positive attitudes towards Muslims
      ●    Savelkoul et al.’s (2011) study on more exposure to unavoidable intergroup contacts and
           the expression of lesser perceived threats.

      Discussion may include but is not limited to:
      •    the role of egocentrism
      •    the effectiveness of the conflict resolution style
      •    gender considerations
      •    cultural considerations

      Candidates may consider a small number of origins of conflict/conflict resolution to demonstrate
      depth of knowledge or may consider a larger number of origins of conflict/conflict resolution
      to demonstrate the breadth of knowledge. Both approaches are equally acceptable.
