© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Social and cultural anthropology
Standard level
Paper 2

5 May 2023

Zone A afternoon   Zone B morning   Zone C morning


1 hour 30 minutes

Instructions to candidates
y   Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y   Section A: answer the question.
y   Section B: answer one question.
y   The maximum mark for this examination paper is [30 marks].




                                                                                               2223 – 5804
      4 pages                                              © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
                                                   –2–                                            2223 – 5804


                                               Section A

Answer the question.

1.   With reference to ethnographic material from one area of inquiry you have studied, discuss
     how culture or power or social relations helps you to understand one of the following
     real-world issues that is grounded in a contemporary example:
     y globalization
     y inequality
     y technology
     y sustainability
     y violence.[15]

                                               Section B

Answer one question from the two remaining areas of inquiry you have studied. You must use specific
and clearly identified ethnographic illustrations. Each question is worth [15 marks].

Belonging

2.   Compare and contrast change in relation to either identity or family with reference to two
     societies that you have studied.

3.   Discuss either social relations or culture in relation to one of the following:
     y kinship
     y ethnicity/race
     y “imagined community”
     y the study of emotions.


Classifying the world

4.   Evaluate whether symbolism may affect either boundaries or morality.

5.   Examine either social relations or belief and knowledge in relation to one of the following:
     y sacred/profane
     y socialization/enculturation/acculturation
     y liminality
     y marginality.


Communication, expression and technology

6.   Discuss change in relation to either commodification or hybridity.

7.   Examine the role of either power or globalization in relation to one of the following:
     y technology
     y transnationalism
     y political discourse
     y communication in global times.
                                                    –3–                                          2223 – 5804


Conflict

8.    Compare and contrast power in relation to either hegemony or resistance in two societies
      that you have studied.

9.    To what extent is society affected by one of the following?
      y conflict
      y consensus
      y the state
      y systems of inequality


Development

10.   Examine the role of either materiality or change in relation to development.

11.   Discuss belief and knowledge in relation to one of the following:
      y modernization
      y sustainability
      y poverty and wealth
      y development and health.


Health, illness and healing

12.   To what extent is symbolism involved in either healing practice or biomedicine?

13.   Evaluate the role of either power or belief and knowledge in relation to one of the following:
      y illness
      y suffering
      y biomedicine, medicalization and social control
      y plural medical systems.


Movement, time and space

14.   Examine the role of either culture or social relations in relation to exclusion.

15.   Discuss symbolism in relation to one of the following:
      y globalization
      y inclusion
      y social construction of space and boundaries
      y the future.




                                                                                                Turn over
                                                    –4–                                        2223 – 5804


Production, exchange and consumption

16.   Discuss identity in relation to either consumption or production.

17.   To what extent is culture affected by one of the following?
      y capitalism
      y colonialism
      y work and labour
      y systems of exchange


The body

18.   Compare and contrast the role of either social relations or materiality in relation to
      personhood in two societies that you have studied.

19.   Evaluate the role of either change or identity in relation to one of the following:
      y habitus
      y the Other
      y the ritualized body
      y the lived body.




