© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
World religions
Standard level
Paper 2

16 May 2023

Zone A afternoon   Zone B morning   Zone C afternoon


1 hour 30 minutes

Instructions to candidates
y   Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y   Section A: a
                nswer one question.
y   Section B: a
                nswer one question.
y   The maximum mark for this examination paper is [30 marks].




                                                                                               2223 – 5908
      3 pages                                              © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
                                                 –2–                                          2223 – 5908


                                             Section A

Answer one question from this section. Each question is worth [15 marks].

Hinduism

1.   Examine the importance of undertaking yatra (pilgrimage) to sacred rivers, shrines and
     kumbha-melas (special bathing fairs) in Hinduism.


2.   “No two Hindu philosophical systems interpret sacred texts in the same way.” To what extent
     do you agree with this statement?



Buddhism

3.   Discuss the nature and role of sacred texts in Buddhism.


4.   Examine Buddhist belief in the Three Marks of Existence: anicca/anitya, dukkha/duhkha and
     anatta/anatman.



Sikhism

5.   Discuss the importance of the Guru Granth Sahib for the ethics and moral conduct of Sikhs.


6.   Examine the links between Sikh rituals in the gurdwara (any place where the Guru Granth
     Sahib is installed) and Sikh doctrine.



Open-ended question

7.   With reference to one religion—Hinduism or Buddhism or Sikhism—discuss the importance
     of meditation and worship.
                                                      –3–                                           2223 – 5908


                                                 Section B

Answer one question from this section. Each question is worth [15 marks].

Judaism

8.      Discuss Jewish practices regarding divorce.


9.      “It is always wrong to interpret the Torah.” Discuss.



Christianity

10.     Discuss diverse Christian understandings of baptism and its relationship to becoming a Christian.


11.     “The incarnation is the most important doctrine in Christianity.” Discuss.



Islam

12.     Examine the relevance of shari’ah (divine law) and qanun (secular law) for the ethics and
        moral conduct of Muslims.


13.     Examine Sufi religious experiences in Islam.



Open-ended question

14.     With reference to one religion—Judaism or Christianity or Islam—discuss the importance of
        rituals associated with the dying and the dead.




