M11/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX




     22110092

ENGLISH A1 – STANDARD LEVEL – PAPER 2
ANGLAIS A1 – NIVEAU MOYEN – ÉPREUVE 2
INGLÉS A1 – NIVEL MEDIO – PRUEBA 2

Tuesday 10 May 2011 (afternoon)
Mardi 10 mai 2011 (après-midi)
Martes 10 de mayo de 2011 (tarde)

1 hour 30 minutes / 1 heure 30 minutes / 1 hora 30 minutos


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

 Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on at least two of the Part 3 works
  you have studied. You may include in your answer a discussion of a Part 2 work of the same
  genre if relevant. Answers which are not based on a discussion of at least two Part 3 works will
  not score high marks.
 You are not permitted to bring copies of the works you have studied into the examination room.

INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS

 N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
 Traitez un seul sujet de composition. Vous devez baser votre réponse sur au moins deux des
  œuvres de la 3e partie que vous avez étudiées. Le cas échéant, vous pouvez inclure dans votre
  réponse une discussion sur une œuvre du même genre littéraire étudiée dans la 2e partie
  du programme. Les réponses qui ne sont pas basées sur au moins deux des œuvres de
  la 3e partie n’obtiendront pas une note élevée.
 Vous n’êtes pas autorisé(e) à amener des exemplaires des œuvres que vous avez étudiées dans
  la salle d’examen.

INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS

 No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
 Elija un tema de redacción. Su respuesta deberá basarse en al menos dos de las obras
  estudiadas en la Parte 3. Se podrán hacer comentarios sobre una obra de la Parte 2 del
  mismo género, si fuera necesario. Las respuestas que no incluyan una discusión sobre al
  menos dos obras de la Parte 3 no recibirán notas altas.
 No se permite traer a la sala de examen copias de las obras estudiadas.




2211-0092                                                                                   3 pages/páginas
                                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2011
                                                  –2–                 M11/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX

Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on at least two of the Part 3 works you
have studied. You may include in your answer a discussion of a Part 2 work of the same genre if relevant.
Answers which are not based on a discussion of at least two Part 3 works will not score high marks.

Drama

1.    One can read a play or watch it. Which experience is best, and why? Or are both rewarding in
      different ways? Discuss with reference to at least two plays you have studied.


2.    Family relationships are commonly featured in drama. To what extent, and in what ways, have
      these relationships been presented in at least two plays you have studied?



Poetry

3.    Choose at least two poems in your study that have captured your imagination and explain why.
      You should justify your choice by commenting on the poetic skills shown in these poems.


4.    In what ways do at least two poets you have studied present either the urban or the natural
      environment?



Prose: The Novel and Short Story

5.    “A parent can support or damage a child.” How, and to what extent, have at least two works you
      have studied illustrated this statement?


6.    “A novel or short story has to have a good story and that is all.” Do you agree or are other factors
      of equal – or more – importance? Give reasons for your answer, referring to at least two works you
      have studied.



Prose: Other than the Novel and Short Story

7.    “At the end of each day you are a different person.” How far, and in what ways, do at least two
      writers you have studied present their experiences as changing their outlook upon life?


8.    In what ways have authors used incidents and/or anecdotes to illustrate their ideas? To what degree,
      and to what effect, have at least two writers in your study used this technique?




2211-0092
                                                  –3–                 M11/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX

General Questions on Literature

9.    When confronted with aggression one can fight or retreat. In what ways are reactions to aggression
      presented in at least two works you have studied?


10.   At the heart of many literary works is the idea that things may not be as they appear. In what ways,
      and to what extent, is this true of at least two works you have studied?


11.    In what ways is the clash between good and evil presented in at least two works you have studied?


12.   The best writing makes you think. In what ways do writers in at least two works you have studied
      provoke thoughtful responses?




2211-0092
