M11/1/A1ENG/HP2/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


                    May / mai / mayo 2011

        ENGLISH / ANGLAIS / INGLÉS A1

                        Higher Level
                      Niveau Supérieur
                       Nivel Superior

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2




7 pages/páginas
                              –2–         M11/1/A1ENG/HP2/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                                –3–           M11/1/A1ENG/HP2/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Provisional marking

During the early period of your marking your team leader (or principal examiner in the case of
team leaders) will contact you to discuss the standard of marking and the interpretation of the
marking notes. Before this discussion, it is necessary to have provisionally marked (in pencil) about
ten scripts.

If your team leader has failed to make contact with you, please try to make contact with her or him
yourself, by phone or e-mail.

                                   ASSESSMENT CRITERIA

Criteria A and B

The danger of rewarding or penalizing the use of illustration/references/quotations twice in both
these categories should be avoided.

Criterion B

“Personal response” and “independence of thought” appear as the levels of the descriptors increase.
What is sought is an engaged and individual treatment of the chosen topic. Engaged and individual
essays will usually make themselves clear by insight into the implications of the question and the
quality and interest of the details cited in support.

The first person singular does not automatically constitute a personal response and conversely an
impersonal academic style does not necessarily indicate a lack of personal response.

Criterion C

It is expected that every question set will provide candidates with ample opportunities to
demonstrate their awareness of the demands of this criterion. However, where a question does not
explicitly offer such opportunities, examiners should interpret criterion C broadly in order to ensure
that candidates are not unfairly disadvantaged. In such cases it would be sufficient for candidates
to show, as appropriate to the question, an awareness of how elements such as plot, character,
setting, structure, voice, etc., are used by writers to meet their purposes. No matter how the
question is phrased, candidates must also address related matters of style and technique.

“Awareness” and “appreciation” of literary features are the key elements under this criterion.
The mere labelling, without appreciation, of literary features will not score the highest marks.
On the other hand, the candidate who is attentive to literary features and deals with them in a
meaningful way, but who does not consistently use the vocabulary of literary criticism, can still be
awarded the higher achievement levels.

Reminder: the term “literary features” is broad and includes elements as basic as plot, character,
etc., attention to which is valid and must be rewarded as appropriate.
                                                 –4–            M11/1/A1ENG/HP2/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Criterion D

Any form of structuring to the essay will be rewarded if it is effective and appropriate. Different
conventions are in operation and therefore all approaches are acceptable and will be judged on the
basis of their effectiveness. Examiners should remember that structure does not exist by itself,
but any structure must be measured by appropriate reference to the terms of the question and by its
capacity to integrate these towards the development of an organized and coherent essay.

Reminder: In this criterion, supporting examples must be evaluated in terms of how fluently they
are incorporated/integrated to shape/advance the argument, not in terms of their appropriateness
or accuracy.

Criterion E

If you have reservations about awarding a four, you should ensure that these are well-founded
before awarding a three. The broadness of achievement in level three sometimes makes examiners
reluctant to award four.

Judgment needs to be used when dealing with lapses in grammar, spelling and punctuation;
therefore do not unduly penalize.

Mechanical accuracy is only part of this criterion. Ensure that all the other elements are considered.

Examiners should be careful to avoid being prejudiced in their application of this criterion by
achievement levels in other criteria. It is possible to score highly on this criterion even if candidates
have scored in the lower levels on other criteria, and vice versa.

These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking and as a
supplement to the published external assessment criteria for written paper 2. They are not
offered as an exhaustive and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must
rigidly adhere. Good ideas or angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded
as appropriate. Similarly, answers which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested
here should not be so heavily penalized as to distort appreciation of individuality.

With reference to criterion C, the better answers will contain examples that show an adequate
sense of stylistic features with some awareness of their effects, using critical analysis and
pertinent detail.

The best answers will show a strong sense of the stylistic and comparable features of the
works, as well as the effects of these features.

Of course, some of the points listed below will appear in weaker papers, but are unlikely to be
developed.

These apply to all answers below.
                                               –5–           M11/1/A1ENG/HP2/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




All adequate to good answers must include some pertinent detail (described, paraphrased or
directly quoted) to support assertions and reveal knowledge of the texts studied.
Relevant discussion of literary features must appear in every response. Answers should
evince some discernible form of organization and demonstrate standard written English.

Good to excellent answers must be grounded in the features demanded for “adequate”
answers, and may go beyond that basis in the ways described below as well as in other,
somewhat unpredictable features which show individual thinking and an engaged,
well-supported address of the texts.

Drama

1.   An adequate to good answer will offer a definition of the term masks. It will give specific
     examples and discuss how and why the masks are used.

     A good to excellent answer may show a more subtle understanding of different kinds of mask
     and the dramatic purposes for which they are used. Answers will be illustrated in greater
     detail.


2.   An adequate to good answer will explain what is meant by jealousy and/or envy, give
     examples and discuss how and why jealousy and/or envy are presented.

     A good to excellent answer may show a more detailed and sophisticated understanding of the
     ways in which different kinds of jealousy and/or envy are presented, and possibly an ability to
     distinguish between the two. The answer should take account of how jealousy and/or envy
     may contribute to the drama.
                                               –6–           M11/1/A1ENG/HP2/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Poetry

Poems should be taken from the works of at least two poets.

If a candidate fails to use at least two poets, mark down two levels in both criterion A,
Knowledge and Understanding of Works and criterion B, Response to the Question.

Contrary to previous instructions, answers must not be penalized for using two poems only,
providing each poem is by a different poet.

3.   An adequate to good answer will provide a definition of what the candidate understands
     by being transported beyond the material world. It will identify at least two poems which
     have generated this effect and explain the means by which they have achieved it.

     A good to excellent answer may give a more sophisticated explanation of how one can be
     transported by poetry and analyse in detail the various techniques used in the poems which
     generate this effect.


4.   An adequate to good answer will identify and discuss two or more poems containing
     expressions of love, and give some consideration to how they are presented.

     A good to excellent answer may choose more apt examples and analyse them in greater depth,
     showing a more nuanced understanding of the poems’ depictions of various expressions
     of love.



Prose: The Novel and Short Story

5.   An adequate to good answer will identify the protagonists and explain the nature of their
     progress or lack of it. It will consider the reasons for such progress (or lack of it) and the
     way it is conveyed.

     A good to excellent answer may show a more detailed understanding of the nature of the
     protagonists’ progress or lack of it and how that is presented, and convey a more subtle grasp
     of the possible implications of the statement.


6.   An adequate to good answer will show some awareness of the relation between conventional
     behaviour and morality (or their opposites). It will identify the characters/situations involved
     and explain why their behaviour is moral or not. It will consider the means by which the
     writers have conveyed this idea.

     A good to excellent answer may analyse in more detail the characters/situations involved and
     show a more subtle appreciation of the implications of the statement as revealed in the texts.
                                               –7–           M11/1/A1ENG/HP2/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Prose: Other than the Novel and Short Story

7.    An adequate to good answer will identify examples of environmental issues and discuss their
      importance in the works as a whole.

      A good to excellent answer may focus in more precise detail on the ways in which
      environmental issues are presented and why.


8.    An adequate to good answer will identify contrasts or similarities in the views of the writers
      and their subjects, and offer some consideration of the ways in which these are conveyed.

      A good to excellent answer may explore in more detail these contrasts or similarities
      and analyse more precisely the means by which they are conveyed (really good answers
      will give a more nuanced understanding of the writers’ views).



General Questions on Literature

9.    An adequate to good answer will identify the ways in which war is presented in the
      works studied.

      A good to excellent answer may comment in greater detail on the ways in which war
      is presented, and show some sophisticated grasp of the ways writers have conveyed war
      and the effects thereof.


10.   An adequate to good answer will identify elements of historical background relevant to
      their chosen texts and show how readers’ reactions may be affected by knowledge of them.

      A good to excellent answer may comment in greater detail on the importance of readers’
      knowledge of historical context, and on how it affects their understanding of the works.


11.   An adequate to good answer will identify language which has in itself an impact on the
      reader, and offer some comment as to why this is so.

      A good to excellent answer may analyse with detail and precision the qualities of such
      language, and show insights into the relationship between style and content.


12.   An adequate to good answer will define what is meant by “forbidden fruit”, and comment
      upon ways in which its attractiveness (or otherwise) is illustrated in works by two or
      more writers.

      A good to excellent answer may provide a shrewder notion of “forbidden fruit” and
      illustrate in more detail how its attractiveness or the possible repercussions of it are
      presented in writers’ works.
