M11/1/A1NOR/HP1/NOR/TZ0/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


                    May / mai / mayo 2011

 NORWEGIAN / NORVÉGIEN / NORUEGO
               A1


                        Higher Level
                      Niveau Supérieur
                       Nivel Superior

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1



5 pages/páginas
                          –2–         M11/1/A1NOR/HP1/NOR/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive
use of examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate
and must not be reproduced or distributed to any other
person without the authorisation of IB Cardiff.
                                                 –3–           M11/1/A1NOR/HP1/NOR/TZ0/XX/M



Provisional marking

During the early period of your marking your team leader (or principal examiner in the case
of team leaders) will contact you to discuss the standard of marking and the interpretation of
the marking notes. Before this discussion, it is necessary to have marked provisionally
(in pencil) about ten scripts.

If your team leader has failed to make contact with you, please try to make contact with him
or her yourself, by phone or e-mail. Owing to work commitments and differences between
time zones it is often difficult for team leaders to make contact with all examiners in
their teams.


                                  ASSESSMENT CRITERIA
Criteria A and B

The danger of rewarding or penalizing the use of illustrations/references/quotations twice in both
these categories should be avoided.

Criterion B

The passages offer candidates a variety of possibilities for analysis and interpretation. The test of
any interpretation is that it has to be tied carefully to the words, images and relevant details of
the text. “Personal response”, in the same way, must be tied to the passage.

Criterion C

“Awareness” and “appreciation” of literary features are the key elements under this criterion.
The mere labelling, without appreciation, of literary features will not score the highest marks.
On the other hand, the candidate who is attentive to literary features and deals with them in a
meaningful way, but who does not consistently use the vocabulary of literary criticism, can still be
awarded the higher achievement levels.

Reminder: The term “literary features” is broad and includes elements as basic as plot, character, etc.,
attention to which is valid and must be rewarded as appropriate.

Criterion D

Any form of structuring to the commentary will be rewarded if it is effective and appropriate.
Different conventions are in operation and therefore all approaches (including the line by line
analysis) are acceptable and will be judged on the basis of their effectiveness. Examiners should
remember that structure does not exist by itself, but any structure must be measured by appropriate
references to the passage or poem and by its capacity to integrate these towards the development of
an organized and coherent commentary.

Reminder: In this criterion, supporting examples must be evaluated in terms of how fluently they
are incorporated/integrated to shape/advance the argument, not in terms of their appropriateness
or accuracy.
                                                 –4–            M11/1/A1NOR/HP1/NOR/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion E
If you have reservations about awarding a four, you should ensure that these are well founded
before awarding a three. The breadth of achievement in level three sometimes makes examiners
reluctant to award four.
Use judgment when dealing with lapses in grammar, spelling and punctuation; therefore do not
unduly penalize.
Mechanical accuracy is only a part of this criterion.         Ensure that all the other elements are
considered.
Examiners should be careful to avoid being prejudiced in their application of this criterion by
achievement levels in other criteria. It is possible to score highly on this criterion even if candidates
have scored in the lower levels on the other criteria, and vice versa.


These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking and as a supplement to
the published external assessment criteria for written paper 1. They are not offered as an exhaustive
and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must rigidly adhere. Good ideas or
angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate. Similarly, answers
which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here may still be very good responses.

Of course, some of the points listed below will appear in weaker papers, but are unlikely to
be developed.
The following elements are particularly relevant to criteria A, B and C.

Question 1. Prose

A barely satisfactory answer will describe the incident in the text (that the main character is not
able to tune his guitar) and barely mention how this short story is told. The answer will only touch
upon the tone presented in the text, and will only mention the repetitions (without interpreting what
the repetitions mean).

A better answer will identify some of the devices (e.g. the repetitions) in a more precise manner
and interpret the main character of the text. The answer will touch upon the tone in the text, with a
more independent interpretation of what is going on between the people on stage. The candidate
will not necessarily use correct vocabulary for literary analysis, but will demonstrate sufficient
understanding of the literary devices used in the text.

The best answers will independently identify many of the literary devices in the text and use well
chosen examples. Furthermore the candidate will reflect upon the effect these have on the reader.
The candidate should, more or less, use correct concepts for literary analysis in a way that shows
their understanding of these devices. The best answers will also provide precise observations on the
main features of the text based on a close reading of the text.
                                                –5–           M11/1/A1NOR/HP1/NOR/TZ0/XX/M


Question 2. Poem

A barely satisfactory answer will identify the most striking metaphors in the poem and describe
the main theme of the poem – the feelings of the lyrical “I”, and the comparison with the horses.
The candidate must, in one way or another, comment on the relief in the last stanza, but will not
necessarily use the correct vocabulary for literary analysis.

A better answer will include the features above, in addition to reflecting more independently and
precisely on the literary tropes in the poem. The candidate will also say something about the
repetitions and the rhythm in the poem and reflect over what this has to say for the meaning of the
text as a whole. The candidate gives an adequate interpretation of the relationship between the
lyrical “I” and the horses, and discusses the relief in the last stanza. The candidate will demonstrate
an adequate understanding of the author’s use of literary devices.

The best answers include the features mentioned above. Furthermore, the candidate presents a
convincing interpretation of the poem, and presents an independent and plausible interpretation of
the relief in the last stanza. The best answers will also provide precise observations on the main
features of the text based on a close reading of the text.
