M&N15/3/BUSMT/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS




Business and management
Case study: LadyA


For use in May and November 2015




Instructions to candidates
Case study booklet required for higher level paper 1 and standard level paper 1 business and
  management examinations.




                                                                                2215 – 5001 ; 8815 – 5001
     5 pages                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2015
                                                   –2–            M&N15/3/BUSMT/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

                                                      LadyA

        Her real name is María Immaculada Alejandra González Carroccio, but everyone knows her as
        LadyA.

        In 1973 her parents fled Cuba and moved to Florida, United States (US), where they were
        granted political asylum. The Carroccios had limited savings but were determined to succeed.
    5   Mr Carroccio thought that working independently and operating as a sole trader would be the
        best way to achieve financial security. He wanted to set up his own business, a small
        shoe repair shop in their Spanish-speaking neighbourhood in Miami. As his cash-flow forecasts
        were weak, he got turned down several times for bank loans; however, he managed to obtain
        a small grant from a government agency that helped entrepreneurs. Mrs Carroccio also had
   10   difficulties at first, because she did not speak much English. She attended classes organized
        by a local charity, a non-profit organization whose mission statement was “to help all adult
        immigrants learn English”. She eventually found a job in the cafeteria of a local school.
        Although the wage was low, she received training and some fringe payments such as health
        insurance. With the profits from Mr Carroccio’s shoe repair shop and Mrs Carroccio’s wage, the
   15   family eventually maintained an economically stable household.

        In 1978 Alejandra, their first child, was born. Mr and Mrs Carroccio wanted her to have a normal
        American life. Although at home they mainly spoke Spanish with each other, they wanted
        Alejandra to speak English with them. They encouraged her to sing in choral groups, at school
        and at church, and they paid for her after-school dance lessons. Alejandra was a beautiful girl.
   20   At the age of 12, she started getting occasional jobs as a model for local fashion catalogues and
        magazines. Her parents put her earnings into a college fund, a special savings account that
        would pay for her to attend university later. The modelling eventually led to small acting roles in
        films when production companies recruited in Miami. Then, in 1994, a casting director needed
        a young Hispanic American woman who could sing and dance in one scene in the film La Bella
   25   Rosa. The film proved very successful. Although her part in the film was small, it led to many
        new opportunities for Alejandra.

        Soon afterwards, a music label offered Alejandra a contract to produce a CD album. Unfamiliar
        with negotiation, Alejandra needed an agent. She found Gloria Woolrich, a local Hispanic
        woman who worked with Spanish-speaking performers. Because Alejandra was not 18 years
   30   old yet, her parents had to sign the contract on her behalf. Gloria thought that Alejandra
        should target the Spanish-speaking market in the US; she promoted her as “Lady Alejandra”,
        a name that emphasized her Hispanic origins with a touch of elegance. Her first CD album,
        Presentación Lady Alejandra, included one song that reached number one in the music charts
        in Florida. Even with only one top hit, she earned much income from the copyrights and
   35   royalties* from the CD album. For the first time, Alejandra needed an accountant to help her
        prepare her final accounts, manage the money, and pay the appropriate taxes.

        Like most immigrant parents, Mr and Mrs Carroccio strongly emphasized education. When they
        first arrived in the US, they struggled to satisfy even basic needs such as food and shelter; only
        by working long hours did they achieve economic security. They believed that if Alejandra went
   40   to university, she would have a better life. Although they celebrated her success with the CD
        album, they did not want music to distract her from her studies. Only with reluctance did her
        parents agree to a second CD album, Viva Lady Alejandra, which proved even more successful
        than the first one.

* royalties: payments made to the performer of the music and the songwriter by a third party,
             such as a radio or television station, each time the performer’s music is played in
             the public domain
                                              –3–           M&N15/3/BUSMT/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

     In April of her final year at high school, Alejandra told her parents that she did not want to
45   go to university: she wanted instead to move to Los Angeles in order to build a career as a
     musician. She wanted to be a star. Her parents were very disappointed. However, because
     she was now 18 they could not stop her. Alejandra left her previous agent, Gloria Woolrich, for
     a new one in Los Angeles: Ruth Liebermann. Ruth had successfully turned young stars into
     media sensations. She would help Alejandra with everything: buying an apartment in the most
50   fashionable neighbourhood, recruiting household employees, getting agencies to establish
     concert tours, producing more CD albums, and, more importantly, promoting her.

     Ruth explained to Alejandra that unless the product life cycle of music stars is carefully
     managed, it is often short. Alejandra needed a brand identity. Her revenue streams would be
     based on that brand. She would also develop strategies to extend the life of the product, which
55   was Alejandra herself. Alejandra had an identity partly based upon her youthful and innocent
     look, her powerful voice and her Hispanic heritage. Ruth said that now that Alejandra was an
     adult, she needed to dress more like a young woman and less like a child. Nervous about
     this transition, Alejandra agreed to a more glamorous image. She began going to a famous
     hairdresser and style expert, Gavin Pratt. Soon, she had another revenue stream: appearing on
60   the cover of high-profile fashion magazines.

     Ruth also argued that Alejandra needed to be “less ethnic”. The US was rapidly changing
     demographically. The percentage of the American population that was Hispanic was small, but
     it was rapidly growing, thus expanding the Spanish-speaking American market. However, this
     demographic shift was creating a negative political reaction in the US. Focus groups showed
65   that some English-speakers did not like the name “Lady Alejandra”. Ruth recommended a new
     name: just “LadyA” as one word, pronounced “lay-dee-ay”, with equally strong emphasis on
     the first and last syllables. It worked. By the year 2000, LadyA was one of the most successful
     musicians in the US. Popular with English-speakers, especially teenage girls and young
     women, she also appealed to many Hispanics. Even though all her songs were now in English
70   and were popular in the mainstream music charts, Spanish-speaking Americans were still fans.
     They saw LadyA as a shining success story of a Hispanic American.

     As LadyA grew more popular, both her revenue and expenses increased. By 2001, she
     was earning millions of dollars a year from CD album sales, concerts, magazine covers, and
     music videos. She employed a full-time accountant to help manage her revenue and all the
75   many expenses of her new life. For her work, she employed a band, a group of dancers, and
     a variety of musical and video technicians. She asked Gavin to join her full time in order to
     plan all aspects of her clothing, make-up, and hairstyle. For her concerts she also had an
     events manager who arranged bookings of venues and hotels, and who hired a company
     specializing in logistics, who transported equipment and set up the stage at each concert
80   location. These were her core employees. Temporary employees were needed at each venue
     to help set up the venue and stage. She had many peripheral employees for her increasingly
     extravagant personal life: two personal assistants, two housekeepers, one chef, one personal
     trainer, one driver, and one chief bodyguard, who supervised six bodyguards. She was very
     inconsistent in her style of leadership with her employees. Sometimes she was very direct,
85   giving detailed instructions and getting angry if they were not followed exactly. At other
     times, she adopted a more laissez-faire leadership style. The employees never knew what to
     expect. Communication was poor. Although working for a superstar had exciting moments, the
     employees frequently complained behind her back, mockingly calling her “la princesa”.




                                                                                           Turn over
                                                –4–            M&N15/3/BUSMT/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

      Alejandra originally operated as a sole trader. However, as the business grew it became clear
 90   that she needed the protection of limited liability and so she changed the business to a private
      limited company, LadyA Management Limited (LAM). Alejandra herself owned 98% of the
      shares in LAM. Her parents and Ruth Liebermann owned the remaining 2%.

      Technology was changing the music industry. In 2000, online file sharing software became
      widely available. Though the file sharing of copyrighted material was usually illegal, many
 95   people did it anyway, especially young people. The sales of CD albums began to fall. This
      trend continued with the emergence of other new technologies such as MP3 players and
      smartphones. Another important technological change was video hosting websites, which
      effectively ended the direct profitability of music videos. Before video hosting websites,
      musicians received royalties for videos that appeared on television. Now, artists such as LadyA
100   had to produce their own videos and upload them to video hosting websites. These productions
      were expensive, but did not generate any direct revenue.

      The definition of a successful musician was also changing. With falling sales revenue from
      music (a problem made worse by the economic downturn that began in 2008), artists had to
      transform themselves into “media personalities” and find ways to generate revenue from these
105   branded identities, just as Ruth had predicted. In 2009, LadyA started appearing in many
      above the line and below the line promotions of various types of products. LadyA was always
      very careful about which products she endorsed. Each one had to strengthen her brand identity
      as a beautiful, mainstream American, yet one with Hispanic passion and intensity. She also
      began communicating with her fans through various social networking websites.

110   In 2010, LadyA started offering her own product line of perfume and cosmetics, promoted
      under the name LadyA. Primary and secondary market research had showed that perfume
      and cosmetics would best connect with LadyA’s established brand and help her reach her
      main target market: teenage girls and young women. The production of LadyA perfume and
      cosmetics was outsourced, to an established manufacturer in Malaysia, where costs were
115   much lower. Quality control could, however, be a problem. The Malaysian manufacturer would
      produce LadyA perfume and cosmetics using batch production which would enable a variety of
      products to be made; LadyA would have to pay 60% of the costs in advance. The wholesaling
      and distribution was also outsourced, to a company in Minnesota. By 2011, LadyA perfume and
      cosmetics were sold in a nation-wide chain of department stores in the US.

120   At the same time, Alejandra decided to reorganize the business. She continued to manage all
      of her household employees personally. She appointed a Managing Director, and a Human
      Resources Manager to assist in workforce planning and manage the rest of the business. She
      delegated some business functions, but kept a very close interest in all decisions through her
      meetings with the Managing Director. One benefit of this reorganization was that, with clear
125   roles, systems and procedures in place, Alejandra’s employees complained less.

      On a personal level, 2012 was a big year for Alejandra. She married Rafaele Eco, an Italian
      investment banker, and they purchased a large mansion in Hollywood, requiring an even greater
      number of peripheral employees. Over the next few years, LadyA was at the peak of her media
      power, wealth, and fame. She was more mature and business-oriented than when she was
130   in her twenties. Her leadership style had matured as well. She became more consistent and
      paternalistic.
                                                   –5–            M&N15/3/BUSMT/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/CS

        Now she began to think about the next phase of her career and her life. She was approaching
        her late thirties. In the US, many female musicians and film stars struggle to remain popular in
        their forties: modelling jobs are harder to get; girls and younger women typically prefer younger
  135   musicians and stars; and the idea of selling youthfulness becomes more difficult as women
        grow older. LadyA hired business consultants, Kersey & Joyce (K&J), who specialized in the
        strategic direction of brands, to help her consider her options. K&J identified three strategic
        options in their report to LadyA.

        Option 1: Move into South American markets, which generally accept older female musicians
  140   and film stars. Ever since Lady Alejandra became LadyA, she had focused on the
        English-speaking market in the US. Though she had some fans in Spanish-speaking markets,
        she had never made them a priority. For those markets, LadyA would start using the name
        Lady Alejandra again, conduct a major concert tour in South America, and try to repeat her
        North American career, building an increasingly powerful name through music downloads (such
  145   as MP3s), concerts, films, product endorsements, magazine covers, and also perfume and
        cosmetics.

        Option 2: Develop more products under the LadyA brand and develop a global market. A
        possibility is a clothing range. Other possible products include accessories such as LadyA
        shoes, LadyA handbags, and LadyA lingerie. These products could be distributed in the US
  150   through the same department stores selling her perfume and cosmetics. Other distribution
        channels would be required for the international market, with e-commerce offering many
        opportunities. Family branding would be maintained.

        Option 3: Re-brand herself. With this strategy, LadyA would actually lower her media profile
        for three years. During that time, she would associate herself with a charitable cause, to tackle
  155   issues such as malnutrition in developing countries, homelessness in big cities, or international
        trafficking of children. She would use her wealth to set up various non-profit organizations
        to support the charitable cause, and utilize various techniques for marketing non-profit
        organizations. She would then appear on American television talk shows and do magazine
        interviews, building a new brand identity based on the image of a strong, mature, determined
  160   and compassionate woman. This would allow for new revenue streams to be sought based on
        this new brand.

Additional terms not in the guide

Brand identity
Core employees
Limited liability
Paternalistic
Peripheral employees
Revenue streams

Companies, products, or individuals named in this case study are fictitious and any similarities with
actual entities are purely coincidental.
