M15/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                               May 2015


                         Global Politics


          Higher level and standard level


                               Paper 1




7 pages
                          –2–             M15/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use
of examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.
                                                –3–                 M15/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Unit 3     Development

Bulleted lists in this markscheme indicate likely points that candidates may include in their
answer: they are not exhaustive, and examiners should credit other valid points not listed.

                                 Sustainable development

1.   Identify three significant facts about global undernourishment that can be
     deduced from the chart in Source A.                                                     [3 marks]

     The following implications can be inferred from the chart:
      nearly all of the world’s undernourished live outside of what the report labels as
       ‘developed countries’;
      the overwhelming majority of undernourished people are to be found in two geographic
       areas: Sub-Saharan Africa and Asia and the Pacific;
      the scale of undernourishment is very large at 1.02 billion;
      some of the world’s undernourished are to be found in developed countries.

     Award [1 mark] for each relevant point up to a maximum of [3 marks].

     Other relevant points not listed can also be rewarded. However, if a candidate merely
     lists the statistics on the chart, instead of deducing from them, eg the answer simply
     states that “There are 15 million undernourished people in developed countries.
     There are 42 million in the Near East and North Africa”, award a maximum of [1 mark].


2.   With explicit reference to Source B, explain the factors that pose challenges to
     sustainable development.                                                                [4 marks]

     Answers may include, but are not limited to:
      extreme poverty: answers should give some explanation of why eradicating this is a
       challenge, eg because of the inequality referred to later in the article. The concept of
       sustainable development implicitly includes the aim of meeting the needs of the current
       generation;
      current consumption and production patterns that are unsustainable: therefore the
       environmental and/or ecological dimensions of sustainable development are of primary
       importance;
      consumption and production patterns that are increasingly spreading from the
       developed to the developing world, eg the unacceptably high levels of greenhouse gas
       emissions and the magnitude of ecological footprint per person in developed countries
       risk being replicated in developing ones;
      a high degree of inequality that accompanies and promotes these patterns of
       unsustainable consumption and production. Answers should give some explanation of
       why this is significant, eg as social unrest may follow from inequality;
      there is no effective global agenda for managing sustainability challenges.
       Answers should include some explanation of why this is significant, eg that the
       challenges are so integrated and pervasive that they cannot be solved by countries
       acting on their own.

     Other relevant points not listed can also be rewarded. Candidates are not expected to
     make four separate points in order to achieve full marks. For each valid point a maximum
     of [2 marks] may be awarded, up to a total of [4 marks].
                                         –4–               M15/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


To be awarded [2 marks] a point must be well developed; for example, simply repeating
the point in Source B that eradicating extreme poverty is a primary challenge of
sustainable development would be awarded [1 mark], whereas developing this point into
a comment such as “eradicating extreme poverty remains a challenge for sustainable
development, because understandings of sustainable development include the idea of
meeting the needs of the current generation” would be awarded [2 marks]. Candidates
may develop their points in different ways.
                                             –5–                M15/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3. Contrast how Source C and Source D view present-day challenges to the
   well-being of people, and the strategies they propose for overcoming these and
   securing sustainable development.                                              [8 marks]

 Potential points of contrast:
  Source C is an industry-based perspective on development and, not surprisingly,
   advocates a central role for the industry concerned, coal, in meeting such challenges;
   Source D expresses the views of the Elders, a group of independent former global
   world leaders whose focus is humanitarian and arguably more objective;
  Source C claims that coal plays a significant role in sustainable development, in
   improving the livelihoods of many, and in empowering millions of people through
   poverty alleviation. Source D suggests that we need to turn away from fossil fuels as
   these are contributing to a negative environmental impact, which threatens the
   “well-being of hundreds of millions of people today”;
  Source C is confident that improvements in the well-being of people have already been
   brought about by the coal industry: “Coal mining makes a substantial contribution to
   improving the livelihoods of many, including providing employment, export revenues,
   and the development of local infrastructure. This is especially true in
   developing countries …” and that coal production will continue to do so; Source D sees
   the continuing use of fossil fuels as likely to lead to “catastrophe” by contributing to
   climate change which “threatens the well-being of hundreds of millions of people today
   and many billions in the future”.
  Source C suggests that coal is an essential resource for meeting the world's energy
   needs and that it widens access to an affordable, secure and reliable electricity supply,
   which is extremely important for development and poverty alleviation; Source D states
   that we must accelerate the use of “affordable renewable energies” and set an
   internationally agreed price for carbon, i.e. implying the limiting of coal production;
  Source C sees development in terms of an increase in industrialization, and of
   economic growth giving freedom to people; Source D sees basic human rights to food,
   water, health and shelter as being undermined by climate change, caused by
   temperature increases post-industrialization;
  Source C is confident about future development through the use of
   natural energy resources (primarily coal), while Source D is pessimistic about the effect
   of the continued exploitation of fossil fuels, as contributing greenhouse gas emissions,
   which are to likely to lead to catastrophic climate change;
  Source C equates development with economic growth, which is underpinned by the
   continued exploitation of natural resources (coal): the source begins with the claim that
   “coal plays a significant global role in sustainable development” but this claim is not
   explored or justified later in the source; Source D by implication equates development
   with a broader moral imperative which includes saving the marginalized from the
   negative effects of climate change, and saving the planet from environmental
   degradation on behalf of future generations.

 If the view of only one source is discussed award a maximum of [4 marks]. For a
 response which focuses significantly on one source with only minimal reference to the
 other source, award a maximum of [5 marks]. Award [2 marks] per effective point of
 contrast up to a maximum of [8 marks]. For an [8 mark] response expect detailed
 contrast but do not expect all of the points above, and allow other valid points.
                                                  –6–                 M15/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   Using the sources and your own knowledge, evaluate the claim that the most
     important factor that will affect the success of development will be the
     involvement of both rich and poor countries.                                              [10 marks]

     Question 4 is assessed according to the markbands that follow, in conjunction with these
     marking notes.

     Source material may include, but is not limited to:
     Source A
      the data from Source A tends to show that meeting the challenge of undernourishment
       is primarily a problem for developing countries;
      however, even developed countries are affected and need to recognize this;

     Source B
      unsustainable production and consumption patterns established in the developed
       countries are being repeated in developing countries and so represent a common
       challenge;
      without an “effective global agenda,” high income households will continue to adopt
       unsustainable consumption patterns in both developing and developed countries;
      inequality prevents the achievement of human development, and inequality between
       countries is unlikely to be resolved without the voice of those who have less being
       heard;

     Source C
      Source C suggests that developing countries whose economies have been
       strengthened significantly by the “major contribution” of coal are equipped to deal with
       the challenges of poverty and development;
      suggests that widening access to global energy supplies is a way of meeting the
       challenge of development, implying that rich and poor countries will need to work to
       facilitate the electricity supply to the 1.3 billion who do not have it;

     Source D
      the threat posed by climate change is common to all and threatens the well-being and
       human rights of all but those with “no voice” are at the greatest risk;
      hence, the Elders’ solution is for every country, rich and poor, to commit to a timetable
       which phases down greenhouse gas emissions.

     Own knowledge could include, but is not limited to:
      a discussion of what is meant by successful development;
      a consideration of the global nature of development;
      problems that are shared by rich and poor countries, such as climate change and
       global economic crises;
      problems that are different for rich and poor countries, such as that economic growth
       may be more important for poor countries, in order to increase well-being, than for rich
       ones;
      reference to international institutions that are rich-country based but influential in poor
       countries, such as the United Nations (UN), International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the
       World Trade Organization (WTO);
      the ability of poor countries with weak state institutions to participate in international
       forums;
      the nature of globalization as markets create international, interdependent relationships
       between rich and poor countries;
      the relationships of power that dominate interactions between rich and poor countries.
                                          –7–                M15/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Do not expect all of the above, and reward other relevant points not listed. Responses
with effective evaluation will make an appraisal of whether the involvement of both rich
and poor countries is the most important factor in successful development,
or whether another, or other, factors are more important. More successful responses
may note that Sources A and C are less helpful in evaluating the claim. For example,
Source C seems to imply that poor countries can self-generate development if they have
coal reserves.

Students should synthesize and evaluate evidence from the sources and from their
study of the prescribed content and key concepts of the course.


Markbands for question 4


Marks       Level descriptor
0             The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors
               below.
1-2           There is little relevant knowledge and a very limited awareness of
               the demands of the question.
              There is little or no attempt to synthesise own knowledge and
               source material.
              Responses at this level are often largely descriptive and contain
               unsupported generalizations.
3-4           There is limited awareness of the demands of the question or the
               question is only partially addressed.
              There is some knowledge demonstrated, but this is not always
               relevant or accurate, and may not be used appropriately or
               effectively.
              Responses at this level are often more descriptive than evaluative.
5-6           Answers show some awareness of the demands of the question.
              Knowledge is mostly accurate and relevant, and there is some
               limited synthesis of own knowledge and source material.
              Counterclaims are implicitly identified but are not explored.
7-8           Answers are focused and show good awareness of the demands
               of the question.
              Relevant and accurate knowledge is demonstrated, there is some
               synthesis of own knowledge and source material, and appropriate
               examples are used.
              The response contains claims and counter claims.
9-10          Answers are clearly focused and show a high degree of
               awareness of the demands of the question.
              Relevant and accurate knowledge is demonstrated, there is
               effective synthesis of own knowledge and source material, and
               appropriate examples are used.
              The response contains clear evaluation, with well balanced claims
               and counter claims.
