m15/3/glpol/hP2/ENG/TZ0/XX




Global Politics
Higher level
Paper 2


Thursday 21 May 2015 (morning)


2 hours 45 minutes


Instructions to candidates
yyDo not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
yyAnswer three questions, each from a different unit of study. Each question is worth [25 marks].
yyThe maximum mark for this examination paper is [75 marks].




                                                                                              2215 – 5952
     2 pages                                              © International Baccalaureate Organization 2015
                                                  –2–                    m15/3/glpol/hP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Answer three questions, each from a different unit of study.

Each question is worth [25 marks]. Marks are awarded for demonstrating understanding of relevant
political concepts, making reference to specific relevant examples, and for justifying your points and
exploring and evaluating counter-arguments.

Power, sovereignty and international relations

1.   Examine the claim that increased interactions and interconnectedness in global politics have
     fundamentally changed the nature of state sovereignty.


2.   Power is often assumed to be linked to the possession of, or access to, resources. Discuss the
     validity of this view.



Human rights

3.   “Human rights covenants and treaties can limit development in newly industrializing economies.”
     To what extent do you agree with this claim?


4.   Discuss the extent to which cultural relativism can be used to justify different concepts
     of human rights.



Development

5.   Evaluate the view that globalization harms rather than benefits the poorest people in countries
     with the lowest incomes.


6.   Discuss the view that sustainable development will never be achieved until state and
     non-state actors can be persuaded or forced to act in the common interest.



Peace and conflict

7.   Peacebuilding is arguably more important than peacemaking, yet it is given much less funding and
     attention. To what extent do you agree with this claim?


8.   Discuss why non-violent protest is sometimes able to achieve success against even the most
     powerful of opponents.
