M15/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                               May 2015


                 Information technology
                    in a global society


           Higher level and standard level


                               Paper 2




16 pages
                          –2–              M15/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use
of examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.
                                                    –3–                  M15/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Using assessment criteria for external assessment

For external assessment, a number of assessment criteria have been identified. Each assessment
criterion has level descriptors describing specific levels of achievement, together with an appropriate
range of marks. The level descriptors concentrate on positive achievement, although for the lower levels
failure to achieve may be included in the description.

Examiners must judge the externally assessed work at SL and at HL against the four criteria (A–D) using
the level descriptors.

 The same assessment criteria are provided for SL and HL.

 The aim is to find, for each criterion, the descriptor that conveys most accurately the level attained by
   the candidate, using the best-fit model. A best-fit approach means that compensation should be
   made when a piece of work matches different aspects of a criterion at different levels. The mark
   awarded should be one that most fairly reflects the balance of achievement against the criterion. It is
   not necessary for every single aspect of a level descriptor to be met for that mark to be awarded.

 When assessing a candidate’s work, examiners should read the level descriptors for each criterion
   until they reach a descriptor that most appropriately describes the level of the work being assessed. If
   a piece of work seems to fall between two descriptors, both descriptors should be read again and the
   one that more appropriately describes the candidate’s work should be chosen.

 Where there are two or more marks available within a level, examiners should award the upper marks
   if the candidate’s work demonstrates the qualities described to a great extent. Examiners should
   award the lower marks if the candidate’s work demonstrates the qualities described to a lesser extent.

 Only whole numbers should be recorded; partial marks, that is fractions and decimals, are not
   acceptable.

 Examiners should not think in terms of a pass or fail boundary, but should concentrate on identifying
   the appropriate descriptor for each assessment criterion.

 The highest level descriptors do not imply faultless performance but should be achievable by
   a candidate. Examiners should not hesitate to use the extremes if they are appropriate descriptions
   of the work being assessed.

 A candidate who attains a high level of achievement in relation to one criterion will not necessarily
   attain high levels of achievement in relation to the other criteria. Similarly, a candidate who attains a
   low level of achievement for one criterion will not necessarily attain low achievement levels for the
   other criteria. Examiners should not assume that the overall assessment of the candidates will
   produce any particular distribution of marks.

 The assessment criteria must be made available to candidates prior to sitting the examination.
                                                   –4–                  M15/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



             Theme: Student cyber-bullying using social networking sites

Criterion A — The issue and stakeholder(s)                                                         [4]

1.   (a)   Describe one social/ethical concern related to the IT system in the article.

           The issues are about cyber-bullying and the related concerns which includes
           anonymity, health/stress problems, privacy and authenticity. There are some
           specific concerns listed below.

           [1]: For identification of the concern, which may not be explicitly named
           separately or incorrectly named or vaguely named (ie identifying cyber-bullying
           without describing a related impact/result/consequence/effect/outcome).

           [2]: The candidate must describe the impact/result/consequences/effect/
           outcome of the concern to obtain [2]. If the description does not support the
           identified concern, award [1]. Detailed description not required as it will come into
           2b

           If two linked/overlapping concerns are identified, eg reliability and integrity,
           mark the best response and that concern needs to be explained in (2)(b).

           The description needs to reference the IT system in the article (sometimes
           candidates will describe the issue and not the concern in context).

           If two different concerns are raised, since the question specifies one concern
           hence only mark the first; except if commonly linked eg security and privacy,
           anonymity and on-going harassment.

           Social/ethical concerns may include the following:
            anonymity – being able to post anonymously on social networking sites giving
             potential for aggressive behaviour
            on-going harassment – leading to hurt and embarrassment
            privacy (use and sharing of personal information without permission) the
             unethical use of personal information from a victim with the intent of
             harassment (if a concern is identified as privacy but described as another
             concern e.g. anonymity = 1 mark)
            ethics of cyber-bullying (incorrect behaviour on the internet)/digital citizenship
             in appropriate use of technology – this is regarded as unacceptable and even
             illegal in some circumstances
            authenticity – public availability of information about the victim which may not
             be true , defamatory claims.
                                                  –5–                  M15/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



(b)       Describe the relationship of one primary stakeholder to the IT system in the
          article.

          Describe means to include who, what and where but not how and why for full
          marks.

          [1]: Who – identification of the stakeholder.

          [2]:   Where social networking sites or sms or emails.
                 What are they doing with the IT system - to communicate, interacting with others or to
                 post information, images and videos about the victim eg “uploading files” or “posting
                 information” is insufficient, must make a reference to how and where.

          Primary stakeholders may include the following:
           victim of cyber-bullying – the person harassed by the personal information
             posted to a cell phone (ie SMS) or to a social networking site (Facebook,
             Ask.fm)
           cyber-bully – person using mobile device/desktop computer or cell phone to
             post hurtful information about a person to a cell phone service or social
             networking site
           persons viewing the personal information about the victim posted to a social
             networking site
           developers/companies of the SNS/Websites -Designing the SNS and
             developing the features that include anonymity used by the victims and bullies.
           parents - they may monitor the SNS/emails/SMS that their children are using
             to be bullied or to bully with.
           student/users use it to communicate and collaborate, staying in touch with
             friends, organising personal life, sharing updates, images, media, or
             messages with their circle of friends (must have some context).

Marks                                              Level descriptor

      0           The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

                  Either an appropriate social/ethical concern or the relationship of one primary
      1
                  stakeholder to the IT system in the article is identified.

                  Either an appropriate social/ethical concern or the relationship of one primary
      2
                  stakeholder to the IT system in the article is described or both are identified.

                  Either an appropriate social/ethical concern or the relationship of one primary
      3
                  stakeholder to the IT system in the article is described; the other is identified.

                  Both an appropriate social/ethical concern and the relationship of one primary
      4
                  stakeholder to the IT system in the article are described.
                                                   –6–                  M15/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Criterion B — The IT concepts and processes                                                                [6]

2.   (a)   Describe, step-by-step, how the IT system works.
           IT system: using computer-based technologies and social networks.

           The steps are for access and storage/sharing of information - reference to cyberbullying
           is not required.

           Many of the responses will not fit neatly into a mark descriptor, so best fit will need to be
           applied. There is a large variety of technologies and ways of using them the candidates
           could include.

           Candidates may choose to describe the process for using a cellphone service or
           a social networking site for accessing and storing/sharing information for cyber-
           bullying – a description of either one is sufficient. This may not be clear to the
           candidates and some may decide to do both and compare them. If they do so
           they should not be penalized by a lack of some details in their descriptions. It is
           not necessary to include about anonymity, as not all information sharing is
           anonymous but this may be written as one of the developments.

           [1]: The candidate may show some understanding of the process but not in a
           step-by-step approach – using the information in the article and possibly some
           steps missing. If storage or sharing (pics, messages, posts, tags) is not
           mentioned the highest mark is [1].

           [2]: The student is able to provide a logical step-by-step account of how an IT
           system is used to access, store/share information – using the information in the
           article but lacks some details. Best fit if contains information beyond the article
           but not in step-by-step or does not include both the computer based technology
           and the social network site.

           [3]: The candidate is able to provide a more detailed step-by-step account of the
           storage/sharing of materials (pics,messages, video, posts, tags, etc). AND access using
           the computer based technology (computer or phone or tablet);
           AND include some information beyond the article (at least one development).

           [4]: The candidate is able to provide a detailed step-by-step account how an IT
           system is used to access and store/share information (at least three
           developments - at least one for each of storage/sharing of pics, messages, etc.
           AND access using the computer based technology.

           The candidate does not need to describe a step-by-step process which includes
           both cellphone services (ie SMS) and social networking services. They may
           focus on one or the other or a combination of both.
                                       –7–                  M15/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




Answers provided in the article include the following:

   Access using the computer based technologies
    examples of SNS in article include Facebook and Ask.fm (line 3, 8)
    from a cell phone (mobile phone) or laptop to another account holder (line
     10)
    24/4 access using cell phone apps to post directly to SNS (line 17)
    via cell phone services (line 23)
    apps are specialized programs downloaded onto mobile devices, that can
     run on the internet on a computer or on a cell/mobile phone or other
     electronic device (footnote)

   Storage and sharing
    the site allows an account holder to send anonymous questions (line 9)
    once a post is received the exchange of messages is posted publicly for
     anyone to read (line 11)
    receiving a stream of nasty messages (line 11)
    anonymous posting in school (line 15)
    posts can include a range of personal information including photos, videos
     (line 18, 19)

Answers with additional information to that in the article may include the following:

   Access using the computer based technologies
    setting up the account and the personal information needed to do this
    downloading of the app or logging into the SNS URL
    additional social networking websites (ie Twitter, internet polling site,
     interactive gaming site, blogs)
    using public wifi/hot spots to avoid IP tracking
    creating fake accounts (not using personal details or other email accounts)

   Storage and sharing
    users receives an alert(in the form of email/sms/?) that information has
     been posted to their cell phone or social networking site
    anonymity is allowed on Ask.fm, but may not be possible on other sites
    personal information may include photos and videos that were taken
     without the user’s knowledge
    the information posted may be seen by far more people than the account
     holders realise
    user may leave identifying information (ie coordinates on photos, what kind
     of device took the images, background details in the photo) (users may
     take photos with geo-tagging enabled device and post it )
    search for friends on the SNS to connect with/Use the Search Bar
    use the chat (voice or message) feature in SNS or email
    tagging of photos or videos
                                              –8–                  M15/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



(b)   Explain the relationship between the IT system and the social/ethical concern
      described in Criterion A.

      Explaining the link between the concern and specific parts, or whole, of the
      IT system means the candidate must include how and why the concern has
      arisen from the use of the IT system. The naming of the concern identified in
      Criterion A may be implicit.

      Question 2.(b) clearly asks for a link to question 1.(a), but the link only needs to
      be generic – eg for a specific concern described in question 1.(a), then in
      question 2.(b) the candidate can explain further without reference to the specific
      concern in question 1.(a). If the concern addressed in question 2.(a) is
      completely different from that in question 1.(a), a link cannot be made and
      hence [0]. If identified as privacy in 1(a) and described as anonymity in 1(a) and
      2(b) explains anonymity then 2 marks - no double jeopardy penalty.

      [1]: If the candidate identifies the relationship between the concern and the IT
      system. This may be a repeat, or rewording, of the response to 1.(a).

      [2]: For concerns regarding a technical aspect of the IT system, candidates would
      be expected to demonstrate an understanding and use of ITGS terminology for
      one of the IT systems. Not a general reference, eg “cyber-bully is invisible” for
      anonymity.

      Some answers may give adequate explanation with limited technical detail due to
      the nature of the concern, eg lack of policy, involving the whole system or many
      aspects of the system.
                                        –9–                  M15/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




Answers may include the following:
This is not an exhaustive list.

 Anonymity is a concern:
  - the social networking site does not have a way of knowing who is
     cyber-bullying
  - being able to post anonymously on social networking sites or using an fake
     account (how); not very strong authentication measures or SNS policies,
     often only a valid but fake email address needed(why).

 On-going harassment is a concern:
  - the victim is receiving constant alerts every time information is posted
     (how). Account settings for SNS/email have been set up to receive alerts
     every time someone makes a post or are automatic (why)
  - it is possible for multiple persons to be posting information to a common
     account (how), due to the privacy settings of a user's account - this may be
     set to friends or public and the number of ‘friends’ of the account holder
     (why)
  - the victim is feeling hurt/embarrassed/harassed due to the nature and
     frequency of the postings to the cell phone service(s) and/or social
     networking site (how), the ease of being able to spread posts ensures that
     embarrassing posts can spread quickly and into the hands of others using
     mobile technologies (why)
  - there is no way of reporting to the social networking site information that
     specific posts should be deleted (how); there are inadequate built in
     features to report misuse of SNS. (why).

 Privacy is a concern:
  - IT system allows the postings to be publicly accessible (how); the spread
      of pics/post without the person not being asked permission to be tagged.
      The tagging spreads it quickly without permission being given (why)

 Ethics of cyber-bullying is a concern:
  - cyber-bullying - the sharing of personal information with the intent of
      harming or embarrassing another through posts, tagged pictures/videos
      often taken/shared without their permission (how); a bully does not have to
      ask permission to post a picture or send an email with attachments; they
      may not realise that it is a form of bullying and that it is just ‘fun’, public
      SNS are not fully monitored (why)
  - has legal consequences in some circumstances - victims can sue the
      bully, by gathering evidence of the bullying or tarnished reputation and
      take them to court (how); bullies can leave a digital footprint e.g. IP
      address used, log activities of school networks; emails/SNS posts can be
      printed as evidence (why)
                                             – 10 –               M15/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



        Authenticity of person posting information (also connected to anonymity) is a
         concern:
         - bullies can easily create fake accounts and hide their true identity when
            creating accounts which they make the bullying posts/messages from
            (how); as very little authentication is required to set up an account to prove
            that you are who you say you are (verification is often through email
            accounts which can easily be made)(why).
         - bullies logging on under other accounts (e.g. friends log on) to share
            information/bullying posts (how); lack of security of friends accounts by
            sharing passwords or log on details (why)

        Authenticity of information is a concern:
         - bullies can post information about others even if it is not true (how); lack of
            approval processes on the site to check the accuracy of the content before
            published (why).

       Candidates are expected to make reference to relevant stakeholders, information
       technologies, data and processes. Candidates will be expected to refer to “how
       the IT system works” using appropriate IT terminology.

Marks                                         Level descriptor

  0           The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

              There is little or no understanding of the step-by-step process of how the
              IT system works and does not go beyond the information in the article.
 1–2
              The major components of the IT system are identified using minimal technical IT
              terminology.

              There is a description of the step-by-step process of how the IT system works
              that goes beyond the information in the article.
              Most of the major components of the IT system are identified using some
 3–4          technical IT terminology.
              The relationship between the IT system referred to in the article and
              the concern presented in criterion A is identified, with the some use of
              ITGS terminology.


              There is a detailed description of the step-by-step process that shows a clear
              understanding of how the IT system works that goes beyond the information in
              the article.
              The major components of the IT system are identified using appropriate
 5–6
              technical IT terminology.
              The relationship between the IT system referred to in the article and
              the concern presented in criterion A is explained using appropriate
              ITGS terminology.
                                                 – 11 –                M15/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Criterion C — The impact of the social/ethical issue(s) on stakeholders                          [8]

3.   Evaluate the impact of the social/ethical issues on the relevant stakeholders. The list
     below is not exhaustive. If in doubt contact your team leader.


     Impact = result/consequence/effect/outcome

     There are a large number of impacts that can be compared and critically analyzed.
     Given the time constraints not all are needed.

     At least two stakeholders are required for entrance into the top markband.

     [1]: One or two impacts described.

     [2]: More than two impacts described of either type.

     [3]: Analysis by structure – organizing a response in a consistent manner
     (eg positive/negatives issues and/or various stakeholders).

     [4–5 ]: Must include linking analytical connections (between positive/negatives,
     various stakeholders, various issues) and/or added evaluative comments about extent
     of implications on stakeholders. Candidates who have supplied a good conclusion
     apply best fit here. Only one stakeholder, maximum of [4] if includes analysis and
     evaluations, eg the impacts on the person who has been
     cyber-bullied only.

     Notes for markers that you would expect to see in this markband:
      if NO analytical links and only evaluative comments then maximum of 4
         (candidates may be providing many evaluations from their own experience).
      candidates providing a descriptive sequence of impacts is not considered
         analytical links (and … and … and….)
      an analytical example may be when there is a discussion of the impact where the
         negative is for the victim and positive for the bully (credit for highlighting the
         relationship between the two)
      a link between impacts such as bullying to health issues to poor grades is another
         example of analysis.
      an extensive list of benefits of SNS not relevant to the cyberbullying focus of article
         should not be awarded significant marks without a link to other relevant ideas.
         Possibly count as one positive impact, especially in the 1-2 mark range
      a wider discussion about the benefits of social networking that builds on the issues
         linked to cyber bullying could be implicit or explicitly linked e.g.., “ …… although
         cyberbullying is bad, it may make the person consider the amount of time they
         spend on social networking sites Overall …….” could be the approach of a level 5
         answer because there are analytical connections and evaluations made.
      4 or more analytical links/evaluations could still be unbalanced and not warrant 6
         marks.
                                             – 12 –                M15/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




[6]: At least two negative per stakeholder; and two positive impacts overall for any
stakeholder/s linked explicitly to cyberbullying. At least two stakeholders need to be
addressed relatively equally. Number of analyses, links and evaluations, is the most
important consideration as well to reach this level. Must be at least FOUR.

[7–8]: A conclusion backed by direct reference to the impacts described is needed.
The overall evaluation should focus on the significance of the impacts on the various
primary stakeholders. The evaluation may include secondary stakeholders as well. A
good conclusion would balance the benefits of SNS with the problems arising from the
possibility of cyberbullying. Another conclusion could focus on the evaluation of a
range of negatives for various stakeholders (with little reference to positive impacts).


Answers may include the following:

Impact on victim
Positive
 character building - victims, learn to stand up for themselves
 learning how hurtful cyber-bullying can be and it may discourage the victim from
  cyber-bullying others.
 the ability to conduct in anonymous postings allows freedom of expression, possibly
  for shy introverted students, or people living in a oppressive environment
 cyberbullying is in writing - this means that it is easy to show proof of it happening as
  posts/messages can be printed

Negative
 sense of being victimized, tormented, hurt, threatened, harassed, embarrassed
  and/or humiliated
 24/7 – constant alerts whenever information is posted
 health issues (ie stress-related disorders, fear, anxiety, depression, helplessness)
 need to change schools or club affiliations to avoid personal contact with
  cyber-bullies
 reluctant to tell an adult (ie teacher or parent) that they are being cyber-bullied drop
  in grades - due to emotional distraction of being bullied
                                            – 13 –               M15/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




Impacts on the person cyber-bullying
Positive
 sense of power over the victim
 personal recognition from peers involved in the cyber-bullying
 less adult supervision online than face-to-face
 bullying can be done from the safety of their own homes, which is convenient and
  feels safe from not being caught
 being able to find private information is a positive for the bully
 increased awareness of the implications of his/her actions which may lead to their
  own more responsible use of technology

Negative
 if caught can be punished by the school or face legal battles with the victim and
  parents

Impacts on persons viewing the postings
Positive
 increased awareness and lookout for signs of depression in friends.. help prevent
  many fatalities
 forces users to be careful and selective of online friends and have increased
  security settings.
 may include the feeling of power in learning personal information (real or not) about
  the victim and making judgments about the victim.

Negative
 information is posted about the victim to a wide spread audience
 may have little/no awareness if the information is true or not
 may choose to take no action for fear of being cyber-bullied themselves

Impacts on school personnel
Positive
 schools have implemented policies and security systems that help prevent cyber-
  bullying during school hours.
 some schools have developed social education programs that address cyber-
  bullying
 Schools can monitor public postings of their students and use this to be proactive in
  dealing with issues
 cyberbullying is in writing - this means that it is easier to support the students who
  can build a case against the bully.

Negative
 teachers may not be aware of their role and responsibility in cyber-bullying cases
 schools may not have a social education program in place that addresses
  cyber-bullying case
 security systems for monitoring or tracing cyberbullying can be expensive and time
  consuming to extract the needed information.
 additional pressure on staff to respond to bullying which happens outside of school
 schools with a cyberbullying problem may have a poor reputation
                                              – 14 –                M15/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Impacts on parents
Positive
 parents have learned from other instances to keep aware of the apps and online
  services that their child is using
 increase parent awareness of possible remedial actions
 parents can monitor their children’s accounts and so protect them from afar.

Negative
 parents may not know how to deal with the situation when their child is being
  cyber-bullied
 parents may need to enroll their child in another schools in order to stop the
  cyber-bullying
 in some countries, parents are ultimately responsible for the actions of their child
  who is a minor and a bully and may be sued.

Impacts on Social networking sites such as Facebook and Ask.fm
Positive
 update policies to address cyber-bullying - this may encourage more students to
  choose their SNS as it may appear ‘safer’
 increased number of users (parents) who will join the SNS in order to monitor or
  keep in contact with their children.

Negative
 implementation of reporting system for cyber-bullying may need to be created which
  will require time for developers to write and cost the company money to employ the
  developers and test out the new features.
 prevent anonymous posting - this may discourage certain users who joined because
  of that specific feature.
 reputation of the website will go down as a result of repeated cyber-bullying
  happening in a particular website – result in fewer users – result in less money
  made by the website.


If the evaluation does not provide any additional information to that in the article, the candidate will
be awarded a maximum of [2].

Marks                                          Level descriptor
  0          The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
             The impact of the social/ethical issues on stakeholders is described but not
 1–2         evaluated. Material is either copied directly from the article or implicit references
             are made to it.
             The impact of the social/ethical issues on stakeholders is partially analysed, with
             some evaluative comment. Explicit references to the information in the article are
 3–5
             partially developed in the response. There is some use of appropriate ITGS
             terminology.

             The impact of the social/ethical issues on stakeholders is fully analysed and
             evaluated. Explicit, well-developed references to information in the article are
 6–8
             made appropriately throughout the response. There is use of appropriate ITGS
             terminology.
                                                    – 15 –                M15/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Criterion D — A solution to a problem arising from the article                                     [8]

4.   Evaluate one possible solution that addresses at least one problem identified in
     Criterion C.

     Problem must be specified here, but if this is not done here, it must be one of the
     impacts/problems identified in Criterion C.

     [1]: Solution is identified. If not, the response is usually not well structured.

     [2]: Solution is described (what, who, where)
     A solution may have more than one part/aspect, e.g. developments for the SNS -
     monitoring and reporting features, policy has different parts and stakeholders. The
     solution may be briefly described early and then expanded subsequently when
     discussing its application - combine descriptions for the 2 marks and other marks for
     the first positive application and further evaluations.

     [3]: The solution is applied to the problem directly and not generally – how and why
     it solves the problem (first positive evaluation). The solution must be feasible and can
     be applied to the problem, even if not good “quality”. A description may also
     include the application to the problem.

     [4–5]: Further positive evaluations and at least one negative evaluation is required for 5
     marks. Best fit if description is limited.

     [6]: Fully evaluated strengths and weaknesses requires at least two positive and
     negative evaluations.

     [7–8]: Concluding paragraph directly referencing the evaluations. Candidates may
     propose future developments as part of the conclusion instead of discussion of
     evaluations – best fit applies. Likewise if a candidate has not fully described the
     solution or provided the minimum four evaluation best fit applies.

     Answers may include the following:

     Solutions to social networking sites allowing anonymous posting
      social networking sites must store identifying information so that anonymous
       cyber-bullies can be reported
      instances of cyber-bullying requires a simple method for reporting and prompt action
      policies need to clearly state the penalties for cyber-bullying
      social networking sites should not allow anonymity.

     Solution to educating parents about actions to take against cyber-bullying
      install web filters on home computers to filter social websites
      keep track of all evidence of cyber-bullying to share with school officials and the
       police
      solicit advice and help from online organizations that specialize in cyber-bullying.

     Solutions to schools offering education programs to prevent cyber-bullying
      schools setup safety teams to investigate reported cases of bullying
      implement an anti-bullying program in the school for students
      develop school policies relating to cyber-bullying.
                                              – 16 –                M15/3/ITGSX/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Solutions to schools implementing security systems to prevent cyber-bullying
 schools use networking software to block common websites used for cyber-bullying
  (ie Facebook, Ask.fm).

Solutions to governments providing laws to address cyber-bullying
 laws may set the conditions for schools to monitor and report cyber-bullying to police
  authorities
 training police authorities about reported instances that can be regarded as
  cyber-bullying and what actions are required.

Solution to Cyberbullying
 cancel the SNS account so as not to be part of any cyberbullying communications
  and so that the bully has less access to the victim.

Do not accept a solution to cyber-bullying in general.

If the evaluation does not provide any additional information to that in the article, the
candidate will be awarded a maximum of [2].

Marks                                          Level descriptor

   0         The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

             One feasible solution to at least one problem is proposed and described.
 1–2         No evaluative comment is offered. Material is either copied directly from the
             article or implicit references are made to it.

             One appropriate solution to at least one problem is proposed and partially
 3–5         evaluated. The response contains explicit references to information in the article
             that are partially developed. There is some use of appropriate ITGS terminology.

             One appropriate solution to at least one problem is proposed and fully evaluated,
             addressing both its strengths and potential weaknesses. Areas for future
 6–8         development may also be identified. Explicit, fully developed references to the
             information in the article are made appropriately throughout the response.
             There is use of appropriate ITGS terminology.
