M15/3/PHILO/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




Philosophy
Standard level
Paper 1


Wednesday 6 May 2015 (afternoon)


1 hour 45 minutes


Instructions to candidates
   Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
   Section A: answer one question.
   Section B: answer one question.
   The maximum mark for this examination paper is [60 marks].




                                                                                               2215 – 5604
      5 pages                                              © International Baccalaureate Organization 2015
                                                           –2–                       M15/3/PHILO/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

In your answers you are expected to:

     •   argue in an organized way using clear, precise language, which is appropriate to philosophy
     •   demonstrate knowledge and understanding of appropriate philosophical issues
     •   analyse, develop and critically evaluate relevant ideas and arguments
     •   present appropriate examples providing support for your overall argument
     •   identify and analyse counter-arguments
     •   provide relevant supporting material, illustrations and/or examples
     •   offer a clear and philosophically relevant personal response to the examination question.

                                                      Section A

Answer one question from this section. Each question in this section is worth [30 marks].

Core theme: What is a human being?

1.       Read the following passage and develop your response as indicated below.

         It is a common assumption that work is a natural feature of the human condition, but it is plain
         lunacy to say that average US$10 to US$20 a week workers are today a lower type than an 18th
         century labourer or a labourer or peasant of any exclusively agricultural community now or in
         the past. It just is not true. It is so silly to cry out about the civilizing effects of work in the fields
         and farmyards, as against the work done in a train or car factory. Work is a nuisance. We work
         because we have to, and all work is done to provide us with leisure and the means of spending
         that leisure as enjoyably as possible.

                                    [Source: adapted from J Beevers, (1989) World Without Faith
                                          in G Orwell, The Road to Wigan Pier, page 178]


         Write a response (of approximately 800 words) in which you:

         • identify a central philosophical concept or philosophical issue in this passage that addresses the
           question, “what is a human being?”
         • investigate two different philosophical approaches to the philosophical concept or philosophical
           issue you identified
         • explain and evaluate the philosophical concept or philosophical issue you identified.
                                                    –3–                         M15/3/PHILO/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

2.   Look at the following picture and develop your response as indicated below.




                                  [Source: National Geographic (January 2012)
                                               © Martin Schoeller]


     Write a response (of approximately 800 words) in which you:

     • identify a central philosophical concept or philosophical issue in this picture that addresses the 		
       question, “what is a human being?”
     • investigate two different philosophical approaches to the philosophical concept or philosophical
       issue you identified
     • explain and evaluate the philosophical concept or philosophical issue you identified.



                                                                                                 Turn over
                                                      –4–                      M15/3/PHILO/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                                  Section B

Answer one question from this section. Each question in this section is worth [30 marks].

Optional theme 1: Grounds of epistemology

3.    Evaluate the claim that a belief is only justified if it is part of a coherent system of beliefs.


4.    Evaluate the claim that we derive all knowledge from experience.



Optional theme 2: Theories and problems of ethics

5.    Explain and discuss how we might justify the criteria which ethical principles should satisfy.


6.    “Personal autonomy forms the basis of a general right to act on one’s own judgment.” Discuss and
      evaluate.



Optional theme 3: Philosophy of religion

7.    Evaluate the claims about experience in arguments for the existence of God, or the gods.


8.    Discuss and evaluate the anthropocentric (human-centred) basis of language used when talking
      about the concept of God, or the gods.



Optional theme 4: Philosophy of art

9.    Evaluate the role of imagination in an aesthetic understanding of an object.


10.   Evaluate the claim that all judgments of beauty depend on non-aesthetic features.
                                                    –5–                     M15/3/PHILO/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Optional theme 5: Political philosophy

11.   Explain and discuss the differences between positive and negative liberty and their impact on
      individuals and society.


12.   With reference to the social contract theories you have studied, explain and discuss the role played
      by one or more of their key element/s, for example, fear, liberty, safety, property and so on.



Optional theme 6: Non-Western traditions and perspectives

13.   Evaluate the role of the self in the ethical imperatives and attitudes of one or more of the
      non-Western traditions and perspectives you have studied.


14.   With reference to one or more of the non-Western traditions you have studied, evaluate the
      pressure on the traditions brought by life in “the modern age”.



Optional theme 7: Contemporary social issues

15.   Evaluate the claim that in present societies, citizenship depends on free media and open access
      to information.


16.   “Toleration is not the opposite of intolerance, but the counterfeit of it. Both are despotisms.”
      Discuss and evaluate this claim with reference to a multicultural environment.



Optional theme 8: People, nations and cultures

17.   “The vis inertiae (power of inertia) of habit is tremendous, and when it is reinforced by a philosophy
      which also is embodied in institutions, it is so great.” Discuss and evaluate this claim with
      reference to the role played by tradition in societies.


18.   Evaluate the claim that all peoples have the right to self-determination and to express their
      identities in a multicultural and multi-ethnic world.
