M15/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX




Psychology
Higher level
Paper 3


Thursday 7 May 2015 (morning)


1 hour


Instructions to candidates
 Do not turn over this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Read the passage carefully and then answer all the questions.
 The maximum mark for this examination paper is [30 marks].




                                                                                               2215 – 5707
     2 pages                                               © International Baccalaureate Organization 2015
                                                          –2–                      M15/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX

The stimulus material below is based on a research article on first-time expectant fathers’ experiences of
their partners’ pregnancies.

             Most research on experiences of pregnancy has focused on motherhood whereas expectant
             fathers’ transition to parenthood has not attracted much attention. This qualitative research
             study took place in Sweden, where expectant fathers’ participation in all aspects of pregnancy,
             parent education, delivery and the care of the newborn baby is encouraged.

      5      The aim of the study was to describe first-time expectant fathers’ experiences of their partners’
             pregnancies. The purposive sample consisted of seven men living with their partners in an
             industrial town in southern Sweden. For both parents, this was their first child. The men were
             between 28 and 37 years old; all were either working or studying. They were recruited at the
             prenatal clinic and interviewed around two weeks before the baby was born.

     10      Before the interview the seven participants were informed about the purpose of the project.
             They all gave written consent and were informed of their rights. A research ethics committee
             also approved the study.

             The researcher in charge of the project conducted all the interviews herself. She decided to
             use narrative interviews to collect data. The men chose the time and place for the interview
     15      themselves. The participants were interviewed individually for around an hour. The opening
             question in all the interviews was: “Can you tell me about your own experiences of the
             pregnancy?” The interviews were audio-recorded with the permission of the participants and
             transcribed word for word by the interviewer. The transcripts were analysed using inductive
             content analysis (thematic analysis) in order to bring out emerging themes. Direct quotations
     20      from the fathers were chosen to support each theme. To ensure credibility, consensus on the
             interpretation of the themes was reached with two other researchers.

             The main finding of the study was that all the expectant fathers said they experienced “a time of
             transition” in adjusting to their new role as father. Their experiences were somewhat different
             but some changes reported by the expectant fathers during the pregnancy were “feelings
     25      of unreality”, “feelings of insufficiency and inadequacy” and “feelings of responsibility”. The
             researcher concluded that this study could give a preliminary insight into the experiences of
             Swedish first-time fathers. She also concluded that emotional support and encouragement for
             men during their partners’ pregnancies should be considered as part of prenatal programmes
             but that more research is needed in order to develop specific programmes.

                                 [Source: © International Baccalaureate Organization 2015]

Answer all of the following three questions, referring to the stimulus material in your answers. Marks will
be awarded for demonstration of knowledge and understanding of qualitative research methodology.

1.        Explain two or more considerations involved before conducting the interviews in this study.       [10]



2.        To what extent can findings from this qualitative study be generalized?                           [10]



3.        Evaluate the use of narrative interviews in this study.                                           [10]
