N13/1/TEXTP/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX




     88130302

LITERATURE AND PERFORMANCE
STANDARD LEVEL
PAPER 2 – POETRY

Monday 4 November 2013 (morning)

1 hour 30 minutes


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

 Do not turn over this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Answer one question.
 The maximum mark for this paper is [25 marks].




8813-0302                                                                                           2 pages
                                                            © International Baccalaureate Organization 2013
                                                   –2–                   N13/1/TEXTP/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Answer one question. Refer closely to the works of at least two poets you have studied.

1.    Poetry is often the vehicle for expressing emotion. In the work of at least two poets you have studied,
      explore the ways in which you have seen poets writing about feelings in an artistic and effective way.


2.    Contrasts can be used effectively by poets to sharpen their ideas and intensify the impact of a poem.
      Referring to the work of at least two poets you have studied, examine the way contrast has been used
      in poems.


3.    Sometimes poetry includes elements, such as dreams, that are more imaginary or fantastic than real.
      In the work of at least two poets you have studied, examine how they have deepened or broadened
      their poems with elements of fantasy.


4.    Coming to the final lines of a poem, the reader can experience many different reactions, such as
      inspiration, questions or a new insight. Using at least two poets you have studied, show how they
      have used language and structure to achieve particular effects in their conclusions.


5.    Poetry has been described as “the art of uniting pleasure and truth.”  In what specific ways have at
      least two poets in your study managed to deliver some truths so that they are pleasurable for readers?


6.    Irony can be used effectively by poets to give their poems more than one level of meaning. In at least
      two poets you have studied, examine how and to what effect they have used various kinds of irony to
      enrich their poems.




8813-0302
