N18/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                           Markscheme


                         November 2018


                 Information technology
                    in a global society


                               Higher level


                                 Paper 3




11 pages
                         –2–             N18/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is the property of the International
Baccalaureate and must not be reproduced or
distributed to any other person without the
authorization of the IB Global Centre, Cardiff.
                                                  –3–                 N18/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Examiners should be aware that in some cases, candidates may take a different approach, which if
appropriate should be rewarded. If in doubt, check with your Team Leader.

If candidates answer more than the prescribed number of questions:

 In the case of an “identify” question read all answers and mark positively up to the maximum marks.
  Disregard incorrect answers.

 In the case of a “describe” question, which asks for a certain number of facts eg “describe two kinds”,
  mark the first two correct answers. This could include two descriptions, one description and
  one identification, or two identifications.

 In the case of an “explain” question, which asks for a specified number of explanations eg “explain
  two reasons”, mark the first two correct answers. This could include two full explanations,
  one explanation, one partial explanation etc.
                                                  –4–                  N18/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.   (a)   Identify two pieces of information that Alicia could send to the cloud.                   [2]

           Answers may include:
            child’s user ID
            audio recording of speech
            when the child has played with Alicia, for example the time of day / date
            context / topic of current conversation, for example, name, age, relationship
            picture of child for mood/emotion/expression analysis
            video of child asking a question of doing something
            location of the child, such as a town or a city.

           Others may be added at the discretion of Team Leaders.

           Award [1] for identifying each piece of information that Alicia would send to the
           cloud up to a maximum of [2].

     (b)   Identify two ways parents would be able to access data about their child’s interactions
           with Alicia.                                                                              [2]

           Answers may include:
            log into website to access cloud account data
            using a mobile app which connects to Alicia and displays information
            connecting to Alicia from a computer (via the Wi-Fi local network or Bluetooth)
            Asking Alicia questions (eg when alone with the doll) possibly using password
            by activating a “parent mode” on Alicia using an RFID chip or some other
             piece of hardware
            by requesting a monthly summary of interactions via email or post which
             would be created by MAGS
            accessing Alicia's history to find information about the child’s interactions.

           Award [1] for identifying each way parents would be able to access data about
           the child’s interactions with Alicia up to a maximum of [2].
                                                 –5–                 N18/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   (a)   Explain one method that could be used to ensure the data stored on Alicia cannot be
           accessed by unauthorized persons.                                                     [2]

           Answers may include:
            encryption can be applied to the data stored on Alicia and explaining how the
             encryption process is performed. For example. the use of keys
            data is stored only temporarily on Alicia until it is sent to the cloud,
             then deleted from the doll where it is more vulnerable
            biometric data (such as fingerprint) could be used to allow/disallow access to
             the data stored on Alicia
            proprietary protocols could be used:
             – use a different file system which is incompatible with standard devices and
                 will not be viewable easily
            allow Alicia data to be wiped remotely, for example if lost/stolen and no valid
             connection is made to a network to “refresh” or authenticate the owner within a
             period of time.

           Award [1] for a method that could be used to ensure the data stored on Alicia
           cannot be accessed by unauthorised persons and [1] for a development of that
           method up to a maximum of [2].
                                              –6–                  N18/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



(b)   Mark Danbung has advised the team that Alicia may pause for a few seconds before
      giving an appropriate response to a child’s question. Explain why this might occur.             [4]

      Answers may include:
       the child’s questions are digitized into an audio format such as wav, mp3,
        aif etc
       the local Alicia software tries to interpret the speech and does not find a match
       the audio data is sent (along with other contextual data and user ID) using the
        Wi-Fi router of the home and eventually reaches the MAGS server
       the server locates the child’s profile in a database and also searches for the
        audio match in a huge database of the appropriate language etc
       a server side process generates an appropriate (probably audio) response
        and sends it back to the doll to play
       another server side process updates the child’s profile with any new
        information from the request which will be used to update the local software in
        Alicia
       the doll receives the response from the server and plays it to the child using
        an in-built speaker if it is an audio response, or using other hardware if it is a
        gesture, facial expression or body movement etc.

      Some candidates may take an alternative approach:
       no suitable response is found on Alicia and so it searches for a match on
        MAGS servers
       the question may be long and complex and therefore takes longer to process
        and provide a suitable response
       the question may be in a different language which needs translating before it
        can be matched.
       the child has only started to use the doll and therefore the profile is not as well
        established and is connecting to the cloud.


 Level                                                                                        Marks
 0        No knowledge or understanding of ITGS issues and concepts. No use of                0
          appropriate ITGS terminology.
 1        Response with some steps and maybe out of sequence.                                 1–2
 2        Clear and correct sequence, covering input, processing, output/feedback and         3–4
          using ITGS terminology.
                                                   –7–                   N18/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   Concerns have been expressed about who should be accountable if any harm comes
     to the child, or if any property is damaged or if any law is broken while the child plays
     with Alicia.

     Discuss whether MAGS, the parent or another person or organization should be
     accountable.                                                                                    [8]

     Answers may include:

     Introductory comments (showing balance)
      it is important to establish levels of responsibility however in real life it may not be so
        easy to distinguish and should be dealt with on a case-by-case basis
      there are international and national organizations which provide standards that Alicia
        has already passed (if sold legally)
      the child might self-harm perhaps even without warning, so there may be situations
        like this in which there really is nobody to blame. Likewise, it could also be a
        complete accident or an unforeseeable situation.

     Arguments for MAGS being responsible
      MAGS has the responsibility to make sure that any toy they provide for a young
       child to play with is not harmful
      if Alicia fails to respond to a very basic (ie child safety) request from the child,
       eg the child cries for help then perhaps that is due to the product not being
       adequately tested and prepared to be used in this situation. In such a case MAGS
       may be responsible for their lack of effectiveness in the programming or design of
       Alicia
      MAGS should have carried out an adequate testing phase on Alicia involving many
       interactions with children and adults. If they did not, perhaps in a rush to market and
       sell the product, then the unreliability that led to the accident would be their fault
      MAGS is responsible for privacy and security of the conversations, so would be
       responsible if the cloud was hacked and wrong information was sent to the doll and
       on to the child
      MAGS should be responsible for informing parents about the way the doll functions
       (as a friend for the child rather than a babysitter) and alerting parents to the
       supervisory role they must play.

     Arguments for THE PARENT being responsible
      it was the decision of the parents (whether well informed or not) to buy the doll for
       their child, knowing that it would have an unpredictable impact, which they may not
       have monitored closely enough
      the parents presumably left the child and Alicia alone during the incident
      there should be a user agreement which the parents have signed or acknowledged
       which would state that the parents have at least some responsibility for their child’s
       safety while playing with Alicia.
                                             –8–                  N18/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Arguments for OTHERS being responsible
 the crime or damage may have been initiated by a 3rd person accompanying the
  child while playing with Alicia and therefore has nothing to do with the actions of the
  child or the doll – therefore it should be that person who is held responsible
  (eg babysitter)
 there are many international standards set by governments in which the toys are
  sold. These may not be up-to-date and wide enough to cover the effects for an
  AI toy which can influence a child’s behaviour. In this case, perhaps some blame
  lies on the government or standards organization of enabling a potentially harmful
  toy to be sold in their jurisdiction
 if Alicia detects danger to the child but is not able to contact authorities/parents/etc
  due to a failure in network (Bluetooth, Wi-Fi or 3G) connectivity then should the
  responsibility of the incident rest with MAGS? Perhaps the communications provider
  is more liable because it did not provide the means to carry out the necessary
  notifications
 MAGS could allow parents to opt out of the cloud access and just use the limited
  functionality of the doll (lessening risks)
  – parents are still ultimately responsible for their children, especially as most
      children playing with dolls would be very young
  – parents should be aware of their child’s play (similar to Internet use) and watch
      over their play with the doll.

Potential ideas for a conclusion
 Alicia may well be able to record the whole situation (audio and/or video) and this
  may be able to provide evidence to decide extent of liability
 Alicia’s log of past behaviour and interactions with the child will be stored on a
  server and this can also be used (with permission) to establish whether the incident
  was foreseeable or not
 there are some very potentially positive possibilities for Alicia to be able to inform
  authorities / call for help in dangerous situations, but these might depend on the
  doll’s communication capabilities and available networks etc. Likewise, the correct
  usage of Alicia depends on some level of monitoring / supervision by adults as well
  as by the MAGS algorithms.
                                        –9–                 N18/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


SL and HL paper 1 part (c) and HL paper 3 question 3 markband

     Marks                                 Level descriptor

   No marks      No knowledge or understanding of the relevant ITGS issues and
                  concepts.
                 No ITGS terminology.

     Basic       Shows only a little ITGS knowledge.
   1–2 marks     Makes at least one argument.
                 May not have any comparison/conclusion.

   Adequate      Shows a little more ITGS knowledge but still weak.
   3–4 marks     Has more arguments, (at least two) and possibly from different
                  stakeholders.
                 Has a conclusion or judgments which are probably not backed by
                  much reasoning.

   Competent     Shows good ITGS knowledge and detail.
   5–6 marks     Has more arguments and they are balanced (+ and –) and for
                  different stakeholders.
                 Conclusion/judgments are supported by the arguments and is well
                  thought out.

   Proficient    Shows very good ITGS knowledge.
   7–8 marks     Arguments are very balanced and detailed.
                 Conclusion is based completely on the arguments.
                                                   – 10 –                N18/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   Artificial intelligence (AI) toys such as Alicia are becoming more sophisticated and
     human-like. With reference to your independent research, to what extent is it
     acceptable for AI toys to replace the friendships of other children?                           [12]

     Answers may include:

     Pros
      might be useful in situations where the child has no access to other children to form
       friendships with (eg lives in a remote area)
      could be used in circumstances in which a child is psychologically or physically unfit
       to mix with other children and the doll could provide surrogate friendship
      children do not always have healthy relationships and the doll could be programmed
       to give each individual child the support and learning that he or she specifically
       needs, rather than leaving that to chance with human friendships
      children of certain ages (toddlers) usually develop imaginary friends anyway who
       talk to them and give them “advice”, and take the blame for their actions. An AI toy
       may be able to provide that function, but in a more discerning way – eg it could be
       like an imaginary friend who provides good advice and informs parents of potential
       bad behavior.

     Cons
      it would not be good for the child if it stopped the child from making other human
       friends because human interaction is required to develop social competence in
       children [possibility to refer to research here – many studies available]
      if a child relates to an AI personality he/she could be learning relationship skills
       which are not quite human and make the child less able to relate to real human
       children in the future
      an AI doll might not be as creative in playing with a child as another child would be.
       It might not be able to encourage the child to be imaginative because imagination is
       something which comes naturally to humans but can be very difficult for machines
      too much interaction with a toy such as Alicia may develop an unrealistic view of the
       world for the child (eg that all people will always be patiently waiting to carry out the
       child’s instructions or help)
      if the AI toy is programmed to inform the parents on a regular basis of the
       conversation then this could be lead to insecurity in the child. Parents might not use
       this information sensitively and could confront the child with evidence of their actions
       in the form of recorded conversations with the doll. This could lead the child to
       believe he/she had been betrayed.

     Possible conclusion ideas:

     Alicia might be better used to augment and support a child’s friendships with other
     children.
     The doll could take on the role of a friend and counsellor.

     Whether we like it or not, AI will be forming a larger and larger part of the child’s future
     life. Therefore, it might be better to allow the child to have exposure to an AI toy at an
     early age and also develop in him/her an awareness that this is not human but has
     some human characteristics and abilities.
                                      – 11 –               N18/3/ITGSX/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


HL paper 3 question 4 markband

      Marks                                     Level descriptor
                     A response with no knowledge or understanding of the relevant
     No marks         ITGS issues and concepts.
                     A response that includes no appropriate ITGS terminology.
                     A response with minimal knowledge and understanding of the
                      relevant ITGS issues and concepts.
                     A response that includes minimal use of appropriate
                      ITGS terminology.
       Basic
                     A response that has no evidence of judgments, conclusions or
    1–3 marks         future strategies.
                     No reference is made to the information in the case study or
                      independent research in the response.
                     The response may be no more than a list.
                     A descriptive response with limited knowledge and/or understanding
                      of the relevant ITGS issues and/or concepts.
                     A response that includes limited use of appropriate
                      ITGS terminology.
     Adequate
                     A response that has evidence of conclusions, judgments or future
    4–6 marks
                      strategies that are no more than unsubstantiated statements.
                      The analysis underpinning them may also be partial or unbalanced.
                     Implicit references are made to the information in the case study or
                      independent research in the response.
                     A response with knowledge and understanding of the relevant ITGS
                      issues and/or concepts.
                     A response that uses ITGS terminology appropriately in places.
    Competent
                     A response that includes conclusions and/or judgments that have
    7–9 marks
                      limited support and are underpinned by a balanced analysis.
                     Explicit references to the information in the case study or
                      independent research are made at places in the response.
                     A response with a detailed knowledge and understanding of the
                      relevant ITGS issues and/or concepts.
                     A response that uses ITGS terminology appropriately throughout.
     Proficient
                     A response that includes conclusions, judgments or future
   10–12 marks        strategies that are well supported and underpinned by a balanced
                      analysis.
                     Explicit references are made appropriately to the information in the
                      case study and independent research throughout the response.
