N18/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                         November 2018


                               Philosophy


                               Higher level


                                 Paper 3




6 pages
                          –2–             N18/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is the property of the International
Baccalaureate and must not be reproduced or distributed
to any other person without the authorization of the
IB Global Centre, Cardiff.
                                                   –3–                 N18/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


How to use the Diploma Programme Philosophy markscheme

The assessment markbands constitute the formal tool for marking examination scripts, and in these
assessment markbands examiners can see the skills being assessed in the examinations. The
markschemes are designed to assist examiners in possible routes taken by candidates in terms of the
content of their answers when demonstrating their skills of doing philosophy through their responses.
The points listed are not compulsory points, and not necessarily the best possible points. They are a
framework to help examiners contextualize the requirements of the question, and to facilitate the
application of marks according to the assessment markbands listed on pages 6 and 7.

It is important that examiners understand that the main idea of the course is to promote doing
philosophy, and this involves activity and engagement throughout a two-year programme, as opposed to
emphasizing the chance to display knowledge in a terminal set of examination papers. Even in the
examinations, responses should not be assessed on how much candidates know as much as how they
are able to use their knowledge in support of an argument, using the skills referred to in the various
assessment markbands published in the subject guide, reflecting an engagement with philosophical
activity throughout the course. As a tool intended to help examiners in assessing responses, the
following points should be kept in mind when using a markscheme:

• The Diploma Programme Philosophy course is designed to encourage the skills of doing philosophy
  in the candidates. These skills can be accessed through reading the assessment markbands in the
  subject guide
• The markscheme does not intend to outline a model/correct answer
• The markscheme has an introductory paragraph which contextualizes the emphasis of the question
  being asked
• The bullet points below the paragraph are suggested possible points of development that should not
  be considered a prescriptive list but rather an indicative list where they might appear in the answer
• If there are names of philosophers and references to their work incorporated into the markscheme,
  this should help to give context for the examiners and does not reflect a requirement that such
  philosophers and references should appear in an answer: They are possible lines of development.
• Candidates can legitimately select from a wide range of ideas, arguments and concepts in service of
  the question they are answering, and it is possible that candidates will use material effectively that is
  not mentioned in the markscheme
• Examiners should be aware of the command terms for Philosophy as published on page 54 of the
  Philosophy subject guide when assessing responses
• In markschemes for Paper 3, there are suggested pertinent points found in the text extract relating to
  philosophical activity. The markschemes include suggested questions that might stimulate analysis of
  those points. It is not intended that all possible points raised by the text are to be covered by the
  candidates. The markbands direct examiners to rewarding the responses accordingly
• The markscheme bullet points cannot and are not intended to predict how a candidate will relate his
  or her personal experience of the DP HL Philosophy course to the text extract, so the examiner must
  be aware that much of the response of the candidate will not be covered by material in the
  markscheme, but the candidate’s response must relate to the text extract.
                                                  –4–                  N18/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 3 markbands

 Marks                                          Level descriptor


   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.


          The response is poorly structured, or where there is a recognizable structure there is
           minimal focus on the task. Philosophical vocabulary is not used, or is consistently used
           inappropriately.
          There is a very basic understanding of the view of philosophical activity raised by the
  1–5
           unseen text. Few, if any, references are made to the text.
          There is limited reference to the student’s personal experience of philosophical activity but
           no comparison or contrast of this experience with the view(s) raised by the text.
          The essay is descriptive and lacking in analysis. Few of the main points are justified.

          There is some attempt to follow a structured approach although it is not always clear what
           the answer is trying to convey.
          There is a limited understanding of the view(s) of philosophical activity raised by the text.
           Few, if any, references are made to the text.
          There is some evidence that the student has drawn on their personal experience of
 6–10      philosophical activity.
          The response identifies similarities and differences between the student’s personal
           experience of philosophical activity and the view(s) of philosophical activity presented in the
           text, although the analysis of these similarities and differences is superficial.
          The response contains some analysis but is more descriptive than analytical. Some of the
           main points are justified.

        There is a clear attempt to structure the response, although there may be some repetition
         or a lack of clarity in places. Philosophical vocabulary is used, sometimes appropriately.
        There is a satisfactory understanding of the view(s) of philosophical activity raised by the
         text. Some references are made to the text.
        There is some evidence that the student has drawn on their personal experience of
 11–15   philosophical activity, with examples or illustrations used to support their points.
        There is some analysis of the similarities and differences between the student’s personal
         experience of philosophical activity and the view(s) of philosophical activity presented in the
         text, although this analysis needs further development.
        The response contains critical analysis rather than just description. Many of the main
         points are justified.

        The response is well organized and can be easily followed. Philosophical vocabulary is
         used, mostly appropriately.
        There is clear identification of the view(s) of philosophical activity presented in the unseen
         text. Some references are made to the text.
        The student draws on their personal experience of philosophical activity, using examples or
 16–20   illustrations to support their points.
        There is clear analysis of both similarities and differences between the student’s personal
         experience of philosophical activity and the view(s) of philosophical activity presented in the
         text, although this analysis needs further development.
        The response contains critical analysis rather than just description. Most of the main points
         are justified. The response argues to a reasoned conclusion.

 21–25  The response is well structured, focused and effectively organized. There is appropriate
         use of philosophical vocabulary throughout the response.
                                         –5–                  N18/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



 There is clear identification of the view(s) of philosophical activity presented in the unseen
  text. Effective references are made to the text.
 The student draws explicitly on their personal experience of philosophical activity, using
  well-chosen examples or illustrations to support their points.
 There is clear analysis of both similarities and differences between the student’s personal
  experience of philosophical activity and the view(s) of philosophical activity presented.
 The response contains well developed critical analysis. All or nearly all of the main points
  are justified. The response argues to a reasoned conclusion.
                                                   –6–                 N18/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Unseen text – exploring philosophical activity

When responding to this extract candidates should focus on the activity of philosophy. In the course of
analysing and evaluating the ideas in the extract candidates should reflect on their own experience of
doing philosophy, and should therefore make explicit comparisons/contrasts between their experience of
studying the HL Philosophy course and what the extract is saying about doing philosophy. Candidates
should make explicit reference to the ideas and arguments in the text in their response.

What philosophy is has always been a much debated question. Expect some responses to argue that
philosophy attempts to answer life’s deepest and profound questions. There is an implicit invitation in
the text for responses to approach philosophy as one of the most important of human endeavours. The
text invites a consideration that doing philosophy concerns everyone and so doing philosophy must be a
matter of making it comprehensible. In today’s culture it might appear that philosophy is what
philosophers do at an academic level by engaging in a field of scholarly study that has the character of a
science, which we can study just like the science of biology. In this view, philosophy is one type of
science among many, with its own unique scope of problems, and its own set of logical methods that
generate new philosophical knowledge. But is this an accurate portrayal of philosophy as it has been
practiced for thousands of years? Perhaps not as argued in the unseen text. We all philosophize. We
always have and, hopefully always will, engage in philosophy. As children we philosophized when we
asked those questions adults hesitate to answer and so expect the responses to pick up on this and
focus on the candidate’s own introduction to studying philosophy as being the beginning for them of
doing philosophy even though the inevitable process of ossification that we call “becoming mature” may
have led them away from considering the bigger questions of our existence in the intervening period.
Candidates should make explicit reference to the ideas and arguments in the text in their response.
                                                                                                       [25]

Candidates might consider the following:
 Philosophy is about questioning our system of beliefs
 Philosophy is one of the most intensely personal and concrete activities they can engage in
 The genesis of philosophical questioning begins with our world of experience (empiricism)
 Philosophy produces within us the wonder and awe (that Plato suggested is the beginning and
  creative source from which all philosophy flows)
 The fact we doubt or have a healthy skepticism may well be the springboard of actively doing
  philosophy
 The personal experience of candidates through studying aspects of the course and topics identified in
  the unseen text like morality, existence of God, free will, identity, logic, etc
 The concept of philosophy as the love of wisdom. Philosophy strives to cultivate wisdom, as it offers
  us the possibility of learning something about what it means to be wise. It is wisdom that is required if
  we are ever to live as truly free individuals in a truly free society
 Language as a tool for doing philosophy
 Reality as a stimulus for doing philosophy
 Examples of the candidate’s awareness/experience of doing philosophy through considering the Core
  Theme, working on the optional themes and through reading texts
 Reference to the candidate’s own experience of doing philosophy through asking questions and
  challenging their own beliefs throughout the course, eg “When I started the course I was surprised by
  how the activity of philosophy seemed more about framing questions than coming up with specific
  answers”.
