Chemistry guide
First assessment 2025Chemistry guide
First assessment 2025
Published February 2023
Published on behalf of the International Baccalaureate Organization, a not-for-profit 
educational foundation of 15 Route des Morillons, 1218 Le Grand-Saconnex, Geneva, 
Switzerland by the
International Baccalaureate Organization (UK) Ltd  
Peterson House, Malthouse Avenue, Cardiff Gate  
Cardiff, Wales CF23 8GL  
United Kingdom  
Website: ibo.org
© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
The International Baccalaureate Organization (known as the IB) offers four high-quality 
and challenging educational programmes for a worldwide community of schools, aiming 
to create a better, more peaceful world. This publication is one of a range of materials 
produced to support these programmes.
The IB may use a variety of sources in its work and check information to verify accuracy 
and authenticity, particularly when using community-based knowledge sources such as 
Wikipedia. The IB respects the principles of intellectual property and makes strenuous 
efforts to identify and obtain permission before publication from rights holders of all 
copyright material used. The IB is grateful for permissions received for material used 
in this publication and will be pleased to correct any errors or omissions at the earliest 
opportunity.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the IB’s prior written 
permission, or as expressly permitted by the Rules for use of IB Intellectual Property .
IB merchandise and publications can be purchased through the IB Store                                    
(email: sales@ibo.org ). Any commercial use of IB publications (whether fee-covered or 
commercial) by third parties acting in the IB’s ecosystem without a formal relationship 
with the IB (including but not limited to tutoring organizations, professional development 
providers, educational publishers and operators of curriculum mapping or teacher 
resource digital platforms, etc.) is prohibited and requires a subsequent written licence 
from the IB. Licence requests should be sent to copyright@ibo.org . More information can 
be obtained on the IB public website .
Diploma Programme
Chemistry guide
International Baccalaureate , Baccalauréat International , Bachillerato Internacional   
and IB logos are registered trademarks of the International Baccalaureate Organization.IB mission statement
The International Baccalaureate aims to develop inquiring, knowledgeable and caring young people who 
help to create a better and more peaceful world through intercultural understanding and respect.
To this end the organization works with schools, governments and international organizations to develop 
challenging programmes of international education and rigorous assessment.
These programmes encourage students across the world to become active, compassionate and lifelong 
learners who understand that other people, with their differences, can also be right.IB learner profile I
profile IB learner parner profile IB leaile IB learner profiIB learner profile Ier profile IB learne
© International Bac calaur eate Or ganiza tion 2017
International Bac calaur eate® | Bac calaur éat International® | Bachiller ato Internacional®
The IB learner pro/f_ile represents 10 attributes valued by IB World Schools. We believe these attributes, and others 
like them, can help individuals and groups become responsible members of local, national and global communities.We nurture our curiosity, developing skills for inquiry and 
research. We know how to learn independently and with others. 
We learn with enthusiasm and sustain our love of learning 
throughout life.
We develop and use conceptual understanding, exploring 
knowledge across a range of disciplines. We engage with issues 
and ideas that have local and global signi/f_icance. 
We use critical and creative thinking skills to analyse and take 
responsible action on complex problems. We exercise initiative in 
making reasoned, ethical decisions.
We express ourselves con/f_idently and creatively in more than one 
language and in many ways.  We collaborate eﬀectively, listening 
carefully to the perspectives of other individuals and groups.
We act with integrity and honesty, with a strong sense of 
fairness and justice, and with respect for the dignity and rights 
of people everywhere. We take responsibility for our actions 
and their consequences.We critically appreciate our own cultures and personal histories, 
as well as the values and traditions of others. We seek and evaluate 
a range of points of view, and we are willing to grow from the 
experience.
We show empathy, compassion and respect. We have a 
commitment to service, and we act to make a positive diﬀerence 
in the lives of others and in the world around us.
We understand the importance of balancing diﬀerent aspects of 
our lives /emdash.capintellectual, physical, and emotional/emdash.cap to achieve 
well-being for ourselves and others. We recognize our interde-
pendence with other people and with the world in which we live.
We thoughtfully consider the world and our own ideas and expe-
rience. We work to understand our strengths and weaknesses in order to support our learning and personal development.We approach uncertainty with forethought and determination; we work independently and cooperatively to explore new ideas and innovative strategies. We are resourceful and resilient in the face of challenges and change.IB learner profile
The aim of all IB programmes is to develop internationally minded people who, recognizing their common 
humanity and shared guardianship of the planet, help to create a better and more peaceful world.
As IB learners we strive to be:THE IB LEARNER PROFILEIntroduction 1
Purpose of this document 1
The Diploma Programme 2
Nature of science 6
Nature of chemistry 9
Approaches to the teaching and learning of chemistry 15
Collaborative sciences project 20
Aims 21
Assessment objectives 22
Assessment objectives in practice 23
Syllabus 24
Syllabus outline 24
Syllabus roadmap 25
Syllabus format 26
Skills in the study of chemistry 27
Syllabus content 33
Assessment 65
Assessment in the Diploma Programme 65
Assessment outline—SL 67
Assessment outline—HL 68
External assessment 69
Internal assessment 71
Appendices 81
Glossary of command terms 81
Bibliography 83
Contents
Chemistry guide
This  publication  is intended  to guide  the planning,  teaching  and  assessment  of chemistry  in schools. 
Subject teachers are the primary audience, although it is expected that teachers will use the guide to inform 
students and parents about the subject.
This  guide  can be found  on the subject  page  of the Programme  Resource  Centre  at resources.ibo.org , a 
password-protected International Baccalaureate (IB) website designed to support IB teachers. It can also be 
purchased from the IB store at store.ibo.org .
Additional resources
Additional  publications  such  as specimen  papers  and  markschemes,  teacher  support  material  (TSM), 
subject  reports  and  grade  descriptors  can also  be found  on the Programme  Resource  Centre.  Past 
examination papers as well as markschemes can be purchased from the IB store.
Teachers are encouraged to check the Programme Resource Centre for additional resources created or used 
by other  teachers.  Teachers  can provide  details  of useful  resources,  for example:  websites,  books,  videos, 
journals or teaching ideas.
Acknowledgement
The IB wishes  to thank  the educators  and  associated  schools  for generously  contributing  time  and 
resources to the production of this guide.
First assessment 2025
Introduction
Purpose of this document
1 Chemistry guide
The Diploma  Programme  (DP)  is a rigorous  pre-university  course  of study  designed  for students  in the 
16 to 19 age range.  It is a broad-based  two-year  course  that  aims  to encourage  students  to be 
knowledgeable  and  inquiring,  but also  caring  and  compassionate.  There  is a strong  emphasis  on 
encouraging  students  to develop  intercultural  understanding,  open-mindedness,  and  the attitudes 
necessary for them to respect and evaluate a range of points of view.
The Diploma Programme model
The course  is presented  as six academic  areas  enclosing  a central  core  (see  figure  1). It encourages  the 
concurrent  study  of a broad  range  of academic  areas.  Students  study  two  modern  languages  (or a modern 
language  and  a classical  language),  a humanities  or social  science  subject,  an experimental  science, 
mathematics  and  one  of the creative  arts.  It is this comprehensive  range  of subjects  that  makes  the DP a 
demanding  course  of study  designed  to prepare  students  effectively  for university  entrance.  In each  of the 
academic  areas  students  have  flexibility  in making  their  choices,  which  means  they  can choose  subjects 
that particularly interest them and that they may wish to study further at university.
Figure 1
Diploma Programme model
Introduction
The Diploma Programme
2 Chemistry guide
Choosing the right combination
Students are required to choose one subject from each of the six academic areas, although they can, 
instead  of an arts  subject,  choose  two  subjects  from  another  area.  Normally,  three  subjects  (and  not 
more  than  four)  are taken  at higher  level  (HL),  and  the others  are taken  at standard  level  (SL).  The IB 
recommends 240 teaching hours for HL subjects and 150 hours for SL. Subjects at HL are studied in greater 
depth and breadth than at SL.
At both levels, many skills are developed, especially those of critical thinking and analysis. At the end of the 
course,  students’  abilities  are measured  by means  of external  assessment.  Many  subjects  contain  some 
element of coursework assessed by teachers.
The core of the Diploma Programme model
All DP students participate in the three course elements that make up the core of the model.
Theory  of knowledge  (TOK)  is a course  that  is fundamentally  about  critical  thinking  and  inquiry  into  the 
process of knowing rather than about learning a specific body of knowledge. The TOK course examines the 
nature  of knowledge  and  how  we know  what  we claim  to know.  It does  this by encouraging  students  to 
analyse  knowledge  claims  and  explore  questions  about  the construction  of knowledge.  The task  of TOK  is 
to emphasize  connections  between  areas  of shared  knowledge  and  link them  to personal  knowledge  in 
such  a way  that  an individual  becomes  more  aware  of their  own  perspectives  and  how  they  might  differ 
from others.
In TOK, students explore the means of producing knowledge within the core theme of “knowledge and the 
knower”  as well  as within  various  optional  themes  (knowledge  and  technology,  knowledge  and  politics, 
knowledge  and  language,  knowledge  and  religion,  and  knowledge  and  indigenous  societies)  and  areas  of 
knowledge  (the  arts,  natural  sciences,  human  sciences,  history  and  mathematics).  The course  also 
encourages  students  to make  comparisons  between  different  areas  of knowledge  and  reflect  on how 
knowledge is arrived at in the various disciplines, what the disciplines have in common, and the differences 
between them.
Creativity,  activity,  service  (CAS)  is at the heart  of the DP. The emphasis  in CAS  is on helping  students  to 
develop  their  own  identities,  in accordance  with  the ethical  principles  embodied  in the IB mission 
statement  and  the IB learner  profile.  It involves  students  in a range  of activities  alongside  their  academic 
studies  throughout  the DP. The three  strands  of CAS  are creativity  (arts  and  other  experiences  that  involve 
creative  thinking),  activity  (physical  exertion  contributing  to a healthy  lifestyle)  and  service  (an unpaid  and 
voluntary  exchange  that  has a learning  benefit  for the student).  Possibly,  more  than  any other  component 
in the DP, CAS  contributes  to the IB’s mission  to create  a better  and  more  peaceful  world  through 
intercultural understanding and respect.
The extended  essay  (EE),  including  the world  studies  extended  essay,  offers  the opportunity  for IB students 
to investigate  a topic  of special  interest,  in the form  of a 4,000-word  piece  of independent  research.  The 
area  of research  undertaken  is chosen  from  one  of the students’  six DP subjects,  or in the case  of the 
interdisciplinary  world  studies  essay,  two  subjects,  and  acquaints  them  with  the independent  research  and 
writing skills expected at university. This leads to a major piece of formally presented, structured writing, in 
which ideas and findings are communicated in a reasoned and coherent manner, appropriate to the subject 
or subjects  chosen.  It is intended  to promote  high-level  research  and  writing  skills,  intellectual  discovery 
and  creativity.  An authentic  learning  experience,  it provides  students  with  an opportunity  to engage  in 
personal research on a topic of choice, under the guidance of a supervisor.
Approaches to teaching and approaches to 
learning
Approaches to teaching and approaches to learning (ATL) across the DP refers to deliberate strategies, skills 
and  attitudes  that  permeate  the teaching  and  learning  environment.  These  approaches  and  tools, 
intrinsically  linked  with  the learner  profile  attributes,  enhance  student  learning  and  assist  student The Diploma Programme
3 Chemistry guide
preparation for the DP assessment and beyond. The aims of approaches to teaching and learning in the DP 
are to:
• empower teachers as teachers of learners as well as teachers of content
• empower teachers to create clearer strategies for facilitating learning experiences in which students 
are more meaningfully engaged in structured inquiry and greater critical and creative thinking
• promote both the aims of individual subjects (making them more than course aspirations) and linking 
previously isolated knowledge (concurrency of learning)
• encourage students to develop an explicit variety of skills that will equip them to continue to be 
actively engaged in learning after they leave school, and to help them not only obtain university 
admission through better grades but also prepare for success during tertiary education and beyond
• enhance further the coherence and relevance of the students’ DP experience
• allow schools to identify the distinctive nature of an IB DP education, with its blend of idealism and 
practicality.
The five ATL (developing  thinking  skills,  social  skills,  communication  skills,  self-management  skills  and 
research  skills)  along  with  the six approaches  to teaching  (teaching  that  is inquiry-based,  conceptually 
focused,  contextualized,  collaborative,  differentiated  and  informed  by assessment)  encompass  the key 
values and principles that underpin IB pedagogy.
The IB mission statement and the IB learner profile
The DP aims  to develop  in students  the knowledge,  skills  and  attitudes  they  will need  to fulfil  the aims  of 
the IB, as expressed  in the organization’s  mission  statement  and  the learner  profile.  Teaching  and  learning 
in the DP represent the reality in daily practice of the organization’s educational philosophy.
Academic integrity
Academic  integrity  in the DP is a set of values  and  behaviours  informed  by the attributes  of the learner 
profile.  In teaching,  learning  and  assessment,  academic  integrity  serves  to promote  personal  integrity, 
engender  respect  for the integrity  of others  and  their  work,  and  ensure  that  all students  have  an equal 
opportunity to demonstrate the knowledge and skills they acquire during their studies.
All coursework—including  work  submitted  for assessment—is  to be authentic,  based  on the student’s 
individual  and  original  ideas  with  the ideas  and  work  of others  fully  acknowledged.  Assessment  tasks  that 
require  teachers  to provide  guidance  to students  or that  require  students  to work  collaboratively  must  be 
completed in full compliance with the detailed guidelines provided by the IB for the relevant subjects.
For further  information  on academic  integrity  in the IB and  the DP, please  consult  the IB publications 
Academic  integrity  policy , Effective  citing  and  referencing , Diploma  Programme:  From  principles  into  practice 
and  the general  regulations  in Diploma  Programme  Assessment  procedures  (updated  annually).  Specific 
information  regarding  academic  integrity  as it pertains  to external  and  internal  assessment  components  of 
this DP subject can be found in this guide.
Acknowledging the ideas or work of another 
person
Coordinators  and  teachers  are reminded  that  candidates  must  acknowledge  all sources  used  in work 
submitted for assessment. The following is intended as a clarification of this requirement.
DP candidates submit work for assessment in a variety of media that may include audiovisual material, text, 
graphs, images and/or data published in print or electronic sources. If a candidate uses the work or ideas of 
another  person,  the candidate  must  acknowledge  the source  using  a standard  style  of referencing  in a 
consistent  manner.  A candidate’s  failure  to acknowledge  a source  will be investigated  by the IB as a 
potential breach of regulations that may result in a penalty imposed by the IB final award committee.The Diploma Programme
4 Chemistry guide
The IB does not prescribe which style(s) of referencing or in-text citation should be used by candidates; this 
is left to the discretion  of appropriate  faculty/staff  in the candidate’s  school.  The wide  range  of subjects, 
response  languages  and  the diversity  of referencing  styles  make  it impractical  and  restrictive  to insist  on 
particular styles. In practice, certain styles may prove most commonly used, but schools are free to choose a 
style  that  is appropriate  for the subject  concerned  and  the language  in which  candidates’  work  is written. 
Regardless of the reference style adopted by the school for a given subject, it is expected that the minimum 
information  given  includes:  name  of author,  date  of publication,  title  of source,  and  page  numbers  as 
applicable.
Candidates  are expected  to use a standard  style  and  use it consistently  so that  credit  is given  to all sources 
used,  including  sources  that  have  been  paraphrased  or summarized.  When  writing  text  candidates  must 
clearly  distinguish  between  their  words  and  those  of others  by the use of quotation  marks  (or other 
method, such as indentation) followed by an appropriate citation that denotes an entry in the bibliography. 
If an electronic  source  is cited,  the date  of access  must  be indicated.  Candidates  are not expected  to show 
faultless  expertise  in referencing,  but are expected  to demonstrate  that  all sources  have  been 
acknowledged.  Candidates  must  be advised  that  audiovisual  material,  text,  graphs,  images  and/or  data 
published  in print  or in electronic  sources  that  is not their  own  must  also  attribute  the source.  Again,  an 
appropriate style of referencing/citation must be used.
Learning diversity and learning support 
requirements
Schools  must  ensure  that  equal  access  arrangements  and  reasonable  adjustments  are provided  to 
candidates  with  learning  support  requirements  that  are in line with  the IB documents  Access  and  inclusion 
policy  and Learning diversity and inclusion in IB programmes: Removing barriers to learning . 
The publications  Meeting  student  learning  diversity  in the classroom  and  The  IB guide  to inclusive  education:  a 
resource  for whole  school  development  are available  to support  schools  in the ongoing  process  of increasing 
access and engagement by removing barriers to learning.
Programme standards and practices
The programme  standards  and  practices  are a set of principles  for schools  to ensure  quality  and  fidelity  in 
the implementation  of IB programmes.  Teaching  and  learning  are important  markers  of quality  and 
effective practice in schools; thus the expectations teachers and learners share across all IB programmes can 
be found in the programme standards and practices.
The programme  standards  and  practices  provide  a framework  to help  teachers  understand  their  rights  and 
responsibilities  in IB World  Schools  as they  develop  learning  environments  and  experiences  for their 
students. The IB recognizes that in order for effective teaching to take place, teachers must be supported in 
their  understanding,  well-being,  environment  and  resources.  Teachers  use the core  tenets  of IB philosophy 
and  pedagogy  (approaches  to teaching,  ATL,  the learner  profile  and  international-mindedness)  to design 
learning experiences that prepare learners to fulfil the aims and objectives outlined in this guide.
To learn  more  about  teachers’  rights  and  responsibilities,  please  see the IB publication  Programme 
standards and practices  on the Programme Resource Centre.The Diploma Programme
5 Chemistry guide
What is nature of science?
Nature of science (NOS) is an overarching theme in the biology, chemistry and physics courses that seeks to 
explore conceptual understandings related to the purpose, features and impact of scientific knowledge.
What do we want to know in science?
Nobel  laureate  and  influential  popularizer  of science,  Richard  Feynman,  once  described  the process  of 
science  using  the analogy  of watching  an unknown  board  game  being  played  “... and  you don’t  know  the 
rules  of the game,  but you’re  allowed  to look  at the board  from  time  to time.  And  from  these  observations, 
you try to figure  out what  the rules  are of the game,  [and]  the rules  of the pieces  moving”  (Feynman  et al., 
1963).
What is the scientific endeavour?
Classifying  such  observations  and  underlying  patterns  in the natural  world  is the essence  of what  scientists 
do, underpinned  by the assumption  that  the universe  exists  as an external  reality  accessible  to the human 
experience.  The varied  and  often  non-linear  processes  used  in scientific  methodologies  have  several  key 
features  in common  to maximize  the validity  and  reliability  of knowledge  produced.  The development  of 
falsifiable  hypotheses,  a requirement  for replicable  data,  and  the utilization  of peer-review  may  be among 
the most  essential  of these  and  help  differentiate  a scientific  process  from  a pseudoscientific  one.  The 
communal  and  collaborative  nature  of this approach  further  strengthens  the objectivity  of science  by 
ensuring the inclusion of diverse perspectives and shared responsibility for its outcomes.
What type of knowledge do we produce?
Formal  scientific  knowledge  may  encompass  several  categories  including  representative  models, 
explanatory  theories  and  descriptive  laws.  As the focus  of each  discipline  of natural  science  differs,  so too 
does  the balance  of their  contributions  to each  category.  What  remains  constant,  however,  is the 
acknowledgement  of assumptions,  exceptions  and  limitations  of scientific  knowledge  to provide  realistic 
parameters  to our understanding  of the natural  world.  Claims  of certainty  are treated  with  caution  given 
the presence of paradigmatic shifts throughout the history of science.
What is the impact of scientific knowledge?
As well  as the pursuit  of knowledge  for its own  sake,  it is useful  to consider  the interplay  of science  with 
other  areas  of society.  Although  advances  in technology  traditionally  fuelled  great  leaps  in scientific 
understanding,  in recent  times  it may  be more  common  to see science  as a driver  of technological 
development.  In addition,  the implications  of science  within  environmental,  political,  social,  cultural  and 
economic domains can also be profound. These connections illustrate the importance of local, national and 
international  scientific  bodies  that  engage  with  the public  understanding  of science  and  heighten  the 
responsibility of scientists to adhere to principles of academic integrity in their research.
Introduction
Nature of science
6 Chemistry guide
Table 1
Aspects of nature of science
Aspects How are scientific knowledge claims generated, tested, communicated, 
evaluated and used? What issues arise from these actions?
Observations Scientists act as observers, looking at Earth and all other parts of the universe, to 
obtain data about natural phenomena. Observations can be made directly using 
human senses, or with the aid of instruments such as electronic sensors. 
Unexpected or unplanned observations can open up new research fields.
Patterns and trends Scientists analyse their observations, looking for patterns or trends, and try to draw 
general conclusions by inductive reasoning. They also look for discrepancies. 
Scientists classify objects through pattern recognition. A trend may take the form 
of a positive or negative correlation between variables. Correlations may be based 
on a causal relationship, but correlation does not prove causation.
Hypotheses Scientists make provisional explanations for the patterns that they have observed 
in natural phenomena. These hypotheses can be tested, with further observations 
or experiments, to obtain support for a hypothesis or show that it is false.
Experiments Scientists design and perform experiments to obtain data, which can be used to 
test hypotheses. The quality of experimental evidence depends on careful control 
of variables and on the quantity of data generated. Progress in science often 
follows technological developments that allow new experimental techniques. 
Creativity and imagination play a role in experimental design, interpretation and 
conclusion.
Measurement Quantitative measurements are more objective than qualitative observations, but 
all measurements are limited in precision and accuracy. Measurements are 
repeated to strengthen the reliability of data. Random errors in measurement due 
to unknown or unpredictable differences lead to imprecision and uncertainty, 
whereas systematic errors lead to inaccuracy.
Models Scientists construct models as artificial representations of natural phenomena. 
They are useful when direct observation or experimentation is difficult. Models are 
simplifications of complex systems and can be physical representations, abstract 
diagrams, mathematical equations or algorithms. All models have limitations that 
need to be considered in their application.
Evidence Scientists adopt a sceptical attitude to claims and evaluate them using evidence. 
Some claims cannot be tested using verifiable evidence, so cannot be falsified. 
They are therefore not scientific. Scientific knowledge must be supported by 
evidence.
Theories Scientists develop general explanations that are widely applicable, based on 
observed patterns or tested hypotheses. Predictions can be generated from these 
theories by deductive reasoning. If these predictions are tested, they may 
corroborate a theory or show that it is false and should be rejected. Paradigm shifts 
take place when a new theory replaces an old one. The term “law” is sometimes 
used for statements that allow predictions to be made about natural phenomena 
without explaining them.
Falsification Scientists can use evidence to falsify a claim formulated as a hypothesis, theory or 
model, but they cannot prove with certainty that such a claim is true. There is 
therefore inherent uncertainty in all scientific knowledge. Nonetheless, many 
theories in science are corroborated by strong evidence and allow for prediction 
and explanation. Scientists must remain open-minded with respect to new 
evidence.Nature of science
7 Chemistry guide
Aspects How are scientific knowledge claims generated, tested, communicated, 
evaluated and used? What issues arise from these actions?
Science as a shared 
endeavourScientists communicate and collaborate throughout the world. Agreed 
conventions and common terminology facilitate unambiguous communication. 
Peer review is essential to verify the research methods of knowledge claims prior 
to their publication in journals.
Global impact of 
scienceScientists have an obligation to assess the risks associated with their work and 
must aim to do no harm. Developments in science may have ethical, 
environmental, political, social, cultural and economic consequences that must be 
considered during decision-making. The pursuit of science may have unintended 
consequences. Research proposals are often filtered through ethics boards. 
Scientists have a responsibility to communicate their findings to the public with 
honesty and clarity.
How is NOS different from TOK?
In contrast  to the specificity  of understanding  of science,  the TOK  course  encourages  students  to think 
critically  about  the concepts  that  underpin  knowledge  production.  For example,  peer  review  is used  as a 
tool  to support  objectivity  in scientific  research.  Through  the study  of TOK,  students  question  the 
limitations  of the peer  review  process  and  extend  their  thinking  to an assessment  of objectivity  in other 
areas of knowledge.Nature of science
8 Chemistry guide
What is the purpose of studying chemistry?
As one  of the three  natural  sciences  in the IB Diploma  Programme,  chemistry  is primarily  concerned  with 
identifying  patterns  that  allow  us to explain  matter  at the microscopic  level.  This  then  allows  us to predict 
and  control  matter’s  behaviour  at a macroscopic  level.  The subject  therefore  emphasizes  the development 
of representative  models  and  explanatory  theories,  both  of which  rely heavily  on creative  but rational 
thinking.  Given  the pattern-seeking  nature  of chemistry,  the development  of generalized  rules  and 
principles  also  plays  an important  part  in knowledge  production,  as do the concrete  statements  provided 
by mathematical laws.
How is knowledge acquired in chemistry?
With  its roots  in the practice  of alchemy,  chemistry  maintains  a strong  emphasis  on empirical 
experimentation.  However,  with  advances  in technology,  it now  extends  its reach  beyond  the limits  of the 
human  senses  at a macroscopic  level  and  into  fields  such  as spectroscopy  and  computer  molecular 
modelling.  Insights  from  these  technologies  often  require  thorough  mathematical  analysis  before  being 
accepted  as valid  justifications  for scientific  claims.  In all their  investigative  work,  chemists  must  qualify 
confidence  in their  discoveries  by considering  potential  errors  related  to methodology  or limitations  in 
measuring equipment.
What is the impact of chemistry?
As outlined  in the “Nature  of science ” section,  the pursuit  of scientific  knowledge  does  not occur  in 
isolation.  In chemistry,  developments  in fields  such  as biofuels  or catalysis  often  have  impacts  far beyond 
the boundaries  of academic  research.  Honest  and  clear  communication  to audiences  beyond  the scientific 
domain  is therefore  essential.  The retraction  of a 2019  research  paper  by Dr Frances  Arnold,  a Nobel 
laureate  in chemistry,  due  to unreproducible  data  is a good  example  of embracing  this ethical 
responsibility.
How is the nature of chemistry engaged with?
The Diploma Programme chemistry course supports teaching through:
• approaches to learning
• nature of science
• skills in the study of chemistry.
The Diploma Programme chemistry course supports learning in several ways.
• It offers a balanced experimental programme—Students are encouraged to become familiar with 
traditional experimentation techniques, as well as the application of technology where possible. These 
opportunities help them to develop their investigative skills and evaluate the impact of error in 
scientific inquiry.
• The scientific investigation—This places a specific emphasis on inquiry-based skills and the formal 
communication of scientific knowledge.
• The collaborative sciences project—This extends the development of scientific communication in a 
collaborative and interdisciplinary context, allowing students to work together beyond the confines of 
one specific syllabus.
Introduction
Nature of chemistry
9 Chemistry guide
Distinction between SL and HL
Students at SL and HL share the following.
• An understanding of science through a stimulating experimental programme
• The nature of science as an overarching theme
• The study of a concept-based syllabus
• One piece of internally assessed work, the scientific investigation
• The collaborative sciences project
The SL course  provides  students  with  a fundamental  understanding  of chemistry  and  experience  of the 
associated  skills.  The HL course  requires  students  to increase  their  knowledge  and  understanding  of the 
subject,  including  additional  mathematical  skills,  and  so provides  a solid  foundation  for further  study  at 
university level.
The SL course  has a recommended  150 teaching  hours,  compared  to 240 hours  for the HL course.  This 
difference  is reflected  in the additional  content  studied  by HL students.  Some  of the HL content  is 
conceptually  more  demanding  and  explored  in greater  depth.  The distinction  between  SL and  HL is 
therefore  one  of both  breadth  and  depth.  The increased  breadth  and  depth  at HL result  in increased 
networked  knowledge,  requiring  the student  to make  more  connections  between  diverse  areas  of the 
syllabus.
Chemistry and the core
Chemistry and theory of knowledge
The TOK  course  plays  a special  role  in the DP by providing  opportunities  for students  to reflect  on the 
nature,  scope  and  limitations  of knowledge  and  the process  of knowing  through  an exploration  of 
knowledge questions.
The areas  of knowledge  (AOK)  are specific  branches  of knowledge,  each  of which  can be seen  to have  a 
distinct  nature  and  sometimes  use different  methods  of gaining  knowledge.  In TOK,  students  explore  five 
compulsory AOK: history, the human sciences, the natural sciences, mathematics and the arts.
There  are several  different  ways  in which  aspects  of the chemistry  course  can be connected  to the 
exploration of knowledge. During the teaching and learning of the chemistry course, teachers and students 
evaluate  knowledge  claims  by exploring  questions  concerning  their  validity,  reliability,  credibility  and 
certainty, as well as individual and cultural perspectives on them.
Exploration  of the relationship  between  knowledge  and  TOK  concepts  can help  students  to deepen  their 
understanding  and  make  connections  between  disciplines.  For example,  while  discussing  the depletion  of 
energy  sources  and  the constant  need  for new  energy  resources  to meet  energy  demands,  students  can 
explore the concepts of responsibility, power and justification.
Many  aspects  of the chemistry  course  lend  themselves  to the exploration  of knowledge  questions.  Some 
examples are provided in the following table.
Table 2
Examples of knowledge questions
Learning opportunities Knowledge question
Chemical equations Can all knowledge be expressed in words or symbols?
Development in our understanding 
of atomic theoryHow can it be that scientific knowledge changes over time?
What role do paradigm shifts play in the progression of scientific 
knowledge?
Acids and bases or the periodic 
tableTo what extent do the classification systems we use in the pursuit of 
knowledge affect the conclusions that we reach?Nature of chemistry
10 Chemistry guide
Learning opportunities Knowledge question
Analytic and spectroscopic 
techniquesHow do the tools that we use shape the knowledge that we 
produce?
Structure of benzene and the origin 
of the “ring-like” modelWhat is the role of imagination and intuition in the creation of 
hypotheses in the natural sciences?
For more  information,  please  refer  to the Theory  of knowledge  guide  and  the  Theory  of knowledge  teacher 
support material .
Chemistry and the extended essay
Students  who  choose  to write  an EE in chemistry  undertake  independent  research  as part  of an in-depth 
study of a focused topic. The topic for study may be generated from the chemistry course or may relate to a 
subject  area  beyond  the syllabus  content.  This  detailed  study  will help  develop  research,  thinking,  self-
management  and  communication  skills,  which  will support  students’  learning  in the chemistry  course,  and 
in further studies.
Examples of areas for research topics
• Environmental chemistry—removing heavy metals or pesticides from the soil or water sources; 
measuring the amount of and effects of acid deposition.
• Food chemistry—investigating the stability of certain pigments or vitamins and the shelf life of certain 
molecules in food.
• Materials chemistry—assessing the durability or other chemical/physical properties of compounds, 
mixtures or metals.
Students and supervisors must ensure that an EE does not duplicate other work submitted for the diploma.
For more  information,  please  refer  to the Extended  essay  guide  and  the  Extended  essay  teacher  support 
material .
Chemistry and creativity, activity, service
The CAS  component  of the DP core  provides  many  opportunities  for students  to link science  concepts  and 
topics  to practical  experiences.  Teachers  can highlight  how  knowledge  and  understanding  developed 
through  the course  might  inform  meaningful  experiences.  Outside  the classroom,  CAS  experiences  might 
also ignite students’ passion for addressing topics inside the chemistry classroom.
Some examples of relevant CAS experiences are as follows.
• Organizing a science club for students in lower years
• Implementing environmental initiatives within the school or local community, such as recycling, 
composting and roof gardens
• Organizing or participating in a social media outreach or advocacy campaign, for example, on an 
environmental or health concern
CAS  experiences  can be a single  event  or may  be an extended  series  of events.  It is important  that  CAS 
experiences be distinct from and not submitted as part of a chemistry assessment.
For more  information,  please  refer  to the Creativity,  activity,  service  guide  and  the  Creativity,  activity,  service 
teacher support material .
Chemistry and international-mindedness
Science has been, and continues to be, a truly international endeavour. From the beginnings of seismology 
in China,  through  material  science  in Mesopotamia  to astronomy  in the Islamic  Golden  Age,  the search  for 
an objective  understanding  of the natural  world  transcends  the limitations  imposed  by national 
boundaries. The scientific process, requiring curiosity, insight and an open-minded approach, benefits from 
the widest possible participation across genders and cultures through inclusivity and diversity.Nature of chemistry
11 Chemistry guide
Given  the global  nature  of many  scientific  issues,  international  organizations  often  have  a focus  on the 
engagement of science with the public domain. The World Health Organization and the Intergovernmental 
Panel  on Climate  Change  are two  well-known  examples  that  model  a responsibility  to inform  nations  of 
scientific  progress  on an equitable  basis.  Underlying  this responsibility  is the interest  of promoting  a 
peaceful and sustainable future.
Advancements  in technology,  along  with  the cost  of modern  research  facilities,  continues  to reinforce  the 
role  of international  collaborative  work.  The project  between  the Joint  Institute  of Nuclear  Research  in 
Russia and the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in the USA to provide evidence for the existence of 
element 118, oganesson, is a good example of international collaboration.
The importance  of collaboration  in contemporary  science  is reflected  by the large  number  of international 
organizations  tasked  with  collating  and  sharing  data  with  the scientific  community.  Access  to shared 
knowledge  through  websites  and  databases  must  be integrated  into  classroom  teaching  as it plays  an 
important role in validating experimental work.
In addition to integrating technology and collaborative work, the collaborative sciences project provides an 
excellent opportunity for students to engage with global issues.
Teachers  are encouraged  to consider  the questions  posed  in the “Teaching  in context”  section  in the TSM, 
to allow students to reflect on where and how science might interact with society. These conversations may 
also introduce ethical questions such as those identified in the TOK syllabus.
Chemistry and the IB learner profile
Each  box provides  an example  of how  each  learner  profile  attribute  could  be modelled  by learners  and 
teachers.
Example attribute
• Learners who best embody the attribute with reference to science.
• Directing teachers with possible routes to develop the attribute in the classroom.
• Practical ways in which learners demonstrate the attribute in the process of “doing” science.
Attributes of the IB learner profile
Inquirer
• Inquirers are curious, they actively use research skills, work independently and show enthusiasm 
about the world around them.
• Teachers facilitate skill development and promote inquiry; they provide students with opportunities 
to ask questions, search for answers, and experiment.
• Learners use their inquiry skills to extend their scientific knowledge and engage with research.
Knowledgeable
• Learners explore concepts, ideas and issues related to science in order to broaden and deepen their 
understanding of factual and procedural knowledge.
• Access to a variety of resources and opportunities provides learner agency to develop scientific 
knowledge and understanding.
• Learners apply their knowledge to unfamiliar contexts and make connections between concepts and 
facts to illustrate their understanding of science.
Thinker
• Learners are eager to solve complex problems and reflect on their thinking strategies.Nature of chemistry
12 Chemistry guide
Thinker
• Teachers provide opportunities for learners to critically analyse their approaches and methods and 
deepen their understanding of science, allowing them to be creative in finding solutions to problems.
• Learners practise reasoning and critical thinking by testing assumptions, formulating hypotheses, 
interpreting data and drawing conclusions from the evidence provided.
Communicator
• Learners collaborate effectively with others and use a variety of modes of communication to express 
their ideas and opinions.
• Teachers facilitate group work, encourage open discussions and the use of the scientific language to 
provide models for successful communication.
• Learners demonstrate effective communication skills as part of collaborative activities through 
listening to others and sharing ideas.
Principled
• Learners take responsibility for their work, promote shared values and act in an ethical manner.
• Teachers can provide opportunities to model principled behaviour including acknowledging the 
work of others and citing sources. The collaborative sciences project provides opportunities for 
learners to take a principled stance.
• Learners appreciate the importance of integrity in data collection and consider all data, even that 
which does not match their original hypothesis.
Open-minded
• Open-minded learners accept that different perspectives, models or hypotheses exist, and these can 
be used to enhance scientific understanding.
• Teachers can provide models that were at the time supported by data or observations, but through 
reasoning, deduction or falsification may be rejected or refined.
• Learners need to be prepared to have their perspectives and ideas challenged through the study of 
science.
Caring
• Learners act to protect the environment and to improve the lives of others.
• Teachers can draw attention to how daily choices have consequences by challenging learners to 
adopt sustainable practice and providing support to help fellow learners. Reference should be made 
to the Sciences experimentation guidelines .
• Learners can connect curriculum content to global challenges such as healthcare, energy supply or 
food production. The collaborative sciences project provides an opportunity for learners to support 
each other to enable their group to achieve their goal successfully.
Risk-taker
• Risk-takers seek new opportunities to develop their learning and explore new approaches to solve 
problems. They actively thrive on challenges.
• Teachers can provide support and guidance for learners, encouraging them to explore new 
techniques or methods of learning. This might include scaffolds for the use of language, the design of 
experiments and the analysis of data. As learners grow in confidence, these supports can be phased 
out giving them more freedom to choose their own approach.Nature of chemistry
13 Chemistry guide
Risk-taker
• Learners should be prepared for the next set of experimental data to falsify their ideas as uncertainty 
is a feature of science. They understand that this is a step forward in their understanding.
Balanced
• Balanced learners look holistically at all aspects of their development and ensure that various tasks 
are given appropriate attention without focusing on one to the detriment of others.
• Teachers should encourage learners to consider a balanced perspective on scientific issues without 
bias.
• Learners need to organize their own time effectively, giving themselves sufficient time to complete 
all parts of their learning without negatively impacting on the emotional and social aspects of their 
lives.
Reflective
• Reflective learners consider why and how they achieve success, and also how they could change their 
approach when learning is difficult.
• Teachers provide opportunities for learners to continually review strategies, methods, techniques 
and approaches to problem-solving in order to improve their conceptual understandings in science. 
Assessment criteria or checklists can help learners to consider the quality of their work in a guided 
way.
• Learners develop skills and concepts throughout the course, networking their knowledge by 
continually reflecting on their understanding.Nature of chemistry
14 Chemistry guide
The approaches to learning framework
What are approaches to learning skills and why do we teach them?
The approaches  to learning  (ATL)  framework  seeks  to develop  in students  affective,  cognitive  and 
metacognitive  skills  that  will support  their  learning  processes  during  and  beyond  their  IB experience.  The 
development  of ATL skills  is closely  connected  with  the IB learner  profile  attributes  and  therefore  helps  to 
advance  the IB mission.  The ATL skills  are an integral  part  of IB learning  and  teaching  that  should  be 
developed  across  the whole  programme—it  is not expected  that  a single  course  should  ever  address  all of 
them.
How are they organized?
The ATL framework  for IB programmes  consists  of five general  skill categories:  thinking  skills, 
communication  skills,  social  skills,  research  skills  and  self-management  skills.  Each  of these  categories 
covers  a broad  range,  as shown  by the examples  presented  in the table  below.  The ATL skill categories  are 
closely linked and interrelated and therefore individual skills may be relevant to more than one category.
How do we teach them?
ATL skills can be learned and taught, improved with practice and developed incrementally. The table below 
illustrates,  through  a number  of examples,  how  the chemistry  course  can support  ATL skill development. 
The examples  shown  in the table  are not exhaustive.  Teachers  are encouraged  to adapt  them  for use in 
their school context and collaboratively identify further examples of ATL skill development.
Further  information  on the ATL framework  and  strategies  for the development  of the ATL skills  can be 
found  in the Chemistry  teacher  support  material  and  the Diploma  Programme  Approaches  to teaching  and 
learning website .
Table 3
ATL skills and development
Skill category Examples of ATL skill development in the classroom
Thinking skills • Being curious about the natural world
• Asking questions and framing hypotheses based upon sensible scientific 
rationale
• Designing procedures and models
• Reflecting on the credibility of results
• Providing a reasoned argument to support conclusions
• Evaluating and defending ethical positions
• Combining different ideas in order to create new understandings
• Applying key ideas and facts in new contexts
• Engaging with, and designing, linking questions
• Experimenting with new strategies for learning
• Reflecting at all stages of the assessment and learning cycle
Communication skills • Practising active listening skills
Introduction
Approaches to the teaching and learning of 
chemistry
15 Chemistry guide
Skill category Examples of ATL skill development in the classroom
• Evaluating extended writing in terms of relevance and structure
• Applying interpretive techniques to different forms of media
• Reflecting on the needs of the audience when creating engaging 
presentations
• Clearly communicating complex ideas in response to open-ended 
questions
• Using digital media for communicating information
• Using terminology, symbols and communication conventions consistently 
and correctly
• Presenting data appropriately
• Delivering constructive criticism appropriately
Social skills • Working collaboratively to achieve a common goal
• Assigning and accepting specific roles during group activities
• Appreciating the diverse talents and needs of others
• Resolving conflicts during collaborative work
• Actively seeking and considering the perspective of others
• Reflecting on the impact of personal behaviour or comments on others
• Constructively assessing the contribution of peers
Research skills • Evaluating information sources for accuracy, bias, credibility and 
relevance
• Explicitly discussing the importance of academic integrity and full 
acknowledgement of the ideas of others
• Using a single, standard method of referencing and citation
• Comparing, contrasting and validating information
• Using search engines and libraries effectively
Self-management skills • Breaking down major tasks into a sequence of stages
• Being punctual and meeting deadlines
• Taking risks and regarding setbacks as opportunities for growth
• Avoiding unnecessary distractions
• Drafting, revising and improving academic work
• Setting learning goals and adjusting them in response to experience
• Seeking and acting on feedback
Experimental programme
Integral  to the student  experience  of a chemistry  course  is the learning  that  takes  place  through  scientific 
inquiry  within  the classroom  or laboratory.  Experimentation  through  a variety  of forms  can be used  to 
introduce  a topic,  address  a phenomenon  or allow  students  to consider  and  examine  authentic  questions 
and curiosities.
A school’s  experimental  programme  should  allow  students  to experience  the full breadth  and  depth  of the 
course,  develop  scientific  skills  and  demonstrate  safe,  competent  and  methodical  use of a range  of tools, 
techniques and equipment. Students should therefore be encouraged to develop investigations to support 
their  learning  through  open-ended  inquiry  with  a focus  on laboratory  experiments,  databases,  simulations 
and modelling.Approaches to the teaching and learning of chemistry
16 Chemistry guide
Conceptual learning
Concept-based teaching and learning is encouraged across the continuum of IB programmes.
Concepts  are mental  representations  of categories.  They  are constructed,  modified  and  activated  by the 
learner  through  learning  experiences.  Concepts  do not exist  in isolation  but are interrelated.  Conceptual 
understanding is always a work in progress—it is continually being developed and refined.
Conceptual  understanding  is therefore  an outcome  of a non-linear,  ongoing  process  of evolving 
understandings,  adapting  previous  understandings,  and  identifying  and  dispelling  misconceptions.  It 
consists  of making  connections  between  prior  and  new  knowledge  to construct  and  build  an awareness  of 
this network of knowledge.
Concepts vary in their level of abstraction and universality.
• They can be organizing ideas that are applicable in many contexts and have relevance both within and 
across subject areas.
• They can provide a deep understanding of specific knowledge fields (or fields of knowledge) and help 
to organize knowledge further, as well as reveal connections between different areas of the subject.
For example,  consider  the following  sequence  of three  concepts,  which  shows  the more  specific  focus  of 
each concept.
Change > Reactivity > Collision theory
In other words, collision theory is a component in understanding chemical reactivity, which in turn helps to 
develop  an understanding  of change  in chemistry.  The sequence  could  be extended  further  to look  at 
concepts  such  as particle,  collision  and  reaction,  all of which  provide  a basis  for understanding  collision 
theory.
Outcomes of a concept-based approach
Fostering critical thinking, the outcome of a concept-based approach is that students are able to:
• identify examples of a concept
• organize, reflect on, modify and expand their network of knowledge
• apply concepts to existing and future knowledge
• apply their conceptual understanding as a scientific thinking tool for predicting outcomes, justifying 
conclusions and evaluating knowledge claims.
Structure of the syllabus and conceptual understanding
The structure of this chemistry syllabus is intended to promote concept-based teaching and learning.
There  are two  organizing  concepts  in the chemistry  roadmap:  structure  and  reactivity . Each  of these 
concepts  is subdivided  into  topics  and  subtopics,  which  are all connected  through  the idea  that  structure 
determines reactivity, which in turn transforms structure.
Each of the 22 subtopics is headed by a guiding question to give a sense of what is covered. The purpose of 
these  guiding  questions  is to promote  inquiry—they  are therefore  not straightforward  and  best  answered 
once  the associated  understandings  have  been  acquired.  Teachers  and  students  are encouraged  to create 
their own guiding questions to capture the content of units of study.
Several  linking  questions  are associated  with  understandings  throughout  this guide.  Linking  questions  are 
intended  to promote  the skills  in the study  of chemistry  and  highlight  links  between  the course 
understandings, encouraging students to look at an understanding from a different perspective, originating 
in a different part of the course. They are designed to facilitate these connections and their ideal outcome is 
to promote a highly networked understanding of chemistry.
For example,  the trend  in reactivity  down  group  1 is connected  to several  parts  of the course—it  illustrates 
the organization  of elements  in the periodic  table,  can be explained  in terms  of ionization  energies,  is 
related  to the electron  configuration  and  exemplifies  the tendency  of metals  to be oxidized.  The linking Approaches to the teaching and learning of chemistry
17 Chemistry guide
questions  found  in the guide  are not exhaustive.  Students  and  teachers  may  encounter  other  connections 
between understandings and concepts in the syllabus, leading them to create their own linking questions.
Teaching chemistry in context
The study  of chemistry  enables  constructive  engagement  with  topical  scientific  issues.  By contextualizing 
chemical concepts, scientific knowledge claims can be evaluated more effectively, and informed choices on 
such issues as human health and the environment can be made. Chemical research has brought innovation 
and  benefit  to many  fields  and  continues  to be at the heart  of seeking  effective  solutions  to many  global 
challenges.  It is therefore  important  to explore  applications  of chemistry  in our world  while  teaching  the 
course to elicit interest, understanding and curiosity.
Teaching  the content  of the course  in relation  to specific  contexts  supports  the pedagogical  principle  of 
teaching in local and global contexts as part of the approaches to teaching framework and offers a number 
of advantages.  First,  it helps  students  relate  their  learning  to genuine  applications  of chemistry, 
highlighting  the relevance  to global  issues  as well  as the significance  in students’  own  contexts.  Second,  it 
develops  an appreciation  for the interaction  between  scientific  solutions  and  their  implications,  be it 
ethical,  environmental  or economic.  Third,  it helps  to illustrate  some  of the NOS  aspects  underpinning  the 
course.
The Chemistry teacher support material  highlights possible areas that could be visited throughout the course 
and  that  may  provide  context  for some  topics  to stimulate  the application  of ideas  and  problem-solving 
skills.  Consideration  of these  and  related  areas  may  help  provide  ideas  for the scientific  investigation,  the 
collaborative sciences project, TOK exhibition, CAS, or an EE in chemistry or world studies.
Engaging with sensitive topics
Students  and  teachers  are encouraged  to engage  with  exciting,  stimulating  and  personally  relevant  topics 
and  issues  that  may  be, at times,  sensitive  or personally  challenging.  Teachers  should  be aware  of this and 
provide  guidance  on how  to engage  with  such  topics  in a responsible  manner.  Consideration  should  be 
given to the personal, political and spiritual values of others.
Prior learning
Past  experience  shows  that  students  will be able  to study  chemistry  at SL successfully  with  no background 
in, or previous  knowledge  of, science.  Their  approach  to learning,  characterized  by the IB learner  profile 
attributes, will be significant here.
However,  for most  students  considering  the study  of chemistry  at HL, while  there  is no intention  to restrict 
access,  some  previous  exposure  to formal  science  education  would  be necessary.  Specific  topic  details  are 
not specified,  but students  who  have  undertaken  the IB Middle  Years  Programme  (MYP)  or studied  an 
equivalent national science qualification or a school-based science course would be well prepared for an HL 
subject.
Links to the Middle Years Programme
The MYP  sciences  courses  seek  to promote  skills  and  attitudes  needed  to apply  scientific  knowledge  in 
theoretical,  experimental  and  authentic  contexts.  A strong  foundation  is established  for DP sciences  in 
which  learners  will capitalize  on—and  continue  advancing—their  skills  and  attitudes  to develop 
knowledge and understanding commensurate with pre-university level science.
The MYP offers a framework for learning and teaching while maintaining flexibility with curriculum content. 
The content  in MYP  sciences  courses  can therefore  vary  greatly  from  one  school  to another.  Content  in DP 
sciences  courses  is more  prescribed,  and  this is one  of the main  differences  teachers  will notice  when 
comparing the two programmes.Approaches to the teaching and learning of chemistry
18 Chemistry guide
A connected, conceptual curriculum where learning is inquiry-based and contextualized is the pedagogical 
principle  that  underpins  both  programmes  and  indeed  the entire  IB continuum  (International 
Baccalaureate, 2019).
Conceptual  learning  focuses  on organizing  ideas  and  their  interconnections.  A conceptual  approach  is 
encouraged in IB programmes because it promotes deep learning and facilitates the construction of further 
knowledge. Conceptual understanding aids the application of knowledge in unfamiliar and novel contexts. 
This skill is reflected in the aims and assessment objectives of both programmes.
Broad  concepts  frame  MYP  learning  and  teaching  with  the purpose  of unifying  ideas  across  subject  areas. 
Discipline-specific related concepts are intended to provide disciplinary depth (International Baccalaureate, 
2014). Key and related concepts are not required in the DP, although some teachers may find that they wish 
to continue  developing  a curriculum  around  them.  In DP sciences,  overarching  concepts  are manifested  in 
the course  roadmaps  and  the NOS.  DP sciences  seek  to highlight  the interconnectedness  of the course 
understandings.  The intention  is to promote  conceptual  understanding  and  further  the construction  of 
learners’ knowledge networks.
Both  MYP  and  DP teaching  involve  inquiry-based  approaches,  which  foster  a high  degree  of student 
engagement,  collaboration  and  interaction.  The inquiry,  design,  experimental,  analysis,  evaluation  and 
communication  skills  encouraged  by criteria  B and  C will serve  students  well  as they  prepare  to undertake 
the scientific  investigation  for the internal  assessment  (IA).  In addition,  MYP  students  will gain  familiarity 
with  criterion-related  assessment  and  the use of assessment  criteria,  which  will further  support  their 
understanding of the DP sciences IA criteria.
IB programmes encourage the exploration of scientific principles in connection to local and global contexts. 
Doing  so helps  students  ground  abstract  concepts  in more  concrete  local  and  global  real-world  situations 
as well  as cultivating  international-mindedness  (see  the “Approaches  to teaching”  section  in Diploma 
Programme Approaches to teaching and learning website ). Teachers should therefore weave opportunities for 
contextualization  into  the curriculum.  MYP  sciences  criterion  D analyses  the real-world  application  of 
science.  In the DP, sciences  teachers  are encouraged  to frequently  anchor  their  teaching  in real-world 
applications that are invoked throughout the course of the programme.
In addition  to equipping  students  with  scientific  knowledge  and  skills,  the MYP  and  DP sciences  courses 
share similar guiding principles that seek to develop in students the learner profile attributes.
Links to the Career-related Programme
In the Career-related  Programme  (CP),  students  study  at least  two  DP subjects,  a core  consisting  of four 
components and a career-related study, which is determined by the local context and aligned with student 
needs.  The CP has been  designed  to add  value  to the students’  career-related  studies.  This  provides  the 
context  for the choice  of DP courses.  The chemistry  course  can assist  CP students  planning  careers  in a 
variety  of professional  fields  where,  for example,  a sound  understanding  of science  and  mathematical  skills 
are important.  This  includes  healthcare,  technological  and  manufacturing  industries,  and  engineering. 
While  chemistry  helps  students  understand  the underlying  science  in the contemporary  world,  it also 
encourages  the development  of strong  problem-solving,  critical  thinking  and  ethical  approaches  that  will 
assist students in the global workplace.Approaches to the teaching and learning of chemistry
19 Chemistry guide
The collaborative sciences project is an interdisciplinary sciences project, providing a worthwhile challenge 
to DP and  CP students,  addressing  real-world  problems  that  can be explored  through  the sciences.  The 
nature  of the challenge  should  allow  students  to integrate  factual,  procedural  and  conceptual  knowledge 
developed through the study of their disciplines.
Through  the identification  and  research  of complex  issues,  students  can develop  an understanding  of how 
interrelated systems, mechanisms and processes impact a problem. Students will then apply their collective 
understanding  to develop  solution-focused  strategies  that  address  the issue.  With  a critical  lens  they  will 
evaluate and reflect on the inherent complexity of solving real-world problems.
Students  will develop  an understanding  of the extent  of global  interconnectedness  between  regional, 
national,  and  local  communities,  which  will empower  them  to become  active  and  engaged  citizens  of the 
world. While addressing local and global issues, students will appreciate that the issues of today exist across 
national boundaries and can only be solved through collective action and international cooperation.
The collaborative  sciences  project  supports  the development  of students’  ATL skills,  including 
teambuilding,  negotiation  and  leadership.  It facilitates  an appreciation  of the environment,  and  the social 
and ethical implications of science and technology.
Full details of the requirements are in the Collaborative sciences project guide .
Introduction
Collaborative sciences project
20 Chemistry guide
The course enables students, through the overarching theme of the NOS, to:
1. develop conceptual understanding that allows connections to be made between different areas of the 
subject, and to other DP sciences subjects
2. acquire and apply a body of knowledge, methods, tools and techniques that characterize science
3. develop the ability to analyse, evaluate and synthesize scientific information and claims
4. develop the ability to approach unfamiliar situations with creativity and resilience
5. design and model solutions to local and global problems in a scientific context
6. develop an appreciation of the possibilities and limitations of science
7. develop technology skills in a scientific context
8. develop the ability to communicate and collaborate effectively
9. develop awareness of the ethical, environmental, economic, cultural and social impact of science.
Introduction
Aims
21 Chemistry guide
The assessment  objectives  for chemistry  reflect  those  parts  of the aims  that  will be formally  assessed  either 
internally  or externally.  It is the intention  of this course  that  students  are able  to fulfil  the following 
assessment objectives.
1. Demonstrate knowledge of:
a. terminology, facts and concepts
b. skills, techniques and methodologies.
2. Understand and apply knowledge of:
a. terminology and concepts
b. skills, techniques and methodologies.
3. Analyse, evaluate, and synthesize:
a. experimental procedures
b. primary and secondary data
c. trends, patterns and predictions.
4. Demonstrate the application of skills necessary to carry out insightful and ethical investigations.
Introduction
Assessment objectives
22 Chemistry guide
Assessments  align  with  the course’s  aims,  objectives  and  conceptual  approach;  the NOS  and  subject-
specific  skills  are also  assessed.  This  allows  students  to demonstrate  learning  effectively  through  varied 
tasks that are reliably and accurately marked or moderated by subject-area educators and experts.
Assessment objective Which component addresses 
this assessment objective?How is the assessment objective 
addressed?
AO1  Demonstrate knowledge Paper 1
Paper 2
Scientific investigationStudents respond to a range of 
multiple-choice, short-answer 
questions and extended-response 
questions.
Students investigate and answer a 
research question that is their 
own.
AO2  Understand and apply 
knowledgePaper 1
Paper 2
Scientific investigationStudents respond to a range of 
multiple-choice, short-answer, 
data-based and extended-
response questions.
Students investigate and answer a 
research question that is their 
own.
AO3  Analyse, evaluate, and 
synthesizePaper 1
Paper 2
Scientific investigationStudents respond to a range of 
multiple-choice, short-answer, 
data-based and extended-
response questions.
Students investigate and answer a 
research question that is their 
own.
AO4  Demonstrate the application 
of skills necessary to carry out 
insightful and ethical 
investigationsScientific investigation Students investigate and answer a 
research question that is their 
own.
Component Approximate weighting of assessment objectives (%)
AO1 + AO2 AO3
Paper 1 50 50
Paper 2 50 50
Internal assessment Covers AO1, AO2, AO3 and AO4
Introduction
Assessment objectives in practice
23 Chemistry guide
Syllabus component Teaching hours
SL HL
Syllabus content
Structure 1. Models of the particulate nature of matter
Structure 2. Models of bonding and structure
Structure 3. Classification of matter
Reactivity 1. What drives chemical reactions?
Reactivity 2. How much, how fast and how far?
Reactivity 3. What are the mechanisms of chemical change?110
17
20
16
12
21
24180
21
30
31
22
31
45
Experimental programme
Practical work
Collaborative sciences project
Scientific investigation40
20
10
1060
40
10
10
Total teaching hours 150 240
The recommended  teaching  time  is 150 hours  to complete  SL courses  and  240 hours  to complete  HL 
courses as stated in the general regulations (in Diploma Programme Assessment procedures ).
Syllabus
Syllabus outline
24 Chemistry guide
The aim of the syllabus  is to integrate  concepts,  topic  content  and  the NOS  through  inquiry.  Students  and 
teachers are encouraged to personalize their approach to the syllabus according to their circumstances and 
interests.
Table 4
Chemistry roadmap via structure and reactivity
Skills in the study of chemistry
Structure
Structure refers to the nature of matter from 
simple to more complex formsReactivity
Reactivity refers to how and why chemical 
reactions occur
Structure determines reactivity, which in turn transforms structure
Structure 1.
Models of the 
particulate 
nature of matterStructure 1.1—Introduction to 
the particulate nature of matterReactivity 1.
What drives 
chemical 
reactions?Reactivity 1.1—Measuring 
enthalpy changes
Structure 1.2—The nuclear 
atomReactivity 1.2—Energy cycles in 
reactions
Structure 1.3—Electron 
configurations
Structure 1.4—Counting 
particles by mass: The moleReactivity 1.3—Energy from 
fuels
Structure 1.5—Ideal gases Reactivity 1.4—Entropy and 
spontaneity (Additional higher 
level)
Structure 2.
Models of 
bonding and 
structureStructure 2.1—The ionic model Reactivity 2.
How much, how 
fast and how far?Reactivity 2.1—How much? The 
amount of chemical change
Structure 2.2—The covalent 
modelReactivity 2.2—How fast? The 
rate of chemical change
Structure 2.3—The metallic 
modelReactivity 2.3—How far? The 
extent of chemical change
Structure 2.4—From models to 
materials
Structure 3.
Classification of 
matterStructure 3.1—The periodic 
table: Classification of elementsReactivity 3.
What are the 
mechanisms of 
chemical change?Reactivity 3.1—Proton transfer 
reactions
Structure 3.2—Functional 
groups: Classification of organic 
compoundsReactivity 3.2—Electron transfer 
reactions
Reactivity 3.3—Electron sharing 
reactions
Reactivity 3.4—Electron-pair 
sharing reactions
Syllabus
Syllabus roadmap
25 Chemistry guide
Syllabus
Syllabus format
26 Chemistry guide
The skills  and  techniques  students  must  experience  through  the course  are encompassed  within  the tools. 
These  support  the application  and  development  of the inquiry  process  in the delivery  of the chemistry 
course.
Tools
• Tool 1:  Experimental techniques
• Tool 2:  Technology
• Tool 3:  Mathematics
Inquiry process
• Inquiry 1:  Exploring and designing
• Inquiry 2:  Collecting and processing data
• Inquiry 3:  Concluding and evaluating
Teachers  are encouraged  to provide  opportunities  for students  to encounter  and  practise  the skills 
throughout the programme. Rather than being taught as stand-alone topics, they should be integrated into 
the teaching  of the syllabus  when  they  are relevant  to the syllabus  topics  being  covered.  The skills  in the 
study of chemistry can be assessed through internal and external assessment.
The approaches to learning provide the framework for the development of these skills.
Syllabus
Skills in the study of chemistry
27 Chemistry guide
Figure 2
Skills for chemistry
Tools
Tool 1: Experimental techniques
Skill Description
Addressing safety of self, others 
and the environmentRecognize and address relevant safety, ethical or environmental issues 
in an investigation.
Measuring variables Understand how to accurately measure the following to an appropriate 
level of precision.
• Mass
• Volume
• Time
• Temperature
• Length
• pH of a solution
• Electric currentSkills in the study of chemistry
28 Chemistry guide
Skill Description
• Electric potential difference
Applying techniques Show awareness of the purpose and practice of:
• preparing a standard solution
• carrying out dilutions
• drying to constant mass
• distillation and reflux
• paper or thin layer chromatography
• separation of mixtures
• calorimetry
• acid–base and redox titration
• electrochemical cells
• colorimetry or spectrophotometry
• physical and digital molecular modelling
• recrystallization
• melting point determination.
Tool 2: Technology
Skill Description
Applying technology to collect 
data• Use sensors.
• Identify and extract data from databases.
• Generate data from models and simulations.
Applying technology to process 
data• Use spreadsheets to manipulate data.
• Represent data in a graphical form.
• Use computer modelling.
Tool 3 : Mathematics
Skill Description
Applying general mathematics • Use basic arithmetic and algebraic calculations to solve problems.
• Carry out calculations involving decimals, fractions, percentages, 
ratios, reciprocals and exponents.
• Carry out calculations involving logarithmic functions.
• Carry out calculations involving exponential functions (additional 
higher level).
• Determine rates of change from tabulated data.
• Calculate mean and range.
• Use and interpret scientific notation (e.g. 3.5 × 106).
• Use approximation and estimation.
• Appreciate when some effects can be ignored and why this is 
useful.
• Compare and quote values to the nearest order of magnitude.Skills in the study of chemistry
29 Chemistry guide
Skill Description
• Understand direct and inverse proportionality, as well as positive 
and negative correlations between variables.
• Calculate and interpret percentage change and percentage 
difference.
• Calculate and interpret percentage error and percentage 
uncertainty.
• Distinguish between continuous and discrete variables.
Using units, symbols and 
numerical values• Apply and use International System of Units (SI) prefixes and units.
• Identify and use symbols stated in the guide and the data booklet.
• Express quantities and uncertainties to an appropriate number of 
significant figures or decimal places.
Processing uncertainties • Understand the significance of uncertainties in raw and processed 
data.
• Record uncertainties in measurements as a range (±) to an 
appropriate level of precision.
• Propagate uncertainties in processed data, in calculations 
involving addition, subtraction, multiplication, division and (HL 
only) exponents.
• Express measurement and processed uncertainties—absolute, 
fractional (relative), percentage—to an appropriate number of 
significant figures or level of precision.
• Apply the coefficient of determination (R2) to evaluate the fit of a 
trend line or curve.
Graphing • Sketch graphs, with labelled but unscaled axes, to qualitatively 
describe trends.
• Construct and interpret tables, charts and graphs for raw and 
processed data including bar charts, histograms, scatter graphs 
and line and curve graphs.
• Plot linear and non-linear graphs showing the relationship 
between two variables with appropriate scales and axes.
• Draw lines or curves of best fit.
• Interpret features of graphs including gradient, changes in 
gradient, intercepts, maxima and minima, and areas.
• Draw and interpret uncertainty bars.
• Extrapolate and interpolate graphs.
Inquiry process
Inquiry 1: Exploring and designing
Skill Description
Exploring • Demonstrate independent thinking, initiative, and insight.
• Consult a variety of sources.
• Select sufficient and relevant sources of information.
• Formulate research questions and hypotheses.Skills in the study of chemistry
30 Chemistry guide
Skill Description
• State and explain predictions using scientific understanding.
Designing • Demonstrate creativity in the designing, implementation and 
presentation of the investigation.
• Develop investigations that involve hands-on laboratory 
experiments, databases, simulations, modelling.
• Identify and justify the choice of dependent, independent and 
control variables.
• Justify the range and quantity of measurements.
• Design and explain a valid methodology.
• Pilot methodologies.
Controlling variables Appreciate when and how to:
• calibrate measuring apparatus
• maintain constant environmental conditions of systems
• insulate against heat loss or gain.
Inquiry 2: Collecting and processing data
Skill Description
Collecting data • Identify and record relevant qualitative observations.
• Collect and record sufficient relevant quantitative data.
• Identify and address issues that arise during data collection.
Processing data • Carry out relevant and accurate data processing.
Interpreting results • Interpret qualitative and quantitative data.
• Interpret diagrams, graphs and charts.
• Identify, describe and explain patterns, trends and relationships.
• Identify and justify the removal or inclusion of outliers in data 
(no mathematical processing is required).
• Assess accuracy, precision, reliability and validity.
Inquiry 3: Concluding and evaluating
Skill Description
Concluding • Interpret processed data and analysis to draw and justify 
conclusions.
• Compare the outcomes of an investigation to the accepted 
scientific context.
• Relate the outcomes of an investigation to the stated research 
question or hypothesis.
• Discuss the impact of uncertainties on the conclusions.
Evaluating • Evaluate hypotheses.
• Identify and discuss sources and impacts of random and 
systematic errors.
• Evaluate the implications of methodological weaknesses, 
limitations and assumptions on conclusions.Skills in the study of chemistry
31 Chemistry guide
Skill Description
• Explain realistic and relevant improvements to an investigation.
Data booklet
The IB publishes  a Chemistry  data  booklet  which  contains  the periodic  table,  relevant  equations,  constants, 
and  tabulated  data,  specific  to the course.  Students  must  have  access  to a copy  for the duration  of the 
course,  so that  they  can become  familiar  with  its contents.  Direct  reference  is made  to the data  booklet  in 
the understandings  section  of the syllabus.  This  helps  to maintain  the emphasis  on interpretation  and 
application rather than memorization of data. A clean copy of the Chemistry data booklet  must also be made 
available to candidates for all examination papers at both SL and HL.Skills in the study of chemistry
32 Chemistry guide
Structure
Structure 1. Models of the particulate nature of matter
Structure 1.1—Introduction to the particulate nature of matter
Guiding question : How can we model the particulate nature of matter?
Standard level and higher level: 2 hours
Structure 1.1.1—Elements are the primary constituents of matter, which cannot be chemically 
broken down into simpler substances.
Compounds consist of atoms of different elements chemically bonded together in a fixed ratio.
Mixtures contain more than one element or compound in no fixed ratio, which are not chemically 
bonded and so can be separated by physical methods.
Distinguish between the properties of elements, compounds and mixtures.
Solvation, filtration, recrystallization, evaporation, 
distillation and paper chromatography should be 
covered. The differences between homogeneous 
and heterogeneous mixtures should be understood .Tool 1—What factors are considered in choosing a 
method to separate the components of a mixture?
Tool 1—How can the products of a reaction be 
purified?
Structure 2.2—How do intermolecular forces 
influence the type of mixture that forms between 
two substances?
Structure 2.3—Why are alloys generally considered 
to be mixtures, even though they often contain 
metallic bonding?
Structure 1.1.2—The kinetic molecular theory is a model to explain physical properties of matter 
(solids, liquids and gases) and changes of state.
Distinguish the different states of matter.
Use state symbols (s, 
 , g and aq) in chemical equations.
Names of the changes of state should be covered: 
melting, freezing, vaporization (evaporation and 
boiling), condensation, sublimation and deposition.Structure 2.4—Why are some substances solid while 
others are fluid under standard conditions?
Structure 2 (all), Reactivity 1.2—Why are some 
changes of state endothermic and some 
exothermic?
Structure 1.1.3—The temperature, T, in Kelvin (K) is a measure of average kinetic energy Ek of 
particles.
Interpret observable changes in physical properties and temperature during changes of state.
Convert between values in the Celsius and Kelvin scales.
Syllabus
Syllabus content
33 Chemistry guide
The kelvin (K) is the SI unit of temperature and has 
the same incremental value as the Celsius degree 
(°C).Reactivity 2.2—What is the graphical distribution of 
kinetic energy values of particles in a sample at a 
fixed temperature?
Reactivity 2.2—What must happen to particles for a 
chemical reaction to occur?
Additional higher level: None for Structure 1.1
Structure 1.2—The nuclear atom
Guiding question : How do the nuclei of atoms differ?
Standard level and higher level: 2 hours
Structure 1.2.1—Atoms contain a positively charged, dense nucleus composed of protons and 
neutrons (nucleons). Negatively charged electrons occupy the space outside the nucleus.
Use the nuclear symbol XZA to deduce the number of protons, neutrons and electrons in atoms and ions.
Relative masses and charges of the subatomic 
particles should be known; actual values are given in 
the data booklet. The mass of the electron can be 
considered negligible.Structure 1.3—What determines the different 
chemical properties of atoms?
Structure 3.1—How does the atomic number relate 
to the position of an element in the periodic table?
Structure 1.2.2—Isotopes are atoms of the same element with different numbers of neutrons.
Perform calculations involving non-integer relative atomic masses and abundance of isotopes from given 
data.
Differences in the physical properties of isotopes 
should be understood.
Specific examples of isotopes need not be learned.Nature of science, Reactivity 3.4—How can isotope 
tracers provide evidence for a reaction mechanism?
Additional higher level: 1 hour
Structure 1.2.3—Mass spectra are used to determine the relative atomic masses of elements from 
their isotopic composition.
Interpret mass spectra in terms of identity and relative abundance of isotopes.
The operational details of the mass spectrometer 
will not be assessed.Structure 3.2—How does the fragmentation pattern 
of a compound in the mass spectrometer help in the 
determination of its structure?
Structure 1.3—Electron configurations
Guiding question : How can we model the energy states of electrons in atoms?
Standard level and higher level: 3 hours
Structure 1.3.1—Emission spectra are produced by atoms emitting photons when electrons in 
excited states return to lower energy levels.
Qualitatively describe the relationship between colour, wavelength, frequency and energy across the 
electromagnetic spectrum.
Distinguish between a continuous and a line spectrum.
Details of the electromagnetic spectrum are given in 
the data booklet.Syllabus content
34 Chemistry guide
Structure 1.3.2—The line emission spectrum of hydrogen provides evidence for the existence of 
electrons in discrete energy levels, which converge at higher energies.
Describe the emission spectrum of the hydrogen atom, including the relationships between the lines and 
energy transitions to the first, second and third energy levels.
The names of the different series in the hydrogen 
emission spectrum will not be assessed.Inquiry 2—In the study of emission spectra from 
gaseous elements and of light, what qualitative and 
quantitative data can be collected from instruments 
such as gas discharge tubes and prisms?
Nature of science, Structure 1.2—How do emission 
spectra provide evidence for the existence of 
different elements?
Structure 1.3.3—The main energy level is given an integer number, n, and can hold a maximum of 
2n2 electrons.
Deduce the maximum number of electrons that can occupy each energy level.
Structure 3.1—How does an element’s highest main 
energy level relate to its period number in the 
periodic table?
Structure 1.3.4—A more detailed model of the atom describes the division of the main energy level 
into s, p, d and f sublevels of successively higher energies.
Recognize the shape and orientation of an s atomic orbital and the three p atomic orbitals.
Structure 3.1—What is the relationship between 
energy sublevels and the block nature of the 
periodic table?
Structure 1.3.5—Each orbital has a defined energy state for a given electron configuration and 
chemical environment, and can hold two electrons of opposite spin.
Sublevels contain a fixed number of orbitals, regions of space where there is a high probability of 
finding an electron.
Apply the Aufbau principle, Hund’s rule and the Pauli exclusion principle to deduce electron 
configurations for atoms and ions up to Z= 36 .
Full electron configurations and condensed electron 
configurations using the noble gas core should be 
covered.
Orbital diagrams, i.e. arrow-in-box diagrams, should 
be used to represent the filling and relative energy 
of orbitals.
The electron configurations of Cr and Cu as 
exceptions should be covered.
Additional higher level: 3 hours
Structure 1.3.6—In an emission spectrum, the limit of convergence at higher frequency corresponds 
to ionization.
Explain the trends and discontinuities in first ionization energy (IE) across a period and down a group.
Calculate the value of the first IE from spectral data that gives the wavelength or frequency of the 
convergence limit.Syllabus content
35 Chemistry guide
The value of the Planck constant h and the 
equations E=h f and c=λ f are given in the data 
booklet.Structure 3.1—How does the trend in IE values 
across a period and down a group explain the trends 
in properties of metals and non-metals?
Nature of science, Tool 3, Reactivity 3.1—Why are 
log scales useful when discussing [H+] and IEs?
Structure 1.3.7—Successive ionization energy (IE) data for an element give information about its 
electron configuration.
Deduce the group of an element from its successive ionization data.
Databases are useful for compiling graphs of trends 
in IEs.AHL Structure 3.1—How do patterns of successive 
IEs of transition elements help to explain the 
variable oxidation states of these elements?
Structure 1.4—Counting particles by mass: The mole
Guiding question : How do we quantify matter on the atomic scale?
Standard level and higher level: 7 hours
Structure 1.4.1—The mole (mol) is the SI unit of amount of substance. One mole contains exactly 
the number of elementary entities given by the Avogadro constant.
Convert the amount of substance, n, to the number of specified elementary entities.
An elementary entity may be an atom, a molecule, 
an ion, an electron, any other particle or a specified 
group of particles.
The Avogadro constant NA is given in the data 
booklet. It has the units mol–1.
Structure 1.4.2—Masses of atoms are compared on a scale relative to 12C and are expressed as 
relative atomic mass Ar and relative formula mass Mr.
Determine relative formula masses Mr from relative atomic masses Ar.
Relative atomic mass and relative formula mass have 
no units.
The values of relative atomic masses given to two 
decimal places in the data booklet should be used in 
calculations.Structure 3.1—Atoms increase in mass as their 
position descends in the periodic table. What 
properties might be related to this trend?
Structure 1.4.3—Molar mass M has the units g mol–1.
Solve problems involving the relationships between the number of particles, the amount of substance in 
moles and the mass in grams.
The relationship n=m
M is given in the data booklet.Reactivity 2.1—How can molar masses be used with 
chemical equations to determine the masses of the 
products of a reaction?
Structure 1.4.4—The empirical formula of a compound gives the simplest ratio of atoms of each 
element present in that compound. The molecular formula gives the actual number of atoms of 
each element present in a molecule.
Interconvert the percentage composition by mass and the empirical formula.
Determine the molecular formula of a compound from its empirical formula and molar mass.Syllabus content
36 Chemistry guide
Tool 1—How can experimental data on mass 
changes in combustion reactions be used to derive 
empirical formulas?
Nature of science, Tool 3, Structure 3.2—What is the 
importance of approximation in the determination 
of an empirical formula?
Structure 1.4.5—The molar concentration is determined by the amount of solute and the volume of 
solution.
Solve problems involving the molar concentration, amount of solute and volume of solution.
The use of square brackets to represent molar 
concentration is required.
Units of concentration should include g dm–3 and 
mol dm–3 and conversion between these.
The relationship n=CV is given in the data booklet.Tool 1—What are the considerations in the choice 
of glassware used in preparing a standard solution 
and a serial dilution?
Tool 1, Inquiry 2—How can a calibration curve be 
used to determine the concentration of a 
solution?
Structure 1.4.6—Avogadro’s law states that equal volumes of all gases measured under the same 
conditions of temperature and pressure contain equal numbers of molecules.
Solve problems involving the mole ratio of reactants and/or products and the volume of gases.
Structure 1.5—Avogadro’s law applies to ideal gases. 
Under what conditions might the behaviour of a real 
gas deviate most from an ideal gas?
Additional higher level: None for Structure 1.4
Structure 1.5—Ideal gases
Guiding  question : How  does  the model  of ideal  gas behaviour  help  us to predict  the behaviour  of real 
gases?
Standard level and higher level: 3 hours
Structure 1.5.1—An ideal gas consists of moving particles with negligible volume and no 
intermolecular forces. All collisions between particles are considered elastic.
Recognize the key assumptions in the ideal gas model.
Structure 1.5.2—Real gases deviate from the ideal gas model, particularly at low temperature and 
high pressure.
Explain the limitations of the ideal gas model.
No mathematical coverage is required. Structure 2.2—Under comparable conditions, why 
do some gases deviate more from ideal behaviour 
than others?
Structure 1.5.3—The molar volume of an ideal gas is a constant at a specific temperature and 
pressure.
Investigate the relationship between temperature, pressure and volume for a fixed mass of an ideal gas 
and analyse graphs relating these variables.
The names of specific gas laws will not be assessed. Nature of science, Tools 2 and 3, Reactivity 2.2—
Graphs can be presented as sketches or as Syllabus content
37 Chemistry guide
The value for the molar volume of an ideal gas under 
standard temperature and pressure (STP) is given in 
the data booklet.accurately plotted data points. What are the 
advantages and limitations of each representation?
Structure 1.5.4—The relationship between the pressure, volume, temperature and amount of an 
ideal gas is shown in the ideal gas equation PV=nRT  and the combined gas law P1V1
T1=P2V2
T2.
Solve problems relating to the ideal gas equation.
Units of volume and pressure should be SI only. The 
value of the gas constant R, the ideal gas equation, 
and the combined gas law, are given in the data 
booklet.Tool 1, Inquiry 2—How can the ideal gas law be used 
to calculate the molar mass of a gas from 
experimental data?
Additional higher level: None for Structure 1.5
Structure 2. Models of bonding and structure
Structure 2.1—The ionic model
Guiding question : What determines the ionic nature and properties of a compound?
Standard level and higher level: 4 hours
Structure 2.1.1—When metal atoms lose electrons, they form positive ions called cations.
When non-metal atoms gain electrons, they form negative ions called anions.
Predict the charge of an ion from the electron configuration of the atom.
The formation of ions with different charges from a 
transition element should be included.Structure 3.1—How does the position of an element 
in the periodic table relate to the charge of its ion(s)?
AHL Structure 1.3—How does the trend in 
successive ionization energies of transition elements 
explain their variable oxidation states?
Structure 2.1.2—The ionic bond is formed by electrostatic attractions between oppositely charged 
ions.
Deduce the formula and name of an ionic compound from its component ions, including polyatomic ions.
Binary ionic compounds are named with the cation first, followed by the anion. The anion adopts 
the suffix “ide”.
Interconvert names and formulas of binary ionic compounds.
The following polyatomic ions should be known by 
name and formula: ammonium NH4+, hydroxide OH–, 
nitrate NO3–, hydrogencarbonate HCO3–, carbonate 
CO32–, sulfate SO42–, phosphate PO43–.Reactivity 3.2—Why is the formation of an ionic 
compound from its elements a redox reaction?
AHL Structure 2.2—How is formal charge used to 
predict the preferred structure of sulfate?
AHL Reactivity 3.1—Polyatomic anions are 
conjugate bases of common acids. What is the 
relationship between their stability and the 
conjugate acid’s dissociation constant, Ka?
Structure 2.1.3—Ionic compounds exist as three-dimensional lattice structures, represented by 
empirical formulas.
Explain the physical properties of ionic compounds to include volatility, electrical conductivity and 
solubility.Syllabus content
38 Chemistry guide
Include lattice enthalpy as a measure of the strength 
of the ionic bond in different compounds, 
influenced by ion radius and charge.Tool 1, Inquiry 2—What experimental data 
demonstrate the physical properties of ionic 
compounds?
Structure 3.1—How can lattice enthalpies and the 
bonding continuum explain the trend in melting 
points of metal chlorides across period 3?
Additional higher level: None for Structure 2.1
Structure 2.2—The covalent model
Guiding question : What determines the covalent nature and properties of a substance?
Standard level and higher level: 10 hours
Structure 2.2.1—A covalent bond is formed by the electrostatic attraction between a shared pair of 
electrons and the positively charged nuclei.
The octet rule refers to the tendency of atoms to gain a valence shell with a total of 8 electrons.
Deduce the Lewis formula of molecules and ions for up to four electron pairs on each atom.
Lewis formulas (also known as electron dot or Lewis 
structures) show all the valence electrons (bonding 
and non-bonding pairs) in a covalently bonded 
species.
Electron pairs in a Lewis formula can be shown as 
dots, crosses or dashes.
Molecules containing atoms with fewer than an 
octet of electrons should be covered.
Organic and inorganic examples should be used.Nature of science—What are some of the limitations 
of the octet rule?
Structure 1.3—Why do noble gases form covalent 
bonds less readily than other elements?
Structure 2.1—Why do ionic bonds only form 
between different elements while covalent bonds 
can form between atoms of the same element?
Structure 2.2.2—Single, double and triple bonds involve one, two and three shared pairs of 
electrons respectively.
Explain the relationship between the number of bonds, bond length and bond strength.
Reactivity 2.2—How does the presence of double 
and triple bonds in molecules influence their 
reactivity?
Structure 2.2.3—A coordination bond is a covalent bond in which both the electrons of the shared 
pair originate from the same atom.
Identify coordination bonds in compounds.
AHL—Include coverage of transition element 
complexes.AHL Reactivity 3.4—Why do Lewis acid–base 
reactions lead to the formation of coordination 
bonds?
Structure 2.2.4—The valence shell electron pair repulsion (VSEPR) model enables the shapes of 
molecules to be predicted from the repulsion of electron domains around a central atom.
Predict the electron domain geometry and the molecular geometry for species with up to four electron 
domains.
Include predicting how non-bonding pairs and 
multiple bonds affect bond angles.Nature of science—How useful is the VSEPR model 
at predicting molecular geometry?Syllabus content
39 Chemistry guide
Structure 2.2.5—Bond polarity results from the difference in electronegativities of the bonded 
atoms.
Deduce the polar nature of a covalent bond from electronegativity values.
Bond dipoles can be shown either with partial 
charges or vectors.
Electronegativity values are given in the data 
booklet.Structure 2.1—What properties of ionic compounds 
might be expected in compounds with polar 
covalent bonding?
Structure 2.2.6—Molecular polarity depends on both bond polarity and molecular geometry.
Deduce the net dipole moment of a molecule or ion by considering bond polarity and molecular 
geometry.
Examples should include species in which bond 
dipoles do and do not cancel each other.AHL Structure 3.2—What features of a molecule 
make it “infrared (IR) active”?
Structure 2.2.7—Carbon and silicon form covalent network structures.
Describe the structures and explain the properties of silicon, silicon dioxide and carbon’s allotropes: 
diamond, graphite, fullerenes and graphene.
Allotropes of the same element have different 
bonding and structural patterns, and so have 
different chemical and physical properties.Structure 3.1—Why are silicon–silicon bonds 
generally weaker than carbon–carbon bonds?
Structure 2.2.8—The nature of the force that exists between molecules is determined by the size 
and polarity of the molecules. Intermolecular forces include London (dispersion), dipole-induced 
dipole, dipole–dipole and hydrogen bonding.
Deduce the types of intermolecular force present from the structural features of covalent molecules.
The term “van der Waals forces” should be used as 
an inclusive term to include dipole–dipole, dipole-
induced dipole, and London (dispersion) forces.
Hydrogen bonds occur when hydrogen, being 
covalently bonded to an electronegative atom, has 
an attractive interaction on a neighbouring 
electronegative atom.Structure 1.5—To what extent can intermolecular 
forces explain the deviation of real gases from ideal 
behaviour?
Nature of science, Structure 1.1, 2.1, 2.3—How do 
the terms “bonds” and “forces” compare?
Nature of science—How can advances in 
technology lead to changes in scientific definitions, 
e.g. the updated International Union of Pure and 
Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) definition of the 
hydrogen bond?
Structure 2.2.9—Given comparable molar mass, the relative strengths of intermolecular forces are 
generally: London (dispersion) forces < dipole–dipole forces < hydrogen bonding.
Explain the physical properties of covalent substances to include volatility, electrical conductivity and 
solubility in terms of their structure.
Tool 1, Inquiry 2—What experimental data 
demonstrate the physical properties of covalent 
substances?
Structure 3.2—To what extent does a functional 
group determine the nature of the intermolecular 
forces?Syllabus content
40 Chemistry guide
Structure 2.2.10—Chromatography is a technique used to separate the components of a mixture 
based on their relative attractions involving intermolecular forces to mobile and stationary phases.
Explain, calculate and interpret the retardation factor values, RF.
Knowledge of the use of locating agents in 
chromatography is not required.
The technical and operational details of a gas 
chromatograph or high-performance liquid 
chromatograph will not be assessed.Tool 1—How can a mixture be separated using 
paper chromatography or thin layer 
chromatography (TLC)?
Additional higher level: 8 hours
Structure 2.2.11—Resonance structures occur when there is more than one possible position for a 
double bond in a molecule.
Deduce resonance structures of molecules and ions.
Include the term “delocalization”. Structure 1.3—Why are oxygen and ozone 
dissociated by different wavelengths of light?
Structure 2.2.12—Benzene, C6H6, is an important example of a molecule that has resonance.
Discuss the structure of benzene from physical and chemical evidence.
Reactivity 2.1, 2.2—How does the resonance energy 
in benzene explain its relative unreactivity?
Reactivity 3.4—What are the structural features of 
benzene that favour it undergoing electrophilic 
substitution reactions?
Structure 2.2.13—Some atoms can form molecules in which they have an expanded octet of 
electrons.
Visually represent Lewis formulas for species with five and six electron domains around the central atom.
Deduce the electron domain geometry and the molecular geometry for these species using the VSEPR 
model.
Structure 3.1—How does the ability of some atoms 
to expand their octet relate to their position in the 
periodic table?
Structure 2.2.14—Formal charge values can be calculated for each atom in a species and used to 
determine which of several possible Lewis formulas is preferred.
Apply formal charge to determine a preferred Lewis formula from different Lewis formulas for a species.
Structure 3.1, Reactivity 3.2—What are the different 
assumptions made in the calculation of formal 
charge and of oxidation states for atoms in a 
species?
Structure 2.2.15—Sigma bonds σ form by the head-on combination of atomic orbitals where the 
electron density is concentrated along the bond axis.
Pi bonds π form by the lateral combination of p-orbitals where the electron density is 
concentrated on opposite sides of the bond axis.
Deduce the presence of sigma bonds and pi bonds in molecules and ions.Syllabus content
41 Chemistry guide
Include both organic and inorganic examples.
Structure 2.2.16—Hybridization is the concept of mixing atomic orbitals to form new hybrid 
orbitals for bonding.
Analyse the hybridization and bond formation in molecules and ions.
Identify the relationships between Lewis formulas, electron domains, molecular geometry and type of 
hybridization.
Predict the geometry around an atom from its hybridization, and vice versa.
Include both organic and inorganic examples.
Only sp, sp2 and sp3 hybridization need to be 
covered.
Structure 2.3—The metallic model
Guiding question : What determines the metallic nature and properties of an element
Standard level and higher level: 2 hours
Structure 2.3.1—A metallic bond is the electrostatic attraction between a lattice of cations and 
delocalized electrons.
Explain the electrical conductivity, thermal conductivity and malleability of metals.
Relate characteristic properties of metals to their 
uses.Tool 1, Inquiry 2, Structure 3.1—What experimental 
data demonstrate the physical properties of metals, 
and trends in these properties, in the periodic table?
Reactivity 3.2—What trends in reactivity of metals 
can be predicted from the periodic table?
Structure 2.3.2—The strength of a metallic bond depends on the charge of the ions and the radius 
of the metal ion.
Explain trends in melting points of s and p block metals.
A simple treatment in terms of charge of cations and 
electron density is required.Structure 2.4—What are the features of metallic 
bonding that make it possible for metals to form 
alloys?
Additional higher level: 1 hour
Structure 2.3.3—Transition elements have delocalized d-electrons.
Explain the high melting point and electrical conductivity of transition elements.
Chemical properties of transition elements are 
covered in Reactivity 3.4.Structure 3.1—Why is the trend in melting points of 
metals across a period less evident across the d-
block?
Structure 2.4—From models to materials
Guiding question : What role do bonding and structure have in the design of materials?
Standard level and higher level: 4 hours
Structure 2.4.1—Bonding is best described as a continuum between the ionic, covalent and metallic 
models, and can be represented by a bonding triangle.
Use bonding models to explain the properties of a material.Syllabus content
42 Chemistry guide
A triangular bonding diagram is provided in the 
data booklet.Structure 3.1—How do the trends in properties of 
period 3 oxides reflect the trend in their bonding?
Nature of science, Structures 2.1, 2.2—What are the 
limitations of discrete bonding categories?
Structure 2.4.2—The position of a compound in the bonding triangle is determined by the relative 
contributions of the three bonding types to the overall bond.
Determine the position of a compound in the bonding triangle from electronegativity data.
Predict the properties of a compound based on its position in the bonding triangle.
To illustrate the relationship between bonding type 
and properties, include example materials of varying 
percentage bonding character. Only binary 
compounds need to be considered.
Calculations of percentage ionic character are not 
required.
Electronegativity data are given in the data booklet.Structure 2.1, 2.2, 2.3—Why do composites like 
reinforced concretes, which are made from ionic 
and covalently bonded components and steel bars, 
have unique properties?
Structure 2.4.3—Alloys are mixtures of a metal and other metals or non-metals. They have 
enhanced properties.
Explain the properties of alloys in terms of non-directional bonding.
Illustrate with common examples such as bronze, 
brass and stainless steel. Specific examples of alloys 
do not have to be learned.Structure 1.1—Why are alloys more correctly 
described as mixtures rather than as compounds?
Structure 2.4.4—Polymers are large molecules, or macromolecules, made from repeating subunits 
called monomers.
Describe the common properties of plastics in terms of their structure.
Examples of natural and synthetic polymers should 
be discussed.Structure 3.2—What are the structural features of 
some plastics that make them biodegradable?
Structure 2.4.5—Addition polymers form by the breaking of a double bond in each monomer.
Represent the repeating unit of an addition polymer from given monomer structures.
Examples should include polymerization reactions 
of alkenes.
Structures of monomers do not have to be learned 
but will be provided or will need to be deduced 
from the polymer.Structure 3.2—What functional groups in molecules 
can enable them to act as monomers for addition 
reactions?
Reactivity 2.1—Why is the atom economy 100% for 
an addition polymerization reaction?
Additional higher level: 1 hour
Structure 2.4.6—Condensation polymers form by the reaction between functional groups in each 
monomer with the release of a small molecule.
Represent the repeating unit of polyamides and polyesters from given monomer structures.
All biological macromolecules form by condensation 
reactions and break down by hydrolysis.Structure 3.2—What functional groups in molecules 
can enable them to act as monomers for 
condensation reactions?Syllabus content
43 Chemistry guide
Structure 3. Classification of matter
Structure 3.1—The periodic table: Classification of elements
Guiding  question : How  does  the periodic  table  help  us to predict  patterns  and  trends  in the properties  of 
elements?
Standard level and higher level: 7 hours
Structure 3.1.1—The periodic table consists of periods, groups and blocks.
Identify the positions of metals, metalloids and non-metals in the periodic table.
The four blocks associated with the sublevels s, p, d, f 
should be recognized.
A copy of the periodic table is available in the data 
booklet.
Structure 3.1.2—The period number shows the outer energy level that is occupied by electrons.
Elements in a group have a common number of valence electrons.
Deduce the electron configuration of an atom up to Z= 36  from the element’s position in the periodic 
table and vice versa.
Groups are numbered from 1 to 18.
The classifications “alkali metals”, “halogens”, 
“transition elements” and “noble gases” should be 
known.Nature of science, Structure 1.2—How has the 
organization of elements in the periodic table 
facilitated the discovery of new elements?
Structure 3.1.3—Periodicity refers to trends in properties of elements across a period and down a 
group.
Explain the periodicity of atomic radius, ionic radius, ionization energy, electron affinity and 
electronegativity.
Structure 3.1.4—Trends in properties of elements down a group include the increasing metallic 
character of group 1 elements and decreasing non-metallic character of group 17 elements.
Describe and explain the reactions of group  1 metals with water, and of group  17 elements with halide 
ions.
Inquiry 2, Tool 2—Why are simulations often used in 
exploring the trends in chemical reactivity of 
group  1 and group  17 elements?
Structure 3.1.5—Metallic and non-metallic properties show a continuum. This includes the trend 
from basic metal oxides through amphoteric to acidic non-metal oxides.
Deduce equations for the reactions with water of the oxides of group  1 and group  2 metals, carbon and 
sulfur.
Include acid rain caused by gaseous non-metal 
oxides, and ocean acidification caused by increasing 
CO2 levels.Structure 2.1, 2.2—How do differences in bonding 
explain the differences in the properties of metal 
and non-metal oxides?
Structure 3.1.6—The oxidation state is a number assigned to an atom to show the number of 
electrons transferred in forming a bond. It is the charge that atom would have if the compound 
were composed of ions.
Deduce the oxidation states of an atom in an ion or a compound.Syllabus content
44 Chemistry guide
Explain why the oxidation state of an element is zero.
Oxidation states are shown with a + or – sign 
followed by the Arabic symbol for the number, e.g. 
+2, –1. Examples should include hydrogen in metal 
hydrides (–1) and oxygen in peroxides (–1).
The terms “oxidation number” and “oxidation state” 
are often used interchangeably, and either term is 
acceptable in assessment.
Naming conventions for oxyanions use oxidation 
numbers shown with Roman numerals, but generic 
names persist and are acceptable. Examples include 
NO3– nitrate, NO2– nitrite, SO42– sulfate, SO32– sulfite.Reactivity 3.2—How can oxidation states be used to 
analyse redox reactions?
Additional higher level: 4 hours
Structure 3.1.7—Discontinuities occur in the trend of increasing first ionization energy across a 
period.
Explain how these discontinuities provide evidence for the existence of energy sublevels.
Explanations should be based on the energy of the 
electron removed, rather than on the “special 
stability” of filled and half-filled sublevels.
Structure 3.1.8—Transition elements have incomplete d-sublevels that give them characteristic 
properties.
Recognize properties, including: variable oxidation state, high melting points, magnetic properties, 
catalytic properties, formation of coloured compounds and formation of complex ions with ligands.
Knowledge of different types of magnetism will not 
be assessed.Nature of science, Structure 2.3—What are the 
arguments for and against including scandium as a 
transition element?
Structure 3.1.9—The formation of variable oxidation states in transition elements can be explained 
by the fact that their successive ionization energies are close in value.
Deduce the electron configurations of ions of the first-row transition elements.
Structure 3.1.10—Transition element complexes are coloured due to the absorption of light when 
an electron is promoted between the orbitals in the split d-sublevels. The colour absorbed is 
complementary to the colour observed.
Apply the colour wheel to deduce the wavelengths and frequencies of light absorbed and/or observed.
Students are not expected to know the different 
splitting patterns and their relation to the 
coordination number.
The colour wheel and the equation c=λ f are given 
in the data booklet.Reactivity 3.4—What is the nature of the reaction 
between transition element ions and ligands in 
forming complex ions?
Tool 1, Inquiry 2—How can colorimetry or 
spectrophotometry be used to calculate the 
concentration of a solution of coloured ions?
Structure 3.2—Functional groups: Classification of organic compounds
Guiding question : How does the classification of organic molecules help us to predict their properties?
Standard level and higher level: 9 hoursSyllabus content
45 Chemistry guide
Structure 3.2.1—Organic compounds can be represented by different types of formulas. These 
include empirical, molecular, structural (full and condensed), stereochemical and skeletal.
Identify different formulas and interconvert molecular, skeletal and structural formulas.
Construct 3D models (real or virtual) of organic molecules.
Stereochemical formulas are not expected to be 
drawn, except where specifically indicated.Structure 2.2—What is unique about carbon that 
enables it to form more compounds than the sum of 
all the other elements’ compounds?
Nature of science, Structure 2.2—What are the 
advantages and disadvantages of different 
depictions of an organic compound (e.g. structural 
formula, stereochemical formula, skeletal formula, 
3D models)?
Structure 3.2.2—Functional groups give characteristic physical and chemical properties to a 
compound. Organic compounds are divided into classes according to the functional groups present 
in their molecules.
Identify the following functional groups by name and structure: halogeno, hydroxyl, carbonyl, carboxyl, 
alkoxy, amino, amido, ester, phenyl.
The terms “saturated” and “unsaturated” should be 
included.AHL Structure 2.4—What is the nature of the 
reaction that occurs when two amino acids form a 
dipeptide?
Nature of science, Reactivity 3.2, 3.4—How can 
functional group reactivity be used to determine a 
reaction pathway between compounds, e.g. 
converting ethene into ethanoic acid?
Structure 3.2.3—A homologous series is a family of compounds in which successive members differ 
by a common structural unit, typically CH2. Each homologous series can be described by a general 
formula.
Identify the following homologous series: alkanes, alkenes, alkynes, halogenoalkanes, alcohols, aldehydes, 
ketones, carboxylic acids, ethers, amines, amides and esters.
Nature of science, Tool 2—How useful are 3D 
models (real or virtual) to visualize the invisible?
Structure 3.2.4—Successive members of a homologous series show a trend in physical properties.
Describe and explain the trend in melting and boiling points of members of a homologous series.
Structure 2.2—What is the influence of the carbon 
chain length, branching and the nature of the 
functional groups on intermolecular forces?
Structure 3.2.5—“IUPAC nomenclature” refers to a set of rules used by the International Union of 
Pure and Applied Chemistry to apply systematic names to organic and inorganic compounds.
Apply IUPAC nomenclature to saturated or mono-unsaturated compounds that have up to six carbon 
atoms in the parent chain and contain one type of the following functional groups: halogeno, hydroxyl, 
carbonyl, carboxyl.
Include straight-chain and branched-chain isomers.Syllabus content
46 Chemistry guide
Structure 3.2.6—Structural isomers are molecules that have the same molecular formula but 
different connectivities.
Recognize isomers, including branched, straight-chain, position and functional group isomers.
Primary, secondary and tertiary alcohols, 
halogenoalkanes and amines should be included.AHL Structure 2.2—How does the fact that there are 
only 3 isomers of dibromobenzene support the 
current model of benzene’s structure?
Additional higher level: 11 hours
Structure 3.2.7—Stereoisomers have the same constitution (atom identities, connectivities and 
bond multiplicities) but different spatial arrangements of atoms.
Describe and explain the features that give rise to cis-trans  isomerism; recognize it in non-cyclic alkenes 
and C3 and C4 cycloalkanes.
Draw stereochemical formulas showing the tetrahedral arrangement around a chiral carbon.
Describe and explain a chiral carbon atom giving rise to stereoisomers with different optical properties.
Recognize a pair of enantiomers as non-superimposable mirror images from 3D modelling (real or virtual).
Nomenclature using the E‐Z system will not be 
assessed.
The terms “chiral”, “optical activity”, “enantiomer” 
and “racemic” mixture should be understood.
Knowledge of the different chemical properties of 
enantiomers can be limited to the fact that they 
behave differently in chiral environments.
Wedge-dash type representations involving tapered 
bonds should be used for the representation of 
enantiomers.
Structure 3.2.8—Mass spectrometry (MS) of organic compounds can cause fragmentation of 
molecules.
Deduce information about the structural features of a compound from specific MS fragmentation patterns.
Include reference to the molecular ion.
Data on specific MS fragments are provided in the 
data booklet .
Structure 3.2.9—Infrared (IR) spectra can be used to identify the type of bond present in a molecule.
Interpret the functional group region of an IR spectrum, using a table of characteristic frequencies 
(wavenumber/cm–1).
Include reference to the absorption of IR radiation 
by greenhouse gases.
Data for interpretation of IR spectra are given in the 
data booklet.Structure 2.2—What features of a molecule 
determine whether it is IR active or not?
Reactivity 1.3—What properties of a greenhouse gas 
determine its “global warming potential”?
Structure 3.2.10—Proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H NMR) gives information on 
the different chemical environments of hydrogen atoms in a molecule.
Interpret 1H NMR spectra to deduce the structures of organic molecules from the number of signals, the 
chemical shifts, and the relative areas under signals (integration traces).Syllabus content
47 Chemistry guide
Structure 3.2.11—Individual signals can be split into clusters of peaks.
Interpret 1H NMR spectra from splitting patterns showing singlets, doublets, triplets and quartets to 
deduce greater structural detail.
Data for interpretation of 1H NMR spectra are given 
in the data booklet.
Structure 3.2.12—Data from different techniques are often combined in structural analysis.
Interpret a variety of data, including analytical spectra, to determine the structure of a molecule.
Reactivity
Reactivity 1. What drives chemical reactions?
Reactivity 1.1—Measuring enthalpy changes
Guiding  question : What  can be deduced  from  the temperature  change  that  accompanies  chemical  or 
physical change?
Standard level and higher level: 5 hours
Reactivity 1.1.1—Chemical reactions involve a transfer of energy between the system and the 
surroundings, while total energy is conserved.
Understand the difference between heat and temperature.
Structure 1.1—What is the relationship between 
temperature and kinetic energy of particles?
Reactivity 1.1.2—Reactions are described as endothermic or exothermic, depending on the 
direction of energy transfer between the system and the surroundings.
Understand the temperature change (decrease or increase) that accompanies endothermic and 
exothermic reactions, respectively.
Tool 1, Inquiry 2—What observations would you 
expect to make during an endothermic and an 
exothermic reaction?
Reactivity 1.1.3—The relative stability of reactants and products determines whether reactions are 
endothermic or exothermic.
Sketch and interpret energy profiles for endothermic and exothermic reactions.
Axes for energy profiles should be labelled as 
reaction coordinate x, potential energy y.Structure 2.2—Most combustion reactions are 
exothermic; how does the bonding in N2 explain the 
fact that its combustion is endothermic?
Reactivity 1.1.4—The standard enthalpy change for a chemical reaction, ΔH⦵, refers to the heat 
transferred at constant pressure under standard conditions and states. It can be determined from 
the change in temperature of a pure substance.
Apply the equations Q=mcΔT  and ΔH= −Q
n in the calculation of the enthalpy change of a reaction.
The units of ΔH⦵ are kJ mol–1. Tool 1, Inquiry 1, 2, 3—How can the enthalpy 
change for combustion reactions, such as for 
alcohols or food, be investigated experimentally?Syllabus content
48 Chemistry guide
The equation Q=mcΔT  and the value of c, the 
specific heat capacity of water, are given in the data 
booklet.Tool 1, Inquiry 3—Why do calorimetry experiments 
typically measure a smaller change in temperature 
than is expected from theoretical values?
Additional higher level: None for Reactivity 1.1
Reactivity 1.2—Energy cycles in reactions
Guiding  question : How  does  application  of the law of conservation  of energy  help  us to predict  energy 
changes during reactions?
Standard level and higher level: 3 hours
Reactivity 1.2.1—Bond-breaking absorbs and bond-forming releases energy.
Calculate the enthalpy change of a reaction from given average bond enthalpy data.
Include explanation of why bond enthalpy data are 
average values and may differ from those measured 
experimentally.
Average bond enthalpy values are given in the data 
booklet.Structure 2.2—How would you expect bond 
enthalpy data to relate to bond length and polarity?
Reactivity 3.4—How does the strength of a carbon–
halogen bond affect the rate of a nucleophilic 
substitution reaction?
Reactivity 1.2.2—Hess’s law states that the enthalpy change for a reaction is independent of the 
pathway between the initial and final states.
Apply Hess’s law to calculate enthalpy changes in multistep reactions.
Additional higher level: 5 hours
Reactivity 1.2.3—Standard enthalpy changes of combustion, ΔHc⦵, and formation, ΔHf⦵, data are 
used in thermodynamic calculations.
Deduce equations and solutions to problems involving these terms.
Enthalpy of combustion and formation data are 
given in the data booklet.Structure 2.2—Would you expect allotropes of an 
element, such as diamond and graphite, to have 
different ΔHf⦵ values?
Reactivity 1.2.4—An application of Hess’s law uses enthalpy of formation data or enthalpy of 
combustion data to calculate the enthalpy change of a reaction.
Calculate enthalpy changes of a reaction using ΔHf⦵ data or ΔHc⦵ data:
ΔH⦵= ΣΔHf⦵products − ΣΔHf⦵reactants
ΔH⦵= ΣΔHc⦵reactants − ΣΔHc⦵products
The equations to determine the enthalpy change of 
a reaction using ΔHf⦵ data or ΔHc⦵ data are given in 
the data booklet.
Reactivity 1.2.5—A Born–Haber cycle is an application of Hess’s law, used to show energy changes 
in the formation of an ionic compound.
Interpret and determine values from a Born–Haber cycle for compounds composed of univalent and 
divalent ions.
The cycle includes: ionization energies, enthalpy of 
atomization (using sublimation and/or bond Structure 2.1—What are the factors that influence 
the strength of lattice enthalpy in an ionic 
compound?Syllabus content
49 Chemistry guide
enthalpies), electron affinities, lattice enthalpy, 
enthalpy of formation.
The construction of a complete Born–Haber cycle 
will not be assessed.
Reactivity 1.3—Energy from fuels
Guiding question : What are the challenges of using chemical energy to address our energy needs?
Standard level and higher level: 4 hours
Reactivity 1.3.1—Reactive metals, non-metals and organic compounds undergo combustion 
reactions when heated in oxygen.
Deduce equations for reactions of combustion, including hydrocarbons and alcohols.
Reactivity 2.2—Why is high activation energy often 
considered to be a useful property of a fuel?
Reactivity 3.2—Which species are the oxidizing and 
reducing agents in a combustion reaction?
Reactivity 1.3.2—Incomplete combustion of organic compounds, especially hydrocarbons, leads to 
the production of carbon monoxide and carbon.
Deduce equations for the incomplete combustion of hydrocarbons and alcohols.
Inquiry 2—What might be observed when a fuel 
such as methane is burned in a limited supply of 
oxygen?
Reactivity 2.1—How does limiting the supply of 
oxygen in combustion affect the products and 
increase health risks?
Reactivity 1.3.3—Fossil fuels include coal, crude oil and natural gas, which have different 
advantages and disadvantages.
Evaluate the amount of carbon dioxide added to the atmosphere when different fuels burn.
Understand the link between carbon dioxide levels and the greenhouse effect.
The tendency for incomplete combustion and 
energy released per unit mass should be covered.Structure 3.2—Why do larger hydrocarbons have a 
greater tendency to undergo incomplete 
combustion?
AHL Structure 3.2—Why is carbon dioxide described 
as a greenhouse gas?
Nature of science, Reactivity 3.2—What are some of 
the environmental, economic, ethical and social 
implications of burning fossil fuels?
Reactivity 1.3.4—Biofuels are produced from the biological fixation of carbon over a short period of 
time through photosynthesis.
Understand the difference between renewable and non-renewable energy sources.
Consider the advantages and disadvantages of biofuels.
The reactants and products of photosynthesis 
should be known.Syllabus content
50 Chemistry guide
Reactivity 1.3.5—A fuel cell can be used to convert chemical energy from a fuel directly to electrical 
energy.
Deduce half-equations for the electrode reactions in a fuel cell.
Hydrogen and methanol should be covered as fuels 
for fuel cells.
The use of proton exchange membranes will not be 
assessed.Reactivity 3.2—What are the main differences 
between a fuel cell and a primary (voltaic) cell?
Additional higher level: None for Reactivity 1.3
Reactivity 1.4—Entropy and spontaneity (Additional higher level)
Guiding question : What determines the direction of chemical change?
Additional higher level: 5 hours
Reactivity 1.4.1—Entropy, S, is a measure of the dispersal or distribution of matter and/or energy in 
a system. The more ways the energy can be distributed, the higher the entropy. Under the same 
conditions, the entropy of a gas is greater than that of a liquid, which in turn is greater than that of a 
solid.
Predict whether a physical or chemical change will result in an increase or decrease in entropy of a system.
Calculate standard entropy changes, ΔS⦵, from standard entropy values, S⦵.
Standard entropy values are given in the data 
booklet.Structure 1.1—Why is the entropy of a perfect 
crystal at 0 K predicted to be zero?
Reactivity 1.4.2—Change in Gibbs energy, ΔG, relates the energy that can be obtained from a 
chemical reaction to the change in enthalpy, ΔH, change in entropy, ΔS, and absolute temperature, 
T.
Apply the equation ΔG⦵= ΔH⦵− TΔS⦵ to calculate unknown values of these terms.
Thermodynamic data values are given in the data booklet.
Note the units: ΔH kJ mol–1; ΔS J K–1 mol–1; ΔG kJ mol–1.
Reactivity 1.4.3—At constant pressure, a change is spontaneous if the change in Gibbs energy, ΔG, 
is negative.
Interpret the sign of ΔG calculated from thermodynamic data.
Determine the temperature at which a reaction becomes spontaneous.
ΔG takes into account the direct entropy change 
resulting from the transformation of the chemicals 
and the indirect entropy change of the surroundings 
resulting from the transfer of heat energy .Reactivity 3.2—How can electrochemical data also 
be used to predict the spontaneity of a reaction?
Reactivity 1.4.4—As a reaction approaches equilibrium, ΔG becomes less negative and finally 
reaches zero.
Perform calculations using the equation ΔG= ΔG⦵+RT lnQ and its application to a system at 
equilibrium ΔG⦵=−RT  lnK.
The equations are given in the data booklet. Reactivity 2.3—What is the likely composition of an 
equilibrium mixture when ΔG⦵ is positive?Syllabus content
51 Chemistry guide
Reactivity 2. How much, how fast and how far?
Reactivity 2.1—How much? The amount of chemical change
Guiding question : How are chemical equations used to calculate reacting ratios?
Standard level and higher level: 7 hours
Reactivity 2.1.1—Chemical equations show the ratio of reactants and products in a reaction.
Deduce chemical equations when reactants and products are specified.
Include the use of state symbols in chemical 
equations.Reactivity 3.2—When is it useful to use half-
equations?
Reactivity 2.1.2—The mole ratio of an equation can be used to determine:
• the masses and/or volumes of reactants and products
• the concentrations of reactants and products for reactions occurring in solution.
Calculate reacting masses and/or volumes and concentrations of reactants and products.
Avogadro’s law and definitions of molar 
concentration are covered in Structure 1.4.
The values for Ar given in the data booklet to two 
decimal places should be used in calculations.Structure 1.5—How does the molar volume of a gas 
vary with changes in temperature and pressure?
Nature of science, Structure 1.4—In what ways does 
Avogadro’s law help us to describe, but not explain, 
the behaviour of gases?
Reactivity 2.1.3—The limiting reactant determines the theoretical yield.
Identify the limiting and excess reactants from given data.
Distinguish between the theoretical yield and the 
experimental yield.Tool 1, Inquiry 1, 2, 3—What errors may cause the 
experimental yield to be i) higher and ii) lower than 
the theoretical yield?
Reactivity 2.1.4—The percentage yield is calculated from the ratio of experimental yield to 
theoretical yield.
Solve problems involving reacting quantities, limiting and excess reactants, theoretical, experimental and 
percentage yields.
Reactivity 2.1.5—The atom economy is a measure of efficiency in green chemistry.
Calculate the atom economy from the stoichiometry of a reaction.
Include discussion of the inverse relationship 
between atom economy and wastage in industrial 
processes.
The equation for calculation of the atom economy is 
given in the data booklet.Structure 2.4, Reactivity 2.2—The atom economy 
and the percentage yield both give important 
information about the “efficiency” of a chemical 
process. What other factors should be considered in 
this assessment?
Additional higher level: None for Reactivity 2.1
Reactivity 2.2—How fast? The rate of chemical change
Guiding question : How can the rate of a reaction be controlled?
Standard level and higher level: 9 hours
Reactivity 2.2.1—The rate of reaction is expressed as the change in concentration of a particular 
reactant/product per unit time.Syllabus content
52 Chemistry guide
Determine rates of reaction.
Calculation of reaction rates from tangents of 
graphs of concentration, volume or mass against 
time should be covered.Tool 1, 3, Inquiry 2—Concentration changes in 
reactions are not usually measured directly. What 
methods are used to provide data to determine the 
rate of reactions?
Tool 1—What experiments measuring reaction rates 
might use time as i) a dependent variable ii) an 
independent variable?
Reactivity 2.2.2—Species react as a result of collisions of sufficient energy and proper orientation.
Explain the relationship between the kinetic energy of the particles and the temperature in kelvin, and the 
role of collision geometry.
Structure 1.1—What is the relationship between the 
kinetic molecular theory and collision theory?
Reactivity 2.2.3—Factors that influence the rate of a reaction include pressure, concentration, 
surface area, temperature and the presence of a catalyst.
Predict and explain the effects of changing conditions on the rate of a reaction.
Tool 1—What variables must be controlled in 
studying the effect of a factor on the rate of a 
reaction?
Nature of science, Tool 3, Inquiry 3—How can graphs 
provide evidence of systematic and random error?
Reactivity 2.2.4—Activation energy, Ea, is the minimum energy that colliding particles need for a 
successful collision leading to a reaction.
Construct Maxwell–Boltzmann energy distribution curves to explain the effect of temperature on the 
probability of successful collisions.
Reactivity 2.2.5—Catalysts increase the rate of reaction by providing an alternative reaction 
pathway with lower Ea.
Sketch and explain energy profiles with and without catalysts for endothermic and exothermic reactions.
Construct Maxwell–Boltzmann energy distribution curves to explain the effect of different values for Ea on 
the probability of successful collisions.
Biological catalysts are called enzymes.
The different mechanisms of homogeneous and 
heterogeneous catalysts will not be assessed.Reactivity 2.3—What is the relative effect of a 
catalyst on the rate of the forward and backward 
reactions?
AHL Structure 3.1—What are the features of 
transition elements that make them useful as 
catalysts?
Additional higher level: 6 hours
Reactivity 2.2.6—Many reactions occur in a series of elementary steps. The slowest step determines 
the rate of the reaction.
Evaluate proposed reaction mechanisms and recognize reaction intermediates.
Distinguish between intermediates and transition states, and recognize both in energy profiles of 
reactions.Syllabus content
53 Chemistry guide
Include examples where the rate-determining step 
is not the first step.
Proposed reaction mechanisms must be consistent 
with kinetic and stoichiometric data.Reactivity 3.4—Which mechanism in the hydrolysis 
of halogenoalkanes involves an intermediate?
Reactivity 2.2.7—Energy profiles can be used to show the activation energy and transition state of 
the rate-determining step in a multistep reaction.
Construct and interpret energy profiles from kinetic data.
Reactivity 2.2.8—The molecularity of an elementary step is the number of reacting particles taking 
part in that step.
Interpret the terms “unimolecular”, “bimolecular” and “termolecular”.
Reactivity 2.2.9—Rate equations depend on the mechanism of the reaction and can only be 
determined experimentally.
Deduce the rate equation for a reaction from experimental data.
Reactivity 2.2.10—The order of a reaction with respect to a reactant is the exponent to which the 
concentration of the reactant is raised in the rate equation.
The order with respect to a reactant can describe the number of particles taking part in the rate-
determining step.
The overall reaction order is the sum of the orders with respect to each reactant.
Sketch, identify and analyse graphical representations of zero, first and second order reactions.
Concentration–time and rate–concentration graphs 
should be included.
Only integer values for order of reaction will be 
assessed.Tool 1, 3, Inquiry 2—What measurements are 
needed to deduce the order of reaction for a specific 
reactant?
Nature of science—Why are reaction mechanisms 
only considered as “possible mechanisms”?
Reactivity 2.2.11—The rate constant, k, is temperature dependent and its units are determined 
from the overall order of the reaction.
Solve problems involving the rate equation, including the units of k.
Reactivity 3.4—What are the rate equations and 
units of k for the reactions of primary and tertiary 
halogenoalkanes with aqueous alkali?
Reactivity 2.2.12—The Arrhenius equation uses the temperature dependence of the rate constant 
to determine the activation energy.
Describe the qualitative relationship between temperature and the rate constant.
Analyse graphical representations of the Arrhenius equation, including its linear form.
The Arrhenius equation and its linear form are given 
in the data booklet.
Reactivity 2.2.13—The Arrhenius factor, A, takes into account the frequency of collisions with 
proper orientations.
Determine the activation energy and the Arrhenius factor from experimental data.Syllabus content
54 Chemistry guide
Reactivity 2.3—How far? The extent of chemical change
Guiding question : How can the extent of a reversible reaction be influenced?
Standard level and higher level: 5 hours
Reactivity 2.3.1—A state of dynamic equilibrium is reached in a closed system when the rates of 
forward and backward reactions are equal.
Describe the characteristics of a physical and chemical system at equilibrium.
Reactivity 2.3.2—The equilibrium law describes how the equilibrium constant, K, can be 
determined from the stoichiometry of a reaction.
Deduce the equilibrium constant expression from an equation for a homogeneous reaction.
Reactivity 2.3.3—The magnitude of the equilibrium constant indicates the extent of a reaction at 
equilibrium and is temperature dependent.
Determine the relationships between K values for reactions that are the reverse of each other at the same 
temperature.
Include the extent of reaction for: 
K<<1, K<1,K =1,K>1,K>>1 .Reactivity 3.1—How does the value of K for the 
dissociation of an acid convey information about its 
strength?
Reactivity 2.3.4—Le Châtelier’s principle enables the prediction of the qualitative effects of changes 
in concentration, temperature and pressure to a system at equilibrium.
Apply Le Châtelier’s principle to predict and explain responses to changes of systems at equilibrium.
Include the effects on the value of K and on the 
equilibrium composition.
Le Châtelier’s principle can be applied to 
heterogeneous equilibria such as:
X(g) ⇌ X(aq)Reactivity 2.2—Why do catalysts have no effect on 
the value of K or on the equilibrium composition?
Additional higher level: 4 hours
Reactivity 2.3.5—The reaction quotient, Q, is calculated using the equilibrium expression with non-
equilibrium concentrations of reactants and products.
Calculate the reaction quotient Q from the concentrations of reactants and products at a particular time, 
and determine the direction in which the reaction will proceed to reach equilibrium.
Reactivity 2.3.6—The equilibrium law is the basis for quantifying the composition of an equilibrium 
mixture.
Solve problems involving values of K and initial and equilibrium concentrations of the components of an 
equilibrium mixture.
The approximation [reactant]initial ≈ [reactant]eqm 
when K is very small should be understood.
The use of quadratic equations is not expected. Only 
homogeneous equilibria will be assessed.Reactivity 3.1—How does the equilibrium law help 
us to determine the pH of a weak acid, weak base or 
a buffer solution?
Reactivity 2.3.7—The equilibrium constant and Gibbs energy change, ΔG, can both be used to 
measure the position of an equilibrium reaction.Syllabus content
55 Chemistry guide
Calculations using the equation  ΔG⦵=−RT  lnK.
The equation is given in the data booklet.Reactivity 1.4—How can Gibbs energy be used to 
explain which of the forward or backward reaction is 
favoured before reaching equilibrium?
Reactivity 3. What are the mechanisms of chemical change?
Reactivity 3.1—Proton transfer reactions
Guiding question : What happens when protons are transferred?
Standard level and higher level: 8 hours
Reactivity 3.1.1—Brønsted–Lowry acid is a proton donor and a Brønsted–Lowry base is a proton 
acceptor.
Deduce the Brønsted–Lowry acid and base in a reaction.
A proton in aqueous solution can be represented as 
both H+(aq) and H3O+(aq).
The distinction between the terms “base” and 
“alkali” should be understood.Nature of science, Reactivity 3.4—Why has the 
definition of acid evolved over time?
Reactivity 3.1.2—A pair of species differing by a single proton is called a conjugate acid–base pair.
Deduce the formula of the conjugate acid or base of any Brønsted–Lowry base or acid.
Structure 2.1—What are the conjugate acids of the 
polyatomic anions listed in Structure 2.1?
Reactivity 3.1.3—Some species can act as both Brønsted–Lowry acids and bases.
Interpret and formulate equations to show acid–base reactions of these species.
Structure 3.1—What is the periodic trend in the 
acid–base properties of metal and non-metal 
oxides?
Structure 3.1—Why does the release of oxides of 
nitrogen and sulfur into the atmosphere cause acid 
rain?
Reactivity 3.1.4—The pH scale can be used to describe the [H+] of a solution:
pH = –log10[H+]; [H+] = 10–pH
Perform calculations involving the logarithmic relationship between pH and [H+].
Include the estimation of pH using universal 
indicator, and the precise measurement of pH using 
a pH meter/probe.
The equations for pH are given in the data booklet.Tools 1, 2, 3—What is the shape of a sketch graph of 
pH against [H+]?
Nature of science, Tool 2—When are digital sensors 
(e.g. pH probes) more suitable than analogue 
methods (e.g. pH paper/solution)?
Reactivity 3.1.5—The ion product constant of water, Kw, shows an inverse relationship between [H+] 
and [OH–]. Kw = [H+] [OH–]
Recognize solutions as acidic, neutral and basic from the relative values of [H+] and [OH–].
The equation for Kw and its value at 298 K are given 
in the data booklet.Reactivity 2.3—Why does the extent of ionization of 
water increase as temperature increases?Syllabus content
56 Chemistry guide
Reactivity 3.1.6—Strong and weak acids and bases differ in the extent of ionization.
Recognize that acid–base equilibria lie in the direction of the weaker conjugate.
 and 
  are strong acids, and 
group  1 hydroxides are strong bases.
The distinction between strong and weak acids or 
bases and concentrated and dilute reagents should 
be covered.Reactivity 2.3—How would you expect the 
equilibrium constants of strong and weak acids to 
compare?
Reactivity 1.1—Why does the acid strength of the 
hydrogen halides increase down group 17?
Tool 1, Inquiry 2—What physical and chemical 
properties can be observed to distinguish between 
weak and strong acids or bases of the same 
concentration?
Reactivity 3.1.7—Acids react with bases in neutralization reactions.
Formulate equations for the reactions between acids and metal oxides, metal hydroxides, 
hydrogencarbonates and carbonates.
Identify the parent acid and base of different salts.
Bases should include ammonia, amines, soluble 
carbonates and hydrogencarbonates; acids should 
include organic acids.Tool 1, Structure 1.1—How can the salts formed in 
neutralization reactions be separated?
Reactivity 1.1—Neutralization reactions are 
exothermic. How can this be explained in terms of 
bond enthalpies?
Reactivity 3.2—How could we classify the reaction 
that occurs when hydrogen gas is released from the 
reaction between an acid and a metal?
Reactivity 3.1.8—pH curves for neutralization reactions involving strong acids and bases have 
characteristic shapes and features.
Sketch and interpret the general shape of the pH curve.
Interpretation should include the intercept with the 
pH axis and equivalence point.
Only monoprotic neutralization reactions will be 
assessed.Structure 1.4—Why is the equivalence point 
sometimes referred to as the stoichiometric point?
Tools 1 and 3, Structure 1.3—How can titration be 
used to calculate the concentration of an acid or 
base in solution?
Additional higher level: 9 hours
Reactivity 3.1.9—The pOH scale describes the [OH–] of a solution. pOH = –log10[OH–]; [OH–] = 10–pOH
Interconvert [H+], [OH–], pH and pOH values.
The equations for pOH are given in the data booklet.
Reactivity 3.1.10—The strengths of weak acids and bases are described by their Ka, Kb, pKa or pKb
values.
Interpret the relative strengths of acids and bases from these data.
Reactivity 3.1.11—For a conjugate acid–base pair, the relationship Ka×Kb=Kw can be derived 
from the expressions for Ka and Kb.
Solve problems involving these values.Syllabus content
57 Chemistry guide
The use of quadratic equations is not expected in 
calculations.Reactivity 2.3—How can we simplify calculations 
when equilibrium constants Ka and Kb are very 
small?
Reactivity 3.1.12—The pH of a salt solution depends on the relative strengths of the parent acid and 
base.
Construct equations for the hydrolysis of ions in a salt, and predict the effect of each ion on the pH of the 
salt solution.
Examples should include the ammonium ion NH4+, 
the carboxylate ion RCOO–, the carbonate ion CO32–, 
and the hydrogencarbonate ion HCO3–.
The acidity of hydrated transition element ions and 
 (aq) is not required.
Reactivity 3.1.13—pH curves of different combinations of strong and weak monoprotic acids and 
bases have characteristic shapes and features.
Interpret the general shapes of pH curves for all four combinations of strong and weak acids and bases.
Interpretation should include: intercept with the pH 
axis, equivalence point, buffer region, points where 
pH = p Ka or pOH = p Kb.Tool 1—When collecting data to generate a pH 
curve, when should smaller volumes of titrant be 
added between each measurement?
Reactivity 3.1.14—Acid–base indicators are weak acids, where the components of the conjugate 
acid–base pair have different colours. The pH of the end point of an indicator, where it changes 
colour, approximately corresponds to its pKa value.
Construct equilibria expressions to show why the colour of an indicator changes with pH.
The generalized formula HInd(aq) can be used to 
represent the undissociated form of an indicator.
Examples of indicators with their pH range are given 
in the data booklet.
Include universal indicator as a mixture of many 
indicators with a wide pH range of colour change.Tool 1, Inquiry 2, Reactivity 3.2—What are some of 
the similarities and differences between indicators 
used in acid–base titrations and in redox titrations?
Reactivity 3.1.15—An appropriate indicator for a titration has an end point range that coincides 
with the pH at the equivalence point.
Identify an appropriate indicator for a titration from the identity of the salt and the pH range of the 
indicator.
Distinguish between the terms “end point” and 
“equivalence point”.
Reactivity 3.1.16—A buffer solution is one that resists change in pH on the addition of small 
amounts of acid or alkali.
Describe the composition of acidic and basic buffers and explain their actions.
Reactivity 2.3—Why must buffer solutions be 
composed of weak acid or base conjugate systems, 
not of strong acids or bases?
Reactivity 3.1.17—The pH of a buffer solution depends on both:Syllabus content
58 Chemistry guide
• the pKa or pKb of its acid or base
• the ratio of the concentration of acid or base to the concentration of the conjugate base or 
acid.
Solve problems involving the composition and pH of a buffer solution, using the equilibrium constant.
Include explanation of the effect of dilution of a 
buffer.Reactivity 2.3—How does Le Châtelier’s principle 
enable us to interpret the behaviour of indicators 
and buffer solutions?
Reactivity 3.2—Electron transfer reactions
Guiding question : What happens when electrons are transferred?
Standard level and higher level: 10 hours
Reactivity 3.2.1—Oxidation and reduction can be described in terms of electron transfer, change in 
oxidation state, oxygen gain/loss or hydrogen loss/gain.
Deduce oxidation states of an atom in a compound or an ion.
Identify the oxidized and reduced species and the oxidizing and reducing agents in a chemical reaction.
Include examples to illustrate the variable oxidation 
states of transition element ions and of most main 
group non-metals.
Include the use of oxidation numbers in the naming 
of compounds.Structure 3.1—What are the advantages and 
limitations of using oxidation states to track redox 
changes?
Structure 2.3—The surface oxidation of metals is 
often known as corrosion. What are some of the 
consequences of this process?
Reactivity 3.2.2—Half-equations separate the processes of oxidation and reduction, showing the 
loss or gain of electrons.
Deduce redox half-equations and equations in acidic or neutral solutions.
Tool 1, Inquiry 2—Why are some redox titrations 
described as “self-indicating”?
Reactivity 3.2.3—The relative ease of oxidation and reduction of an element in a group can be 
predicted from its position in the periodic table.
The reactions between metals and aqueous metal ions demonstrate the relative ease of oxidation of 
different metals.
Predict the relative ease of oxidation of metals.
Predict the relative ease of reduction of halogens.
Interpret data regarding metal and metal ion reactions.
The relative reactivity of metals observed in metal/
metal ion displacement reactions does not need to 
be learned; appropriate data will be supplied in 
examination questions.Structure 3.1—Why does metal reactivity increase, 
and non-metal reactivity decrease, down the main 
groups of the periodic table?
Tool 1, Inquiry 2—What observations can be made 
when metals are mixed with aqueous metal ions, 
and solutions of halogens are mixed with aqueous 
halide ions?
Reactivity 3.2.4—Acids react with reactive metals to release hydrogen.
Deduce equations for reactions of reactive metals with dilute 
  and 
 .Syllabus content
59 Chemistry guide
Reactivity 3.2.5—Oxidation occurs at the anode and reduction occurs at the cathode in 
electrochemical cells.
Identify electrodes as anode and cathode, and identify their signs/polarities in voltaic cells and electrolytic 
cells, based on the type of reaction occurring at the electrode.
Reactivity 3.2.6—A primary (voltaic) cell is an electrochemical cell that converts energy from 
spontaneous redox reactions to electrical energy.
Explain the direction of electron flow from anode to cathode in the external circuit, and ion movement 
across the salt bridge.
Construction of primary cells should include: half-
cells containing metal/metal ion, anode, cathode, 
electric circuit, salt bridge.Reactivity 1.3—Electrical energy can be derived from 
the combustion of fossil fuels or from 
electrochemical reactions. What are the similarities 
and differences in these reactions?
Reactivity 3.2.7—Secondary (rechargeable) cells involve redox reactions that can be reversed using 
electrical energy.
Deduce the reactions of the charging process from given electrode reactions for discharge, and vice versa.
Include discussion of advantages and disadvantages 
of fuel cells, primary cells and secondary cells.Reactivity 2.3—Secondary cells rely on electrode 
reactions that are reversible. What are the common 
features of these reactions?
Reactivity 3.2.8—An electrolytic cell is an electrochemical cell that converts electrical energy to 
chemical energy by bringing about non-spontaneous reactions.
Explain how current is conducted in an electrolytic cell.
Deduce the products of the electrolysis of a molten salt.
Construction of electrolytic cells should include: DC 
power source connected to anode and cathode, 
electrolyte.Structure 2.1—Under what conditions can ionic 
compounds act as electrolytes?
Reactivity 3.2.9—Functional groups in organic compounds may undergo oxidation.
Deduce equations to show changes in the functional groups during oxidation of primary and secondary 
alcohols, including the two-step reaction in the oxidation of primary alcohols.
Include explanation of the experimental set-up for 
distillation and reflux.
Include the fact that tertiary alcohols are not 
oxidized under similar conditions.
Names and formulas of specific oxidizing agents, 
and the mechanisms of oxidation, will not be 
assessed.Structure 3.2—How does the nature of the 
functional group in a molecule affect its physical 
properties, such as boiling point?
Reactivity 1.3—What is the difference between 
combustion and oxidation of an alcohol?
AHL Structure 3.1—Why is there a colour change 
when an alcohol is oxidized by a transition element 
compound?
Reactivity 3.2.10—Functional groups in organic compounds may undergo reduction.
Deduce equations to show reduction of carboxylic acids to primary alcohols via the aldehyde, and 
reduction of ketones to secondary alcohols.
Include the role of hydride ions in the reduction 
reaction.Structure 3.1—How can oxidation states be used to 
show that the following molecules are given in Syllabus content
60 Chemistry guide
Names and formulas of specific reducing agents, 
and the mechanisms of reduction, will not be 
assessed.increasing order of oxidation: CH4, CH3OH, HCHO, 
HCOOH, CO2?
Reactivity 3.2.11—Reduction of unsaturated compounds by the addition of hydrogen lowers the 
degree of unsaturation.
Deduce the products of the reactions of hydrogen with alkenes and alkynes.
Reactivity 3.4—Why are some reactions of alkenes 
classified as reduction reactions while others are 
classified as electrophilic addition reactions?
Additional higher level: 5 hours
Reactivity 3.2.12—The hydrogen half-cell H+(aq) + e−⇌1
2H2(g) is assigned a standard electrode 
potential of zero by convention. It is used in the measurement of standard electrode potential, E⦵.
Interpret standard electrode potential data in terms of ease of oxidation/reduction.
Standard reduction potentials are given in the data 
booklet.
Reactivity 3.2.13—Standard cell potential, E⦵
cell, can be calculated from standard electrode 
potentials. E⦵
cell has a positive value for a spontaneous reaction.
Predict whether a reaction is spontaneous in the forward or reverse direction from E⦵ data.
Reactivity 3.2.14—The equation ΔG⦵= −nFE⦵
cell shows the relationship between standard 
change in Gibbs energy and standard cell potential for a reaction.
Determine the value for ΔG⦵ from E⦵ data.
The equation and the value of F in C mol–1 are given 
in the data booklet.Reactivity 1.4—How can thermodynamic data also 
be used to predict the spontaneity of a reaction?
Reactivity 3.2.15—During electrolysis of aqueous solutions, competing reactions can occur at the 
anode and cathode, including the oxidation and reduction of water.
Deduce from standard electrode potentials the products of the electrolysis of aqueous solutions.
Electrolytic processes should include the electrolysis 
of water and of aqueous solutions.
The effects of concentration and the nature of the 
electrode are limited to the electrolysis of 
and 
 .
Reactivity 3.2.16—Electroplating involves the electrolytic coating of an object with a metallic thin 
layer.
Deduce equations for the electrode reactions during electroplating.
Tool 1—How is an electrolytic cell used for 
electroplating?
Reactivity 3.3—Electron sharing reactions
Guiding question : What happens when a species possesses an unpaired electron?Syllabus content
61 Chemistry guide
Standard level and higher level: 2 hours
Reactivity 3.3.1—A radical is a molecular entity that has an unpaired electron. Radicals are highly 
reactive.
Identify and represent radicals, e.g. 
  and 
 .
Structure 2.1—How is it possible for a radical to be 
an atom, a molecule, a cation or an anion? Consider 
examples of each type.
Reactivity 3.3.2—Radicals are produced by homolytic fission, e.g. of halogens, in the presence of 
ultraviolet (UV) light or heat.
Explain, including with equations, the homolytic fission of halogens, known as the initiation step in a chain 
reaction.
The use of a single-barbed arrow (fish hook) to show 
the movement of a single electron should be 
covered.Reactivity 1.2—Why do chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) 
in the atmosphere break down to release chlorine 
radicals but typically not fluorine radicals?
Structure 2.2—What is the reverse process of 
homolytic fission?
Structure 2.2—Chlorine radicals released from CFCs 
are able to break down ozone, O3, but not oxygen, 
O2, in the stratosphere. What does this suggest 
about the relative strengths of bonds in the two 
allotropes?
Reactivity 3.3.3—Radicals take part in substitution reactions with alkanes, producing a mixture of 
products.
Explain, using equations, the propagation and termination steps in the reactions between alkanes and 
halogens.
Reference should be made to the stability of alkanes 
due to the strengths of the C–C and C–H bonds and 
their essentially non-polar nature.Reactivity 2.2—Why are alkanes described as 
kinetically stable but thermodynamically unstable?
Additional higher level: None for Reactivity 3.3
Reactivity 3.4—Electron-pair sharing reactions
Guiding question : What happens when reactants share their electron pairs with others?
Standard level and higher level: 4 hours
Reactivity 3.4.1—A nucleophile is a reactant that forms a bond to its reaction partner (the 
electrophile) by donating both bonding electrons.
Recognize nucleophiles in chemical reactions.
Both neutral and negatively charged species should 
be included.
Reactivity 3.4.2—In a nucleophilic substitution reaction, a nucleophile donates an electron pair to 
form a new bond, as another bond breaks producing a leaving group.
Deduce equations with descriptions and explanations of the movement of electron pairs in nucleophilic 
substitution reactions.Syllabus content
62 Chemistry guide
Further details of the mechanisms are not required at 
SL.
Reactivity 3.4.3—Heterolytic fission is the breakage of a covalent bond when both bonding 
electrons remain with one of the two fragments formed.
Explain, with equations, the formation of ions by heterolytic fission.
Curly arrows should be used to show the movement 
of electron pairs during reactions.Reactivity 3.3—What is the difference between the 
bond-breaking that forms a radical and the bond-
breaking that occurs in nucleophilic substitution 
reactions?
Reactivity 3.4.4—An electrophile is a reactant that forms a bond to its reaction partner (the 
nucleophile) by accepting both bonding electrons from that reaction partner.
Recognize electrophiles in chemical reactions.
Both neutral and positively-charged species should 
be included.
Reactivity 3.4.5—Alkenes are susceptible to electrophilic attack because of the high electron 
density of the carbon–carbon double bond. These reactions lead to electrophilic addition.
Deduce equations for the reactions of alkenes with water, halogens, and hydrogen halides.
The mechanisms of these reactions will not be 
assessed at SL.Reactivity 3.3—Why is bromine water decolourized 
in the dark by alkenes but not by alkanes?
Structure 2.4—Why are alkenes sometimes known 
as “starting molecules” in industry?
Additional higher level: 7 hours
Reactivity 3.4.6—A Lewis acid is an electron-pair acceptor and a Lewis base is an electron-pair 
donor.
Apply Lewis acid–base theory to inorganic and organic chemistry to identify the role of the reacting 
species.
Reactivity 3.1—What is the relationship between 
Brønsted–Lowry acids and bases and Lewis acids 
and bases?
Reactivity 3.4.7—When a Lewis base reacts with a Lewis acid, a coordination bond is formed. 
Nucleophiles are Lewis bases and electrophiles are Lewis acids.
Draw and interpret Lewis formulas of reactants and products to show coordination bond formation in 
Lewis acid–base reactions.
Structure 2.2—Do coordination bonds have any 
different properties from other covalent bonds?Syllabus content
63 Chemistry guide
Reactivity 3.4.8—Coordination bonds are formed when ligands donate an electron pair to 
transition element cations, forming complex ions.
Deduce the charge on a complex ion, given the formula of the ion and ligands present.
Reactivity 3.4.9—Nucleophilic substitution reactions include the reactions between 
halogenoalkanes and nucleophiles.
Describe and explain the mechanisms of the reactions of primary and tertiary halogenoalkanes with 
nucleophiles.
Distinguish between the concerted one-step SN2 
reaction of primary halogenoalkanes and the two-
step SN1 reaction of tertiary halogenoalkanes. Both 
mechanisms occur for secondary halogenoalkanes.
The stereospecific nature of SN2 reactions should be 
covered.Reactivity 2.2—What differences would be expected 
between the energy profiles for SN1 and SN2 
reactions?
Reactivity 2.2—What are the rate equations for 
these SN1 and SN2 reactions?
Nature of science, Reactivity 2.2—How useful are 
mechanistic models such as SN1 and SN2?
Reactivity 3.4.10—The rate of the substitution reactions is influenced by the identity of the leaving 
group.
Predict and explain the relative rates of the substitution reactions for different halogenoalkanes.
Different halogenoalkanes should include 
 .
The roles of the solvent and the reaction mechanism 
on the rate will not be assessed.Structure 3.1—Why is the iodide ion a better leaving 
group than the chloride ion?
Reactivity 3.4.11—Alkenes readily undergo electrophilic addition reactions.
Describe and explain the mechanisms of the reactions between symmetrical alkenes and halogens, water 
and hydrogen halides.
Reactivity 3.4.12—The relative stability of carbocations in the addition reactions between 
hydrogen halides and unsymmetrical alkenes can be used to explain the reaction mechanism.
Predict and explain the major product of a reaction between an unsymmetrical alkene and a hydrogen 
halide or water.
Reactivity 3.4.13—Electrophilic substitution reactions include the reactions of benzene with 
electrophiles.
Describe and explain the mechanism of the reaction between benzene and a charged electrophile, E+.
The formation of the electrophile will not be 
assessed.Structure 2.2—What are the features of benzene, 
C6H6, that make it not prone to undergo addition 
reactions, despite being highly unsaturated?
Reactivity 3.1—Nitration of benzene uses a mixture 
of concentrated nitric and sulfuric acids to generate 
a strong electrophile, NO2+. How can the acid/base 
behaviour of HNO3 in this mixture be described?Syllabus content
64 Chemistry guide
General
Assessment  is an integral  part  of teaching  and  learning.  The most  important  aims  of assessment  in the 
Diploma  Programme  (DP)  are that  it should  support  curricular  goals  and  encourage  appropriate  student 
learning.  Both  external  and  internal  assessments  are used  in the DP. IB examiners  mark  work  produced  for 
external  assessment,  while  work  produced  for internal  assessment  is marked  by teachers  and  externally 
moderated by the IB.
There are two types of assessment identified by the IB.
• Formative assessment informs both teaching and learning. It is concerned with providing accurate and 
helpful feedback to students and teachers on the kind of learning taking place and the nature of 
students’ strengths and weaknesses in order to help develop students’ understanding and capabilities. 
Formative assessment can also help to improve teaching quality, as it can provide information to 
monitor progress towards meeting the course aims and objectives (0404-01).
• Summative assessment gives an overview of previous learning and is concerned with measuring 
student achievement at, or towards the end, of the course of study (0404-04).
A comprehensive  assessment  policy  is viewed  as being  integral  with  teaching,  learning  and  course 
organization. For further information, see the IB Programme standards and practices  publication.
The approach  to assessment  used  by the IB is criterion-related,  not norm-referenced.  This  approach  to 
assessment  judges  students’  work  by their  performance  in relation  to identified  levels  of attainment,  and 
not in relation  to the work  of other  students.  For further  information  on assessment  within  the DP, please 
refer to the publication Assessment principles and practices—Quality assessments in a digital age .
To support  teachers  in the planning,  delivery  and  assessment  of the DP courses,  a variety  of resources  can 
be found  on the Programme  Resource  Centre  or purchased  from  the IB store  (store.ibo.org ). Additional 
publications  such  as specimen  papers  and  markschemes,  teacher  support  material  (TSM),  subject  reports 
and  grade  descriptors  can also  be found  on the Programme  Resource  Centre.  Past  examination  papers  as 
well as markschemes can be purchased from the IB store.
Methods of assessment
The IB uses several methods to assess work produced by students.
Assessment criteria
Assessment  criteria  are used  when  the assessment  task  is open-ended.  Each  criterion  concentrates  on a 
particular  skill that  students  are expected  to demonstrate.  An assessment  objective  describes  what 
students should be able to do, and assessment criteria describe how well they should be able to do it. Using 
assessment criteria allows discrimination between different answers and encourages a variety of responses. 
Each  criterion  comprises  a set of hierarchically  ordered  level  descriptors.  Each  level  descriptor  is worth  one 
or more marks. Each criterion is applied independently using a best-fit model. The maximum marks for each 
criterion may differ according to the criterion’s importance. The marks awarded for each criterion are added 
together to give the total mark for the piece of work.
Markbands
Markbands  are a comprehensive  statement  of expected  performance  against  which  responses  are judged. 
They represent a single holistic criterion divided into level descriptors. Each level descriptor corresponds to 
Assessment
Assessment in the Diploma Programme
65 Chemistry guide
a range  of marks  to differentiate  student  performance.  A best-fit  approach  is used  to ascertain  which 
particular mark to use from the possible range for each level descriptor.
Analytic markschemes
Analytic  markschemes  are prepared  for those  examination  questions  that  expect  a particular  kind  of 
response and/or a given final answer from students. They give detailed instructions to examiners on how to 
break down the total mark for each question for different parts of the response.
Marking notes
For some  assessment  components  marked  using  assessment  criteria,  marking  notes  are provided.  Marking 
notes give guidance on how to apply assessment criteria to the particular requirements of a question.
Inclusive access arrangements
Inclusive  access  arrangements  are available  for candidates  with  access  requirements.  Standard  assessment 
conditions may put candidates with assessment access requirements at a disadvantage by preventing them 
from  demonstrating  their  attainment  level.  Inclusive  access  arrangements  enable  candidates  to 
demonstrate their ability under assessment conditions that are as fair as possible.
The IB document  Access  and  inclusion  policy  provides  details  on all the inclusive  access  arrangements 
available  to candidates.  The IB document  Learning  diversity  and  inclusion  in IB programmes:  Removing 
barriers  to learning  outlines  the position  of the IB with  regard  to candidates  with  diverse  learning  needs  in 
the IB programmes. For candidates affected by adverse circumstances, the publication Diploma Programme 
Assessment  procedures  (updated  annually),  which  includes  the general  regulations,  provides  details  on 
access consideration.
Responsibilities of the school
The school  is required  to ensure  that  equal  access  arrangements  and  reasonable  adjustments  are provided 
to candidates  with  learning  support  requirements  that  are in line with  the IB documents  Access  and 
inclusion policy  and Learning diversity and inclusion in IB programmes: Removing barriers to learning .Assessment in the Diploma Programme
66 Chemistry guide
First assessment 2025
Assessment component Weighting
External assessment (3 hours) 80%
Paper 1  (1 hour and 30 minutes)
Paper 1A—Multiple-choice questions
Paper 1B—Data-based questions
(Total 55 marks)36%
Paper 2  (1 hour and 30 minutes)
Short-answer and extended-response questions
(Total 50 marks)44%
Internal assessment  (10 hours) 20%
The internal assessment consists of one task: the scientific investigation.
This component is internally assessed by the teacher and externally moderated by the IB at 
the end of the course.
(Total 24 marks)
Assessment
Assessment outline—SL
67 Chemistry guide
First assessment 2025
Assessment component Weighting
External assessment (4 hours and 30 minutes) 80%
Paper 1  (2 hours)
Paper 1A—Multiple-choice questions
Paper 1B—Data-based questions
(Total 75 marks)36%
Paper 2  (2 hours and 30 minutes)
Short-answer and extended-response questions
(Total 90 marks)44%
Internal assessment  (10 hours) 20%
The internal assessment consists of one task: the scientific investigation.
This component is internally assessed by the teacher and externally moderated by the IB at 
the end of the course.
(Total 24 marks)
Assessment
Assessment outline—HL
68 Chemistry guide
Detailed  markschemes  specific  to each  examination  paper  (paper  1 and  paper  2) are used  to assess 
students.
Examinations may require a general understanding and application of the nature of science (NOS).
External assessment details—SL
Paper 1
Duration: 1 hour and 30 minutes
Weighting: 36%
Marks: 55
Paper 1 is presented as two separate booklets.
Paper 1A—30 marks
• 30 multiple-choice questions on standard level material only
No marks are deducted for incorrect answers.
Paper 1B—25 marks
• Data-based questions
• Questions on experimental work
Paper 1A and Paper 1B are to be completed together without interruptions.
The questions on paper 1 test assessment objectives 1, 2 and 3.
The use of calculators is permitted. See the Calculators guidance for examinations booklet  on the Programme 
Resource Centre.
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the Chemistry  data  booklet  during  the examination.  It is 
the responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the Programme  Resource  Centre  and  to 
ensure that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Paper 2
Duration: 1 hour and 30 minutes
Weighting: 44%
Marks: 50
• Short-answer and extended-response questions on standard level material only
The questions on paper 2 test assessment objectives 1, 2 and 3.
The use of calculators is permitted. See the Calculators guidance for examinations booklet  on the Programme 
Resource Centre.
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the Chemistry  data  booklet  during  the examination.  It is 
the responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the Programme  Resource  Centre  and  to 
ensure that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Assessment
External assessment
69 Chemistry guide
External assessment details—HL
Paper 1
Duration: 2 hours
Weighting: 36%
Marks: 75
Paper 1 is presented as two separate booklets.
Paper 1A—40 marks
• 40 multiple-choice questions on standard level and additional higher level material
No marks are deducted for incorrect answers.
Paper 1B—35 marks
• Data-based questions
• Questions on experimental work
Paper 1A and Paper 1B are to be completed together without interruptions.
The questions on paper 1 test assessment objectives 1, 2 and 3.
The use of calculators is permitted. See the Calculators guidance for examinations booklet  on the Programme 
Resource Centre.
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the Chemistry  data  booklet  during  the examination.  It is 
the responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the Programme  Resource  Centre  and  to 
ensure that there are sufficient copies available for all students.
Paper 2
Duration: 2 hours and 30 minutes
Weighting: 44%
Marks: 90
• Short-answer and extended-response questions on standard level and additional higher level material.
The questions on paper 2 test assessment objectives 1, 2 and 3.
The use of calculators is permitted. See the Calculators guidance for examinations booklet  on the Programme 
Resource Centre.
Each  student  must  have  access  to a clean  copy  of the Chemistry  data  booklet  during  the examination.  It is 
the responsibility  of the school  to download  a copy  from  IBIS or the Programme  Resource  Centre  and  to 
ensure that there are sufficient copies available for all students.External assessment
70 Chemistry guide
Purpose of internal assessment
Internal  assessment  is an integral  part  of the course  and  is compulsory  for both  SL and  HL students.  It 
enables students to demonstrate the application of their skills and knowledge, and to pursue their personal 
interests,  without  the time  limitations  and  other  constraints  that  are associated  with  written  examinations. 
The internal  assessment  should,  as far as possible,  be woven  into  normal  classroom  teaching  and  not be a 
separate activity conducted after a course has been taught.
The internal assessment requirements at SL and at HL are the same.
Guidance and authenticity
The scientific  investigation  (SL and  HL) submitted  for internal  assessment  must  be the student’s  own  work. 
However, it is not the intention that students should decide upon a title or topic and be left to work on the 
internal  assessment  component  without  any further  support  from  the teacher.  The teacher  should  play  an 
important  role  during  both  the planning  stage  and  the period  when  the student  is working  on the 
internally assessed work. It is the responsibility of the teacher to ensure that students are familiar with:
• the requirements of the type of work to be internally assessed
• the Sciences experimentation guidelines  publication
• the assessment criteria. Students must understand that the work submitted for assessment must 
address these criteria effectively.
Teachers and students must discuss the internally assessed work. Students should be encouraged to initiate 
discussions  with  the teacher  to obtain  advice  and  information,  and  students  must  not be penalized  for 
seeking guidance. As part of the learning process, teachers should read and give advice to students on one 
draft  of the work.  The teacher  should  provide  oral  or written  advice  on how  the work  could  be improved, 
but not edit the draft. The next version handed to the teacher must be the final version for submission.
It is the responsibility of teachers to ensure that all students understand the basic meaning and significance 
of concepts  that  relate  to academic  integrity,  especially  authenticity  and  intellectual  property.  Teachers 
must  ensure  that  all student  work  for assessment  is prepared  according  to the requirements  and  must 
explain  clearly  to students  that  the internally  assessed  work  must  be entirely  their  own.  Where 
collaboration between students is permitted, it must be clear to all students what the difference is between 
collaboration and collusion.
All work  submitted  to the IB for moderation  or assessment  must  be authenticated  by a teacher,  and  must 
not include  any known  instances  of suspected  or confirmed  malpractice.  Each  student  must  confirm  that 
the work  is their  authentic  work  and  constitutes  the final  version  of that  work.  Once  a student  has officially 
submitted the final version of the work, it cannot be retracted. The requirement to confirm the authenticity 
of work applies to the work of all students, not just the sample work that will be submitted to the IB for the 
purpose  of moderation.  For further  details,  refer  to the IB publications  Academic  integrity  policy , Diploma 
Programme:  From  principles  into  practice  and  the relevant  general  regulations  (in Diploma  Programme 
Assessment procedures ).
Authenticity may be checked by discussion with the student on the content of the work, and by scrutiny of 
one or more of the following.
• The student’s initial proposal
• The first draft of the written work
• The references cited
Assessment
Internal assessment
71 Chemistry guide
• The style of writing compared with work known to be that of the student
• The analysis of the work by a web-based plagiarism detection service such as www.turnitin.com
The same piece of work cannot be submitted to meet the requirements of both the IA and the EE.
Time allocation
Internal  assessment  is an integral  part  of the chemistry  course,  contributing  20%  to the final  assessment  in 
the SL and  the HL courses.  This  weighting  should  be reflected  in the time  that  is allocated  to teaching  the 
knowledge,  skills  and  understanding  required  to undertake  the work,  as well  as the total  time  allocated  to 
carry out the work.
It is recommended  that  a total  of approximately  10 hours  (SL and  HL) of teaching  time  should  be allocated 
to the work. This should include:
• time for the teacher to explain to students the requirements of the internal assessment
• class time for students to work on the internal assessment component and ask questions
• time for consultation between the teacher and each student
• time to review and monitor progress, and to check authenticity.
Safety requirements and recommendations
It is the responsibility  of everyone  involved  in science  education  to make  an ongoing  commitment  to safe 
and healthy practical work.
The working  practices  and  protocols  should  be effective  in safeguarding  students  and  protecting  the 
environment. Schools are responsible for following national or local guidelines, which differ from country to 
country. The Chemistry teacher support material  provides some further guidance.
Using assessment criteria for internal assessment
For internal  assessment,  a number  of assessment  criteria  have  been  identified.  Each  assessment  criterion 
has level  descriptors  describing  specific  achievement  levels,  together  with  an appropriate  range  of marks. 
The level  descriptors  concentrate  on positive  achievement,  although  for the lower  levels  failure  to achieve 
may be included in the description.
Teachers  must  judge  the internally  assessed  work  at SL and  at HL against  the criteria  using  the level 
descriptors.
• The same assessment criteria are provided for SL and HL.
• The aim is to find, for each criterion, the descriptor that conveys most accurately the level attained by 
the student, using the best-fit model. A best-fit approach means that compensation should be made 
when a piece of work matches different aspects of a criterion at different levels. The mark awarded 
should be one that most fairly reflects the balance of achievement against the criterion. It is not 
necessary for every single aspect of a level descriptor to be met for that mark to be awarded.
• When assessing a student’s work, teachers should read the level descriptors for each criterion until 
they reach a descriptor that most appropriately describes the level of the work being assessed. If a 
piece of work seems to fall between two descriptors, both descriptors should be read again and the 
one that more appropriately describes the student’s work should be chosen.
• Where there are two marks available within a level, teachers should award the upper marks if the 
student’s work demonstrates the qualities described to a great extent; the work may be close to 
achieving marks in the level above. Teachers should award the lower marks if the student’s work 
demonstrates the qualities described to a lesser extent; the work may be close to achieving marks in 
the level below.
• Only whole numbers should be recorded; partial marks (fractions and decimals) are not acceptable.Internal assessment
72 Chemistry guide
• Teachers should not think in terms of a pass or fail boundary but should concentrate on identifying the 
appropriate descriptor for each assessment criterion.
• The highest level descriptors do not imply faultless performance but should be achievable by a 
student. Teachers should not hesitate to use the extremes if they are appropriate descriptions of the 
work being assessed.
• A student who attains a high achievement level in relation to one criterion will not necessarily attain 
high achievement levels in relation to the other criteria. Similarly, a student who attains a low 
achievement level for one criterion will not necessarily attain low achievement levels for the other 
criteria. Teachers should not assume that the overall assessment of the students will produce any 
particular distribution of marks.
• It is recommended that the assessment criteria be made available to students.
Internal assessment details—SL and HL
The scientific investigation
Duration: 10 hours
Weighting: 20%
The IA requirement  is the same  for biology,  chemistry  and  physics.  The IA, worth  20%  of the final 
assessment, consists of one task—the scientific investigation.
The scientific  investigation  is an open-ended  task  in which  the student  gathers  and  analyses  data  in order 
to answer their own formulated research question.
The outcome  of the scientific  investigation  will be assessed  through  the form  of a written  report.  The 
maximum overall word count for the report is 3,000 words.
The following are not included in the word count.
• Charts and diagrams
• Data tables
• Equations, formulas and calculations
• Citations/references (whether parenthetical, numbered, footnotes or endnotes)
• Bibliography
• Headers
The following details should be stated at the start of the report.
• Title of the investigation
• IB candidate code (alphanumeric, for example, xyz123)
• IB candidate code for all group members (if applicable)
• Number of words
There is no requirement to include a cover page or a contents page.
Facilitating the scientific investigation
The research  question  should  be of interest  to the student,  but it is not necessary  that  it encompasses 
concepts beyond those described by the understandings within the guide.
The scientific investigation undertaken must have sufficient extent and depth to allow for all the descriptors 
of the assessment criteria to be meaningfully addressed.
The investigation of the research question must involve the collection and analysis of quantitative data that 
should be supported by qualitative observations where appropriate.
The scientific  investigation  allows  a wide  range  of techniques  for data  gathering  and  analysis  to be 
employed. The approaches that could be used in isolation or in conjunction with each other are as follows.
• Hands-on practical laboratory workInternal assessment
73 Chemistry guide
• Fieldwork
• Use of a spreadsheet for analysis and modelling
• Extraction and analysis of data from a database
• Use of a simulation
The Chemistry teacher support material  contains further guidance on these possible approaches.
Teachers must:
• ensure that students are familiar with the assessment criteria
• ensure that students are able to investigate their individual research question
• counsel the students on whether their proposed methodology is feasible in consideration of available 
time and resources
• ensure that students have given appropriate consideration to safety, ethical and environmental factors 
before undertaking the action phase
• remind students of the requirements for academic integrity and the consequences of academic 
malpractice. The difference between collaboration and collusion must be made clear.
Developing the research question
Each  student  is expected  to formulate,  investigate  and  answer  a unique  research  question,  seeking  advice 
from their teacher.
A student must not present the same set of raw data as another student.
Methodology for individual work
Each  student  develops  their  own  methodology  to answer  their  individual  research  question.  The student 
investigates by:
• manipulating an independent variable
or
• selecting variables during fieldwork
or
• selecting different data from external databases.
The student might seek support from peers when collecting data.
Methodology for collaborative work
Collaborative  work  is optional  and  where  it is facilitated  the groups  formed  must  be no larger  than  three 
students.  Students  may  organize  their  own  groups.  The teacher  must  provide  guidance  to ensure  that  all 
students  are fully  engaged  in the collaborative  activity.  Students  must  clearly  understand  the requirement 
to conduct an individual investigation.
The methodology  developed  to answer  their  individual  research  question  may  be in part  the outcome  of 
collaborative  activity.  A student  within  the group  investigates  their  individual  research  question  by 
manipulating:
• a different independent variable from those selected by other group members
or
• the same independent variable with a different dependent variable from those selected by other 
group members
or
• different data from those selected by other group members from within a larger communally acquired 
data set.
In this context,  collaborative  work  is permitted  under  the understanding  that  the final  report  presented  for 
assessment is that of the individual student. A report by the group is not permitted. All authoring, including Internal assessment
74 Chemistry guide
the description  of the methodology,  must  be done  individually.  This  diagram  illustrates  a possible  route 
through the IA process where students collaborate.
Figure 3
A possible route through collaborative work
Class collaboration to set up a database
A school  may  take  part  in a large-scale  activity  collecting  data  to generate  a database  using  standardized 
protocols.  If a student  decides  to utilize  this database  in order  to answer  their  research  question,  then  the 
investigation  must  be treated  as a database  investigation.  In such  a case  the methodology  should  be 
focused on the way the data is filtered and sampled from the whole database in the same way as if the data 
was wholly acquired from an external source.
Assessing the scientific investigation
The performance  in IA at both  SL and  HL is marked  against  common  assessment  criteria,  with  a total  mark 
out of 24. Student work is internally assessed by the teacher and externally moderated by the IB.
The four assessment criteria are as follows.Internal assessment
75 Chemistry guide
• Research design
• Data analysis
• Conclusion
• Evaluation
Each  assessment  criterion  has level  descriptors  describing  specific  achievement  levels,  together  with  an 
appropriate  range  of marks.  The level  descriptors  concentrate  on positive  achievement,  although  for the 
lower levels failure to achieve may be included in the description.
Teachers  must  judge  the internally  assessed  work  at SL and  at HL against  the same  criteria  using  the level 
descriptors  and  aided  by the clarifications.  The criteria  must  be applied  systematically  using  a best-fit 
approach—when  a piece  of work  matches  different  aspects  of a criterion  at different  levels  the mark 
awarded  should  be one  that  most  fairly  reflects  the balance  of achievement  against  the criterion.  It is not 
necessary  for every  single  aspect  of a level  descriptor  to be met  for that  mark  to be awarded.  The highest 
level descriptors do not imply faultless performance.
Where  there  are two  or more  marks  available  within  a level,  teachers  should  award  the upper  mark  if the 
student’s  work  largely  satisfies  the qualities  described;  the work  may  be close  to achieving  marks  in the 
level  above.  Teachers  should  award  the lower  marks  if the student’s  work  demonstrates  the qualities 
described to a lesser extent; the work may be close to achieving marks in the level below.
Only whole numbers must be recorded; partial marks (fractions and decimals) are not acceptable.
The criteria  should  be considered  independently.  A student  who  attains  a high  achievement  level  in 
relation  to one  criterion  will not necessarily  attain  high  achievement  levels  in relation  to the other  criteria. 
Similarly,  a student  who  attains  a low achievement  level  for one  criterion  will not necessarily  attain  low 
achievement  levels  for the other  criteria.  Teachers  should  not assume  that  the overall  assessment  of the 
students will produce any particular distribution of marks.
Where  command  terms  are used  in the level  descriptors,  they  are to be interpreted  as indicated  in the 
“Glossary of command terms ” section of this guide. These command terms indicate the depth of treatment 
required. Command terms used within the descriptors are provided in the following table.
Assessment 
objectiveCommand term Descriptor
AO1 State Give a specific name, value or other brief answer without explanation or 
calculation.
AO2 Identify Provide an answer from a number of possibilities.
AO2 Outline Give a brief account or summary.
AO2 Describe Give a detailed account.
AO3 Explain Give a detailed account including reasons or causes.
AO3 Justify Give valid reasons or evidence to support an answer or conclusion.
Referencing and academic integrity
Appropriate  referencing  to sourced  information  used  in the report  of the scientific  investigation  is 
expected. Omitted or improper referencing will be considered to be academic malpractice.
Students  must  ensure  their  assessment  work  adheres  to the IB’s academic  integrity  policy  and  that  all 
sources  are appropriately  referenced.  A student’s  failure  to appropriately  acknowledge  a source  will be 
investigated  by the IB as a potential  breach  of regulations  that  may  result  in a penalty  imposed  by the IB 
Final Award Committee. See the “ Academic integrity ” section of this guide for full details.Internal assessment
76 Chemistry guide
Internal assessment criteria—SL and HL
Download : Internal assessment criteria—SL and HL  (PDF)
There are four IA criteria for the scientific investigation. The marks and weightings are as follows.
Criterion Maximum number of marks 
availableWeighting (%)
Research design 6 25
Data analysis 6 25
Conclusion 6 25
Evaluation 6 25
Total 24 100
Research design
This  criterion  assesses  the extent  to which  the student  effectively  communicates  the methodology 
(purpose and practice) used to address the research question.
Marks Level descriptor
0 The report does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.
1–2 • The research question is stated without context.
• Methodological considerations associated with collecting data relevant to the 
research question are stated.
• The description of the methodology for collecting or selecting data lacks the detail 
to allow for the investigation to be reproduced.
3–4 • The research question is outlined within a broad context.
• Methodological considerations associated with collecting relevant and sufficient 
data to answer the research question are described.
• The description of the methodology for collecting or selecting data allows for the 
investigation to be reproduced with few ambiguities or omissions.
5–6 • The research question is described within a specific and appropriate context.
• Methodological considerations associated with collecting relevant and sufficient 
data to answer the research question are explained.
• The description of the methodology for collecting or selecting data allows for the 
investigation to be reproduced.
Clarifications for research design
A research question with context should contain reference to the dependent and independent variables 
or two correlated variables, include a concise description of the system in which the research question is 
embedded, and include background theory of direct relevance.
Methodological considerations include:
• the selection of the methods for measuring the dependent and independent variables
• the selection of the databases or model and the sampling of data
• the decisions regarding the scope, quantity and quality of measurements (e.g. the range, interval or 
frequency of the independent variable, repetition and precision of measurements)
• the identification of control variables and the choice of method of their controlInternal assessment
77 Chemistry guide
Clarifications for research design
• the recognition of any safety, ethical or environmental issues that needed to be taken into account.
The description of the methodology refers to presenting sufficiently detailed information (such as specific 
materials used and precise procedural steps) while avoiding unnecessary or repetitive information, so that 
the reader may readily understand how the methodology was implemented and could in principle repeat 
the investigation.
Data analysis
This  criterion  assesses  the extent  to which  the student’s  report  provides  evidence  that  the student  has 
recorded, processed and presented the data in ways that are relevant to the research question.
Marks Level descriptor
0 The report does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–2 • The recording and processing of the data is communicated but is neither clear nor 
precise.
• The recording and processing of data shows limited evidence of the consideration 
of uncertainties.
• Some processing of data relevant to addressing the research question is carried out 
but with major omissions, inaccuracies or inconsistencies.
3–4 • The communication of the recording and processing of the data is either clear or 
precise.
• The recording and processing of data shows evidence of a consideration of 
uncertainties but with some significant omissions or inaccuracies.
• The processing of data relevant to addressing the research question is carried out 
but with some significant omissions, inaccuracies or inconsistencies.
5–6 • The communication of the recording and processing of the data is both clear and 
precise.
• The recording and processing of data shows evidence of an appropriate 
consideration of uncertainties.
• The processing of data relevant to addressing the research question is carried out 
appropriately and accurately.
Clarifications for data analysis
Data refers to quantitative data or a combination of both quantitative and qualitative data.
Communication
• Clear communication means that the method of processing can be understood easily.
• Precise communication refers to following conventions correctly, such as those relating to the 
annotation of graphs and tables or the use of units, decimal places and significant figures.
Consideration of uncertainties is subject specific and further guidance is given in the Chemistry teacher 
support material .
Major omissions, inaccuracies or inconsistencies impede the possibility of drawing a valid conclusion that 
addresses the research question.
Significant omissions, inaccuracies or inconsistencies allow the possibility of drawing a conclusion that 
addresses the research question but with some limit to its validity or detail.Internal assessment
78 Chemistry guide
Conclusion
This  criterion  assesses  the extent  to which  the student  successfully  answers  their  research  question  with 
regard to their analysis and the accepted scientific context.
Marks Level descriptor
0 The report does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–2 • A conclusion is stated that is relevant to the research question but is not supported 
by the analysis presented.
• The conclusion makes superficial comparison to the accepted scientific context.
3–4 • A conclusion is described that is relevant to the research question but is not fully 
consistent with the analysis presented.
• A conclusion is described that makes some relevant comparison to the accepted 
scientific context.
5–6 • A conclusion is justified that is relevant to the research question and fully consistent 
with the analysis presented.
• A conclusion is justified through relevant comparison to the accepted scientific 
context.
Clarifications for conclusion
A conclusion that is fully consistent requires the interpretation of processed data including associated 
uncertainties.
Scientific context refers to information that could come from published material (paper or online), 
published values, course notes, textbooks or other outside sources. The citation of published materials 
must be sufficiently detailed to allow these sources to be traceable.
Evaluation
This  criterion  assesses  the extent  to which  the student’s  report  provides  evidence  of evaluation  of the 
investigation methodology and has suggested improvements.
Marks Level descriptor
0 The report does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
1–2 • The report states generic methodological weaknesses or limitations.
• Realistic improvements to the investigation are stated.
3–4 • The report describes specific methodological weaknesses or limitations.
• Realistic improvements to the investigation that are relevant to the identified 
weaknesses or limitations, are described.
5–6 • The report explains the relative impact of specific methodological weaknesses or 
limitations.
• Realistic improvements to the investigation, that are relevant to the identified 
weaknesses or limitations, are explained.
Clarifications for evaluation
Generic is general to many methodologies and not specifically relevant to the methodology of the 
investigation being evaluated.
Methodological refers to the overall approach to the investigation of the research question as well as 
procedural steps.Internal assessment
79 Chemistry guide
Clarifications for evaluation
Weaknesses could relate to issues regarding the control of variables, the precision of measurement or the 
variation in the data.
Limitations could refer to how the conclusion is limited in scope by the range of the data collected, the 
confines of the system or the applicability of assumptions made.Internal assessment
80 Chemistry guide
Command terms for chemistry
Students  must  be familiar  with  the following  key terms  and  phrases  used  in examination  questions,  which 
are to be understood  as described  in this section.  Although  these  terms  will be used  frequently  in 
examination  questions,  other  terms  may  be used  to direct  students  to present  an argument  in a specific 
way. These command terms indicate the depth of treatment required.
Assessment objective 1
Command term Definition
Draw Represent by means of a labelled, accurate diagram or graph, using a pencil. A 
ruler (straight edge) should be used for straight lines. Diagrams should be drawn 
to scale. Graphs should have points correctly plotted (if appropriate) and joined in 
a straight line or smooth curve.
State Give a specific name, value or other brief answer without explanation or 
calculation.
Assessment objective 2
Command term Definition
Annotate Add brief notes to a diagram or graph.
Calculate Obtain a numerical answer showing the relevant stages in the working.
Describe Give a detailed account.
Estimate Obtain an approximate value.
Outline Give a brief account or summary.
Assessment objective 3
Command term Definition
Comment Give a judgement based on a given statement or result of a calculation.
Compare Give an account of the similarities between two (or more) items or situations, 
referring to both (all) of them throughout.
Contrast Give an account of the differences between two (or more) items or situations, 
referring to both (all) of them throughout.
Deduce Reach a conclusion from the information given.
Determine Obtain the only possible answer.
Discuss Offer a considered and balanced review that includes a range of arguments, factors 
or hypotheses. Opinions or conclusions should be presented clearly and supported 
by appropriate evidence.
Appendices
Glossary of command terms
81 Chemistry guide
Command term Definition
Evaluate Make an appraisal by weighing up the strengths and limitations.
Explain Give a detailed account including reasons or causes.
Predict Give an expected result.
Sketch Represent by means of a diagram or graph (labelled as appropriate). The sketch 
should give a general idea of the required shape or relationship, and should include 
relevant features.
Suggest Propose a solution, hypothesis or other possible answer.Glossary of command terms
82 Chemistry guide
This  bibliography  lists  the principal  works  used  to inform  the curriculum  review.  It is not an exhaustive  list 
and  does  not include  all the literature  available:  judicious  selection  was  made  in order  to better  advise  and 
guide teachers. This bibliography is not a list of recommended textbooks.
Andain,  I., & Murphy,  G. (2008).  Creating  lifelong  learners:  Challenges  for education  in the 21st  century . 
International Baccalaureate Organization.
Atkins,  P. (2010).  Chemistry  education  in New  Zealand:  Chemistry’s  core  ideas.  Chemistry  education  in New 
Zealand , 120, 8–12.
Feynman,  R., Leighton,  R., & Sands,  M. (1963).  The  Feynman  lectures  on physics . California  Institute  of 
Technology, Gottlieb, M. A., & Pfeiffer, R. https://www.feynmanlectures.caltech.edu/I_02.html
Gerzon,  M. (2010).  Global  citizens:  How  our  vision  of the world  is outdated,  and  what  we can  do about  it. Rider 
Books.
Giddens,  J. F., & Brady,  D. P. (2007).  Rescuing  nursing  education  from  content  saturation:  The case  for a 
concept-based  curriculum.  Journal  of Nursing  Education , 46(2), 65–69.  https://doi.org/
10.3928/01484834-20070201-05
Haydon, G. (2006). Education, philosophy and the ethical environment . Routledge.
Headrick, D. (2009). Technology: A world history . Oxford University Press.
International  Baccalaureate.  (2014).  “Conceptual  understanding”.  In MYP:  From  principles  into  practice . 
International Baccalaureate Organization. https://resources.ibo.org/myp/resource/11162-32896
International Baccalaureate. (2015). “Approaches to teaching”. In Approaches to teaching and learning guide . 
International Baccalaureate Organization. https://resources.ibo.org/dp/resource/11162-43504
International  Baccalaureate.  (2019).  What  is an IB education?  International  Baccalaureate  Organization. 
https://resources.ibo.org/ib/works/edu_11162-58229
Khine, M. S. (2012). Advances in nature of science research: Concepts and methodologies . Springer.
Mills,  S. (2016).  Conceptual  understanding:  A concept  analysis.  The  Qualitative  Report , 21(3), 546–557. 
https://doi.org/10.46743/2160-3715/2016.2308
Taber,  K. S. (2019).  The  nature  of the chemical  concept:  Re-constructing  chemical  knowledge  in teaching  and 
learning . Royal Society of Chemistry.
Appendices
Bibliography
83 Chemistry guide
