M15/1/AXENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                    May / Mai / Mayo 2015


             English / Anglais / Inglés
       A: literature / littérature / literatura


                        Higher level
                      Niveau supérieur
                       Nivel superior


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




3 pages/páginas
                                 –2–              M15/1/AXENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and must
not be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.



Ces remarques pour la notation sont confidentielles. Leur usage
est réservé exclusivement aux examinateurs participant à cette
session.

Ces remarques sont la propriété de l’Organisation du Baccalauréat
International. Toute reproduction ou distribution à de tierces
personnes sans l’autorisation préalable du centre de l’évaluation de
l’IB est interdite.



Estas notas para la corrección son confidenciales y para el uso
exclusivo de los examinadores en esta convocatoria de exámenes.

Son propiedad del Bachillerato Internacional y no se pueden
reproducir ni distribuir a ninguna otra persona sin la autorización
previa del centro de evaluación del IB.
                                                  –3–                 M15/1/AXENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking and as a supplement to the
published external assessment criteria for written paper 1. They are not offered as an exhaustive and
fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must rigidly adhere. Good ideas or angles not
offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate. Similarly, answers which do not
include all the ideas or approaches suggested here may still be very good answers.

Of course, some of the points listed below will appear in weaker papers, but are unlikely to be
developed.

1.

     An adequate to good literary commentary will:

        identify what is happening in the passage
        discuss the presentation of the two characters, and their relationship and states of mind
        comment on the imagery and its effects
        comment on the means by which atmosphere is developed throughout the passage.

     A very good to excellent literary commentary may also:

        show a clearer understanding of the whole situation
        explore in greater detail how the writer has revealed the emotions of the two characters
        analyse imagery in greater depth paying particular attention to insects/flies, noise/silence
        comment in a more sophisticated manner on the means by which the atmosphere of mystery
         and tension is developed.


2.

     An adequate to good literary commentary will:

      show an understanding of what is happening in the poem (allow for a range of interpretations)
      comment on the contrast in imagery between that associated with the concrete mixer and that
       involving the pigeon
      comment on the structure of the poem.

     A very good to excellent literary commentary may also:

      show a more nuanced understanding of the poem
      comment in detail on the contrast between the language describing the actions and sounds of
       the cement-making and the movements of the pigeon
      comment in more detail on the structure of the poem; for example, the shift in line 21
      consider the impact of the final three lines.
