M15/1/AXENG/HP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                    May / Mai / Mayo 2015


             English / Anglais / Inglés
       A: literature / littérature / literatura


                        Higher level
                      Niveau supérieur
                       Nivel superior


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




4 pages/páginas
                                 –2–              M15/1/AXENG/HP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and must
not be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.



Ces remarques pour la notation sont confidentielles. Leur usage
est réservé exclusivement aux examinateurs participant à
cette session.

Ces remarques sont la propriété de l’Organisation du Baccalauréat
International. Toute reproduction ou distribution à de tierces
personnes sans l’autorisation préalable du centre de l’évaluation de
l’IB est interdite.



Estas notas para la corrección son confidenciales y para el uso
exclusivo de los examinadores en esta convocatoria de exámenes.

Son propiedad del Bachillerato Internacional y no se pueden
reproducir ni distribuir a ninguna otra persona sin la autorización
previa del centro de evaluación del IB.
                                                 –3–                M15/1/AXENG/HP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking and as a supplement to the
published external assessment criteria for written paper 1. They are not offered as an exhaustive and
fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must rigidly adhere. Good ideas or angles not
offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate. Similarly, answers which do not
include all the ideas or approaches suggested here may still be very good answers.

Of course, some of the points listed below will appear in weaker papers, but are unlikely to be
developed.

1.

     An adequate to good literary commentary will:

      demonstrate some understanding of the situation of young working women living in London
      consider the variety of ways the urban setting is presented
      recognize the shift of perspective from broad generalization to focus on the specific
       characterizations of Caro
      demonstrate some awareness of structure, such as the effect of listing and repetition
      discuss the possible significance of the man on the curb.

     A very good to excellent literary commentary may also:

      display a richer appreciation of the presentation of London and its inhabitants
      offer a deeper and more persuasive account of how urban contexts are handled
      develop a more sophisticated sense of what possibly distinguishes Caro from the other “girls”
       and how this is presented
      offer a more developed reading of the moment of connection between Caro and the man on the
       curb
      explore in more depth shifts in focus and/or shifts in style.
                                                  –4–                M15/1/AXENG/HP1/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


2.

     An adequate to good literary commentary will:

      show an understanding of the central situation of the poem (a scholar meditating on a highly
       charged inscription)
      comment on some of the formal properties of this poem such as structure, rhyme, figurative
       language
      comment on the varied emotions in the poem
      comment on the thoughts of the final stanza.

     A very good to excellent literary commentary may also:

      show a better understanding of the situation and its relation to the power of the written word or
       the power of writing over time
      offer a more developed interpretation of the workings of the poem, such as the way the tightly
       built structure holds in powerful emotions or the contrasts created by word choice
      offer a fuller account of how a runic inscription almost a thousand years old speaks to, and is
       reshaped by, the scholar
      offer a more persuasive interpretation of the ending of the poem with a willingness to grapple
       with the identity of the “he” mentioned.
