m15/1/AXENG/HP2/eng/TZ1/XX




English A: literature – Higher level – Paper 2
Anglais A : littérature – Niveau supérieur – Épreuve 2
Inglés A: literatura – Nivel superior – Prueba 2

Tuesday 5 May 2015 (afternoon)
Mardi 5 mai 2015 (après-midi)
Martes 5 de mayo de 2015 (tarde)

2 hours / 2 heures / 2 horas


Instructions to candidates
 Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on at least two of the Part 3
  works you have studied and compare and contrast these works in response to the question.
  Answers which are not based on a discussion of at least two Part 3 works will not score
  high marks.
 You are not permitted to bring copies of the works you have studied into the examination room.
 The maximum mark for this examination paper is [25 marks].

Instructions destinées aux candidats
 N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
 Traitez un seul sujet de composition. En basant votre réponse sur au moins deux des œuvres
  de la troisième partie que vous avez étudiées, vous devez comparer et opposer ces œuvres
  dans le cadre du sujet. Les réponses qui ne sont pas basées sur au moins deux des œuvres
  de la troisième partie n’obtiendront pas une note élevée.
 Vous n’êtes pas autorisé(e) à apporter des exemplaires des œuvres que vous avez étudiées
  dans la salle d’examen.
 Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est de [25 points].

Instrucciones para los alumnos
 No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
 Conteste una sola pregunta de redacción. Base su respuesta en al menos dos de las obras
  estudiadas de la Parte 3, comparándolas y contrastándolas en relación con la pregunta.
  Las respuestas que no se basen en al menos dos obras de la Parte 3 no recibirán una
  puntuación alta.
 No está permitido traer copias de las obras estudiadas a la sala de examen.
 La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [25 puntos].




                                                                                               2215 – 0062
     3 pages/páginas                                       © International Baccalaureate Organization 2015
                                                   –2–                    m15/1/AXENG/HP2/eng/TZ1/XX

Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on at least two of the Part 3 works you
have studied and compare and contrast these works in response to the question. Answers which are
not based on a discussion of at least two Part 3 works will not score high marks.

Drama

1.   Consider the ways in which at least two of the plays you have studied make use of stock or
     stereotypical characters and compare the effects achieved.


2.   Consider and compare the means by which at least two of the plays you have studied create
     moments of harmony and to what dramatic ends.


3.   We are fascinated by the play of power and persuasion in relationships: explore and compare the
     dynamics in relationships, and the dramatic means by which they are established, in at least two of
     the plays you have studied.



Poetry

4.   Allusions to other works, to historical events or to myth have the power to extend meaning and
     evoke emotion. Compare the ways in which at least two of the poets you have studied have used
     allusion to enrich their works.


5.   Referring closely to at least two of the poets in your study, discuss the use of form and structure
     either to emphasise or to undermine the content of their poems.


6.   Some poems make a particularly strong connection with the individual reader. Comparing at least
     two poets in your study, explore the means by which the connection with you has been achieved
     and sustained.



Prose: novel and short story

7.   A narrator may be close to, or even part of, the action in a work of fiction, or distant in time and/or
     space. What is the effect of either the closeness or the distance of narrators in at least two works
     you have studied?


8.   We often talk of characters arriving at some moment of epiphany; with reference to at least two
     works of fiction you have studied, compare the means by which our attention is drawn to these
     moments and their impact within the works.


9.   “We read fiction because it pleases us, is beautiful.”  What, to you, constitutes this “beauty” in a
     work of prose fiction and to what extent and by what means have at least two of the authors you
     have studied created “beautiful” works?
                                                   –3–                   m15/1/AXENG/HP2/eng/TZ1/XX

Prose other than fiction

10.   Prose non-fiction often contains warnings, reprimands or exhortations to the reader and society.
      Referring closely to at least two works you have studied, compare the means by which these
      warnings, reprimands or exhortations are presented and consider the effects achieved.


11.   Compare the use of reasoned discourse and argument in at least two works of prose non-fiction
      you have studied.


12.   “Prose non-fiction is a public display of both introspection and curiosity about the world.”  By what
      means and for what purposes are these qualities of introspection and/or curiosity communicated
      within at least two works you have studied?
