M15/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                     May / Mai / Mayo 2015


                  English / Anglais / Inglés A:
                   language and literature /
                     langue et littérature /
                       lengua y literatura


                         Higher level
                       Niveau supérieur
                        Nivel superior

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1


4 pages/páginas
                                 –2–              M15/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and must
not be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.



Ces remarques pour la notation sont confidentielles. Leur usage
est réservé exclusivement aux examinateurs participant à
cette session.

Ces remarques sont la propriété de l’Organisation du Baccalauréat
International. Toute reproduction ou distribution à de tierces
personnes sans l’autorisation préalable du centre de l’évaluation
de l’IB est interdite.



Estas notas para la corrección son confidenciales y para el uso
exclusivo de los examinadores en esta convocatoria de exámenes.

Son propiedad del Bachillerato Internacional y no se pueden
reproducir ni distribuir a ninguna otra persona sin la autorización
previa del centro de evaluación del IB.
                                                    –3–                 M15/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


 These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking. They are not offered as
 an exhaustive and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must rigidly adhere.
 Good ideas or angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate.
 Similarly, answers which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here should be
 rewarded appropriately.


1.    Both texts include representations of the ‘shrinking man’ and are concerned with the fascination for
      physical transformation. The first is a journal entry written during World War I. The second is a
      poster advertising the movie The Incredible Shrinking Man from the 1950s.

An adequate to good analysis will:

• identify the types of text and the very different purposes for which they were written and make some
  inferences about the effects on reader/audience
• make some reference to the contexts in which the two texts were written
• identify a common theme and make some comparisons between the two very different situations the
  two men find themselves in
• recognize the presence of the imaginative in both texts.
• notice the calm of Text A, the tension in Text B, the intoxication with nature in the former, the terror of
  it in the latter
• comment on the imagery in Text A and the visual imagery in Text B
• identify and comment on the stylistic features, diction and tone of Text A and their effects. Comment
  on the effects of the diction of the poster and its comic strip as well as other features of illustration,
  graphics and layout
• make some comment on the presence of women in both of these texts.


A good to excellent analysis may also:

• make more informed and detailed comments about the personal and public natures of the types of
  text and their effects on their respective audiences in relation with the contexts in which the two texts
  were produced
• explore more fully the common theme, bringing out the contrasts in the way in which it is treated and
  commenting on the ways in which nature is viewed in the two texts
• comment on narrative structure in the two texts, including how the cartoon narrative contributes to the
  purposes of the poster
• explore more fully the use of stylistic features, diction and tone in both texts with supporting examples
  and comments on effects. Make detailed comments about the graphic and layout features of the
  poster and their effects
• make some comments about the more implicit meanings of the texts, such as the title of Text A or its
  remark about “self-sacrifice” in the context of World War I, or about the “weird mist” of Text B that
  could allude to various forms of paranoia in the 1950s, or possibly about gender issues.
                                                    –4–                 M15/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.    Both texts are about individuals being the object of surveillance. The first is a 2013 blog offering
      practical advice to people worried about potential employers investigating their online profiles.
      The second is the lyrics to a song from 2000 by American singer Jill Scott called “Watching me”
      primarily expressing suspicion, in a pre-social network age, about being watched.

An adequate to good analysis will:

• identify the common theme of technological surveillance or invasion of privacy and the fears this
  arouses in people
• recognize that both the type of anxieties expressed and the technologies referred to in the texts are
  different because of the different contexts and audiences. Identify some aspects of those contexts,
  whether political, social or technological
• draw attention to one or more of the parallels to be made between the concerns of both texts about
  surveillance
• recognize that while Text C offers specific, objective, practical advice, Text D is subjective in point of
  view while expressing social concerns
• further contrast the styles of the two texts, referring, for example, to the step-by-step explanatory
  mode of Text C, to the poetic and rhythmical aspects of Text D
• make observations about the effects of diction and tone in the two texts
• make some observations about the effects of the imagery of the song and of the graphic features of
  the blog.


A good to excellent analysis may also:

• comment more fully on the thematic similarities between the two texts
• analyse in more depth the contrasts to be made between the social and technological contexts of the
  two texts and comment more fully on the anxieties the texts speak of, or the more sinister aspects
  they may allude to
• comment more fully on the techniques used in the blog to guide and reassure the correspondent in
  particular and the young audience of job-seekers generally
• comment more fully on the structure of the song in Text D; its rhymes, rhythms, rhetorical mode, use
  of dialect, etc, and on the conventions of the advice column in the blog and in Text C, recognize that it
  combines the conventions of the advice column and the blog (eg, hyperlinks, related articles, inserts,
  etc) and offer a more detailed interpretation of the ways in which its images support the advice being
  given
• offer comments on some of the less obvious similarities and contrasts between the texts, for example
  between the figure of the protesting victim of surveillance, real or imaginary, in Text D and the
  practical, resourceful and proactive “lifehacker” of Text C.
