M15/1/AYENG/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                     May / Mai / Mayo 2015


                  English / Anglais / Inglés A:
                   language and literature /
                     langue et littérature /
                       lengua y literatura


         Higher level and standard level
        Niveau supérieur et niveau moyen
           Nivel superior y nivel medio


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2

4 pages/páginas
                                 –2–              M15/1/AYENG/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and must
not be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.



Ces remarques pour la notation sont confidentielles. Leur usage
est réservé exclusivement aux examinateurs participant à
cette session.

Ces remarques sont la propriété de l’Organisation du Baccalauréat
International. Toute reproduction ou distribution à de tierces
personnes sans l’autorisation préalable du centre de l’évaluation
de l’IB est interdite.



Estas notas para la corrección son confidenciales y para el uso
exclusivo de los examinadores en esta convocatoria de exámenes.

Son propiedad del Bachillerato Internacional y no se pueden
reproducir ni distribuir a ninguna otra persona sin la autorización
previa del centro de evaluación del IB.
                                                  –3–                 M15/1/AYENG/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


 Context should be understood in the widest possible sense. It may include the social and/or historical
 setting of the work; it may include the context of a situation within the work and will certainly include
 contexts of production and reception of a work.

 In addition to the notes below, responses should be structured with a logical sequence and
 development. Clear, varied and accurate language should be used, as well as appropriate register,
 style and terminology.

1.   An adequate to good answer will identify rural and/or urban aspects in the works studied and
     provide some arguments to show their significance.

     A good to excellent answer may also identify and discuss in more detail rural and/or urban aspects
     in the works studied and analyse their significance both within the works and without.


2.   An adequate to good answer will identify and analyse the techniques that are used to arouse
     emotions in the works, or parts of works.

     A good to excellent answer may also analyse in greater detail some of the techniques used to
     evoke emotions in the reader while acknowledging perhaps that an emotional response may have
     its source in the reader.


3.   An adequate to good answer will identify some sub-plots or secondary themes and explain their
     relevance to the works as a whole as well as how they contribute to the reader’s understanding
     and appreciation.

     A good to excellent answer may also distinguish between primary and secondary sub-plots or
     themes and give more detailed explanations of their role in the works, convincingly demonstrating
     what they bring to the reader’s understanding and appreciation of the whole.


4.   An adequate to good answer will give an example or examples of how authority is challenged in
     the works. It will also identify readers or audiences past or present and show what impact the
     works have had on them.

     A good to excellent answer may also clearly identify different forms of challenge to authority, and
     show a more critical and contextual understanding of the impacts the works have had on readers
     or audiences.


5.   An adequate to good answer will refer to biographical or background information about the writers
     studied and to specific parts or aspects of their works and show the influence of personal history
     on the texts.

     A good to excellent answer may also make more detailed reference to biographical or background
     sources and to well-chosen parts or aspects of the works, convincingly demonstrating significant
     influences of personal history on the texts.
                                                  –4–                M15/1/AYENG/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


6.   An adequate to good answer will identify central concerns or issues in the works as well as
     examples of male and female views of them. It will also provide some discussion of how these
     views differ.

     A good to excellent answer may also clearly identify central concerns or issues in the works and
     illustrate with male and female views of them. It will also convincingly discuss the ways in which
     these views might differ.
