M15/1/AXENG/SP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                    May / Mai / Mayo 2015


             English / Anglais / Inglés
       A: literature / littérature / literatura


                         Standard level
                         Niveau moyen
                          Nivel medio


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2




6 pages/páginas
                                 –2–              M15/1/AXENG/SP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and must
not be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of the IB Assessment Centre.



Ces remarques pour la notation sont confidentielles. Leur usage
est réservé exclusivement aux examinateurs participant à
cette session.

Ces remarques sont la propriété de l’Organisation du Baccalauréat
International. Toute reproduction ou distribution à de tierces
personnes sans l’autorisation préalable du centre de l’évaluation de
l’IB est interdite.



Estas notas para la corrección son confidenciales y para el uso
exclusivo de los examinadores en esta convocatoria de exámenes.

Son propiedad del Bachillerato Internacional y no se pueden
reproducir ni distribuir a ninguna otra persona sin la autorización
previa del centro de evaluación del IB.
                                                   –3–                 M15/1/AXENG/SP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M



Examiners: please note that the term “comparison”, both in the descriptors and in the marking
notes, includes the discussion of relevant “contrasts” as well.

The features of the “very good to excellent” answers assume that those for “adequate to good”
are included.


Drama

1.   An adequate to good answer will discuss appropriate examples of these characters, showing how
     they are “stock or stereotypical” or broadly representational, either explicitly or implicitly, and the
     means by which these qualities are made evident to the audience. Answers will compare their
     dramatic impact on the respective works.

     A very good to excellent answer may also discuss the impact of these characters in greater detail,
     with more persuasive selection and analysis of supporting references.


2.   An adequate to good answer will manage to identify moments of harmony and will suggest why the
     term is appropriate. It will achieve focus on the dramatic means by which such moments have
     been arrived at within the flow of action, and will attempt some effective comparison between the
     separate plays chosen.

     A very good to excellent answer may offer a more detailed and sophisticated analysis of what
     constitutes a moment of harmony within drama.


3.   An adequate to good answer will provide examples of moments of interesting character dynamics
     and suggest how they have been created (by means of dialogue, stage action, use of props or
     setting etc) using a comparative approach.

     A very good to excellent answer may also provide more specific and detailed examples of
     moments of interesting dynamics in relationships and their creation.
                                                –4–                M15/1/AXENG/SP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


Poetry

4.   An adequate to good answer will establish the nature of the allusions, given the context of the
     poetry studied, and will show how these allusions work to communicate meaning and create effect.
     The approach will be comparative.
     A very good to excellent answer may also discuss in greater detail, and with more confidence, an
     interesting range of allusions, perhaps showing a more subtle interpretation of effects created as
     well as the potential obscurity of allusions from different contexts and cultures.


5.   An adequate to good answer will write with clarity about structural aspects of the poems chosen as
     examples and compare some of the ways in which the impact of form upon content functions.
     A very good to excellent answer may discuss form and structure in more sophisticated ways, and
     evaluate how they can be used either to emphasise or to undermine content.


6.   An adequate to good answer will identify and discuss examples of poems that have created a
     connection with the candidate and will give examples of literary conventions that have helped to
     achieve and sustain this connection. There will be some comparison of these means and their
     effects.
     A very good to excellent answer may also offer a more convincing case for the establishment of a
     connection and should include more detailed analysis of relevant conventions.
                                                  –5–                M15/1/AXENG/SP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


Prose: novel and short story

7.   An adequate to good answer will offer a clear definition of the positioning of the chosen narrators
     and compare the means by which it is made clear. The impact of narrative position on the works
     will be discussed, using a selection of relevant supporting examples. Shifting positioning may be
     considered.

     A very good to excellent answer may also show a greater understanding of how this positioning is
     not always immediately apparent. Discussion of the chosen examples will be in greater depth and
     appreciation of the convention more secure.


8.   An adequate to good answer will identify moments that can validly be called epiphanies,
     revelations, turning points or moments of insight, and show why. In comparing such moments by
     means of well chosen examples, it will focus on conventions in relation to impact in some
     interesting ways.

     A very good to excellent answer may offer more convincing accounts of why individual textual
     moments can be identified as epiphanies.


9.   An adequate to good answer will identify works that may be considered beautiful on a wide scale
     ranging from not beautiful at all to, perhaps, sublime. The answer will have to offer—either
     explicitly or implicitly—a workable definition of beauty and compare examples of the literary
     conventions that have been used to create beautiful works or moments within them.

     A very good to excellent answer may also provide a more nuanced sense of what makes a work
     beautiful or not, and the means by which beauty is created.
                                                   –6–                 M15/1/AXENG/SP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


Prose other than fiction

10.   An adequate to good answer will establish clearly relevant examples of warnings, reprimands or
      exhortations from the chosen works. Using a comparative approach, consideration of context may
      be a feature of the discussion, but it should centre on well-chosen examples and the means by
      which they are presented.

      A very good to excellent answer may make more effective choices of example. Supporting details
      will be analyzed in greater depth and with a more secure appreciation of how the warnings, etc, are
      constructed and presented to the reader.


11.   An adequate to good answer will show a grasp of what constitutes reasoned discourse and
      argument, as well as how it functions. It should identify some of the uses of such writing by
      comparing well-chosen examples.

      A very good to excellent answer may offer a more nuanced account of expository prose.


12.   An adequate to good answer will provide examples of how introspection and/or curiosity are
      communicated in the works (examples could include moments of reflection, diary entries, moments
      of observation of the world, transcribed dialogue, etc) and will compare the purpose or effect of this
      feature in the works.

      A very good to excellent answer may also provide more convincing examples of how curiosity
      and/or introspection is communicated in a work, as well as a more convincing discussion of their
      purposes.
