M15/1/AXENG/HP1/ENG/TZ1/XX




English A: literature – Higher level – Paper 1
Anglais A : littérature – Niveau supérieur – Épreuve 1
Inglés A: literatura – Nivel superior – Prueba 1

Monday 4 May 2015 (morning)
Lundi 4 mai 2015 (matin)
Lunes 4 de mayo de 2015 (mañana)

2 hours / 2 heures / 2 horas


Instructions to candidates
 Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Write a literary commentary on one passage only.
 The maximum mark for this examination paper is [20 marks].

Instructions destinées aux candidats
 N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
 Rédigez un commentaire littéraire sur un seul des passages.
 Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est de [20 points].

Instrucciones para los alumnos
 No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
 Escriba un comentario literario sobre un solo pasaje.
 La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [20 puntos].




                                                                                             2215 – 0061
     4 pages/páginas                                     © International Baccalaureate Organization 2015
                                                    –2–                   M15/1/AXENG/HP1/ENG/TZ1/XX

Write a literary commentary on one of the following:

1.

           Girls were getting up all over London. In striped pyjamas, in flowered Viyella1 nightgowns, in
           cotton shifts they had made themselves and unevenly hemmed, or in sheer nylon to which an
           old cardigan had been added for warmth, girls were pushing back bedclothes and groping for
           slippers. They were tying the cords of dressing-gowns and pulling pins from their hair, they
       5   were putting the shilling in the meter2 and the kettle on the gas ring. Those who shared were
           nudging each other out of the way and saying, “And it’s only Tuesday.” Those who lived alone
           were moaning and switching on radio or television. Some said prayers; one sang.
                  It is hard to say what they had least of—past, present, or future. It is hard to say how
           or why they stood it, the cold room, the wet walk to the bus, the office in which they had no
      10   prospects and no fun. The weekends washing hair and underwear, and going in despondent
           pairs to the pictures3. For some, who could not have done otherwise, it was their fate, decreed
           by Mum, Dad, and a lack of funds or gumption. Others had come from the ends of the earth to
           do it—had arrived from Auckland or Karachi or Jo’burg, having saved for years to do just this,
           having wrung or cajoled the wherewithal out of tear-stained parents. Not all were very young,
      15   but all, or nearly all, wished for a new dress, a boyfriend, and eventual domesticity. No two,
           however, were identical: which was the victory of nature over conditioning, advertising, and the
           behavioural sciences—no triumph, but an achievement against the odds.
                  Among the awakening women, that New Year, was Caroline Bell.
                  Caro had passed another examination and moved to another flat, where there were high
      20   ceilings, and draughts at long windows. Learning the address, Christian had remarked, “I didn’t
           know there was anything cheap round there.”
                  “It’s over a shop,” Caro told him, by way of reassurance.
                  For the first time she had a table and two chairs of her own, and a gold-coloured rug from
           India.
      25          In the morning she was closing one of the windows, had drawn it down and was
           leaning both hands on the hasps4. On the inside sill there was a sprinkling of soot and flaked
           white paint. A branch of quince blossom, brought by Ted Tice the week before, was propped
           in a glass vase. Caro was standing at her second-floor window in a green dressing-gown and
           thinking of the women, of whom she was one—the women, waking yet dormant, who were
      30   getting up all over London.
                  Across the street a man on the curb looked up at her; looked up in the same swift,
           focusing way that she looked down. He appeared to have arrived at a destination, and might
           have been a figure in a spy story keeping watch on a fateful house: a wide, tall, motionless man
           in a dark-blue coat, who held a black stick and stood with feet apart and his bare dark head
      35   raised, confident that the house, or the world, would yield to siege.
                  She leaned, he looked. From her arched figure to his inexorable one was no great
           distance, and their eyes now met as they might have done in a room. There was momentary,
           complex stillness until, with a show of normality, Caro lifted her hands and dissolved the spell.
                  He slightly bowed as if he came from a graceful nation, France or Italy. They resumed
      40   their motions of interruption, crossing roads or rooms, Caro’s bare feet on the yellow carpet,
           Caro’s thin fingers yanking a dress from a hanger; the man’s wide hand raised for a cab.
                  All the girls of London shuddered, waiting for the bus. Some had knitted themselves
           unbecoming brown Balaclavas5, with worse mittens to match. Some held a boiled egg, still hot,
           in their glove—which warmed the hand, and could be eaten cold at lunchtime in the
      45   ladies’ room. At that hour all London was ashudder, waiting for the bus.

       From THE TRANSIT OF VENUS by Shirley Hazzard, copyright © 1980 by Shirley Hazzard. Used by
     permission of Viking Books, an imprint of Penguin Publishing Group, a division of Random House LLC.
                                                                    Reprinted by permission of the author.
                                                     –3–                    M15/1/AXENG/HP1/ENG/TZ1/XX


1
    Viyella: a soft, warm cotton/wool blended fabric very popular in the first part of the
    twentieth century
2
    shilling in the meter: at this time it was normal, in rented accommodation, for
    supplies of gas and electricity to be paid for by means of inserting coins into a
    meter – a type of pay-as-you-go in advance method. A shilling was a relatively
    low-value coin.
3
    pictures: an informal British term for the cinema
4
    hasps: metal window fasteners
5
  	Balaclavas: knitted woollen head-coverings in which the head, ears and neck are
    covered and only the face exposed




                                                             Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                  –4–                    M15/1/AXENG/HP1/ENG/TZ1/XX

2.

                                        Meditation on a Bone

                         A piece of bone, found at Trondhjem in 1901, had the
                     following runic* inscription (about 1050 ce) cut on it: “I loved
                      her as a maiden; I will not trouble Erlend’s detestable wife;
                                     better she should be a widow.”

                                     Words scored upon a bone,
                                     Scratched in despair or rage–
                                     Nine hundred years have gone;
                                     Now, in another age
                                 5   They burn with passion on
                                     A scholar’s tranquil page.

                                     The scholar takes his pen
                                     And turns the bone about,
                                     And writes those words again.
                               10    Once more they seethe and shout,
                                     And through a human brain
                                     Undying hate rings out.

                                     “I loved her when a maid;
                                     I loathe and love the wife
                               15    That warms another’s bed:
                                     Let him beware his life!”
                                     The scholar’s hand is stayed;
                                     His pen becomes a knife

                                     To grave in living bone
                               20    The fierce archaic cry.
                                     He sits and reads his own
                                     Dull sum of misery.
                                     A thousand years have flown
                                     Before that ink is dry.

                               25    And, in a foreign tongue,
                                     A man, who is not he,
                                     Reads and his heart is wrung
                                     This ancient grief to see,
                                     And thinks: When I am dung,
                               30    What bone shall speak for me?

                                                                               A D Hope, Quadrant (1957)



* runic: an early medieval northern European alphabet
