N18/1/AYENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX




English A: language and literature – Higher level – Paper 2
Anglais A : langue et littérature – Niveau supérieur – Épreuve 2
Inglés A: lengua y literatura – Nivel superior – Prueba 2

Friday 2 November 2018 (morning)
Vendredi 2 novembre 2018 (matin)
Viernes 2 de noviembre de 2018 (mañana)

2 hours / 2 heures / 2 horas


Instructions to candidates
yy Do not turn over this examination paper until instructed to do so.
yy Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on at least two of the part 3
   works you have studied.
yy You are not permitted to bring copies of the works you have studied into the examination room.
yy The maximum mark for this examination paper is [25 marks].

Instructions destinées aux candidats
yy Ne retournez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
yy Traitez un seul sujet de composition. Vous devez baser votre réponse sur au moins deux des
   œuvres de la troisième partie que vous avez étudiées.
yy Vous n’êtes pas autorisé(e) à apporter des exemplaires des œuvres que vous avez étudiées
   dans la salle d’examen.
yy Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est de [25 points].

Instrucciones para los alumnos
yy No dé la vuelta al examen hasta que se lo autoricen.
yy Conteste una sola pregunta de redacción. Base su respuesta en al menos dos de las obras
   estudiadas de la parte 3.
yy No está permitido traer copias de las obras estudiadas a la sala de examen.
yy La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [25 puntos].




                                                                                              8818 – 2014
     2 pages/páginas                                      © International Baccalaureate Organization 2018
                                                  –2–                  N18/1/AYENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on at least two of the part 3 works you
have studied. Answers which are not based on a discussion of at least two part 3 works will not score
high marks. Your answer should address the ways in which language and context contribute to your
reading of each work.

1.   Discuss how moral and/or ethical issues are explored in at least two of the works you have
     studied.


2.   Discuss the significance of a pivotal moment, shift or turning point in at least two of the works you
     have studied.


3.   Explore the role minor characters play in the development of major characters in at least two of
     the works you have studied.


4.   To what effect have writers used death or dying in at least two of the works you have studied?


5.   How does a physical journey contribute to at least two of the works you have studied?


6.   How and to what effect has childhood been explored in at least two of the works you have
     studied?
