N18/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

  November / Novembre / Noviembre 2018


              English / Anglais / Inglés
        A: literature / littérature / literatura


                         Standard level
                         Niveau moyen
                          Nivel medio

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




4 pages/páginas
                              –2–           N18/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are the property of the International
Baccalaureate and must not be reproduced or distributed to
any other person without the authorization of the IB Global
Centre, Cardiff.

Ces remarques pour la notation sont la propriété du
Baccalauréat International. Toute reproduction ou distribution à
de tierces personnes sans l’autorisation préalable du centre
mondial de l’IB à Cardiff est interdite.

Estas notas para la corrección son propiedad del Bachillerato
Internacional y no deben reproducirse ni distribuirse a ninguna
otra persona sin la autorización del centro global del IB en
Cardiff.
                                                –3–             N18/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


General marking instructions

 These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking. They are not offered
 as an exhaustive and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must rigidly
 adhere.
 Good ideas or angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate.
 Similarly, answers which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here should be
 rewarded appropriately.

 Of course, some of the points listed will appear in weaker papers, but are unlikely to be
 developed.


Instructions générales pour la notation

 Ces remarques sont de simples lignes directrices destinées à aider les examinateurs lors de la
 notation. Elles ne peuvent en aucun cas être considérées comme un ensemble fixe et exhaustif
 de réponses ou d’approches de notation auxquelles les réponses doivent strictement
 correspondre.
 Les idées ou angles valables qui n’ont pas été proposés ici doivent être reconnus et
 récompensés de manière appropriée.
 De même, les réponses qui ne comprennent pas toutes les idées ou approches mentionnées ici
 doivent être récompensées de manière appropriée.

 Naturellement, certains des points mentionnés apparaîtront dans les épreuves les moins bonnes
 mais n’y seront probablement pas développés.



Instrucciones generales para la corrección

 El objetivo de estas notas para los examinadores es servir de directrices para ayudar en la
 corrección. Por lo tanto, no deben considerarse una colección fija y exhaustiva de respuestas y
 enfoques por la que deban regirse estrictamente todas las respuestas.
 Los buenos enfoques e ideas que no se mencionen en las notas para la corrección deben recibir
 el reconocimiento y la valoración que les corresponda.
 De igual manera, las respuestas que no incluyan todas las ideas o los enfoques que se sugieren
 en las notas deben valorarse en su justa medida.

 Por supuesto, algunos de los puntos que se incluyen en las notas aparecerán en exámenes
 más flojos, pero probablemente no se habrán desarrollado.
                                             –4–             N18/1/AXENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.   An adequate to good guided literary analysis will:
      comment on reactions to the boy by other characters
      say something about how far these reactions change during the course of the passage
      say something about contrasts between “normal” life and the child’s abnormal gift
      make some comment on the structure of the passage.

     A very good to excellent guided literary analysis may also:
      show a nuanced sense of interactions within the passage, for example, the ways in which
        Dr Adair and the boy react to one another; the parents’ apparent lack of understanding
        about their child
      comment in greater detail on the implied problems of the gifted “outsider”, for example,
        as revealed in the interplay between the child’s social and mathematical awareness
      comment on the reader’s potential shifting sympathies with certain characters, for
        example, Mrs Bartholomew
      discuss the narrative structuring of this passage, for example, the link between the
        opening and closing section.


2.   An adequate to good guided literary analysis will:
      make some comment on the unfolding events in the poem
      consider some of the techniques employed
      discuss some of the physical elements described, for example, sea, sky, surf, sand
      show some awareness of the mood of the poem.

     A very good to excellent guided literary analysis may also:
      show a more detailed grasp of phases in the narrative
      show a more detailed appreciation of the physical elements in the poem
      show an awareness of some words/phrases, such as “burnt out boat”, “enemy”,
        “big guns”, “enemy shores”, as suggesting a possible war-time context
      show an awareness of possible religious references in the poem
      interpret the end as literal, metaphorical or both.
