N18/1/AYENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

November / Novembre / Noviembre de 2018


                  English / Anglais / Inglés A:
                   language and literature /
                     langue et littérature /
                       lengua y literatura


                         Standard level
                         Niveau moyen
                          Nivel medio

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1


5 pages/páginas
                              –2–           N18/1/AYENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are the property of the International
Baccalaureate and must not be reproduced or distributed to
any other person without the authorization of the IB Global
Centre, Cardiff.

Ces remarques pour la notation sont la propriété du
Baccalauréat International. Toute reproduction ou distribution à
de tierces personnes sans l’autorisation préalable du centre
mondial de l’IB à Cardiff est interdite.

Estas notas para la corrección son propiedad del Bachillerato
Internacional y no deben reproducirse ni distribuirse a ninguna
otra persona sin la autorización del centro global del IB en
Cardiff.
                                                –3–             N18/1/AYENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


General marking instructions

 These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking. They are not
 offered as an exhaustive and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must
 rigidly adhere.
 Good ideas or angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate.
 Similarly, answers which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here should be
 rewarded appropriately.

 Of course, some of the points listed will appear in weaker papers, but are unlikely to be
 developed.


Instructions générales pour la notation

 Ces remarques sont de simples lignes directrices destinées à aider les examinateurs lors de la
 notation. Elles ne peuvent en aucun cas être considérées comme un ensemble fixe et exhaustif
 de réponses ou d’approches de notation auxquelles les réponses doivent strictement
 correspondre.
 Les idées ou angles valables qui n’ont pas été proposés ici doivent être reconnus et
 récompensés de manière appropriée.
 De même, les réponses qui ne comprennent pas toutes les idées ou approches mentionnées ici
 doivent être récompensées de manière appropriée.

 Naturellement, certains des points mentionnés apparaîtront dans les épreuves les moins bonnes
 mais n’y seront probablement pas développés.


Instrucciones generales para la corrección

 El objetivo de estas notas para los examinadores es servir de directrices para ayudar en la
 corrección. Por lo tanto, no deben considerarse una colección fija y exhaustiva de respuestas y
 enfoques por la que deban regirse estrictamente todas las respuestas.
 Los buenos enfoques e ideas que no se mencionen en las notas para la corrección deben recibir
 el reconocimiento y la valoración que les corresponda.
 De igual manera, las respuestas que no incluyan todas las ideas o los enfoques que se sugieren
 en las notas deben valorarse en su justa medida.

 Por supuesto, algunos de los puntos que se incluyen en las notas aparecerán en exámenes
 más flojos, pero probablemente no se habrán desarrollado.
                                                –4–              N18/1/AYENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Text 1

This question asks candidates to analyze an open letter from Barbara Bush and Jenna Bush
Hager, daughters of former US President George W Bush, to Malia and Sasha Obama, on their
leaving the White House at the end of their father’s presidential term. The letter was printed in the
Time Magazine, Ideas section, January 12, 2017 at time.com.

An adequate to good analysis will:

 consider the context in which this letter was printed and the possible audience and purpose it
  implies, recognizing that an “open” letter is intended for general reading and not just the named
  recipients, the Obama sisters
 discuss some of the parallels, and their effects, that are developed in the letter: parallel
  experiences, parallel emotions, parallel concerns—for sisters by sisters, etc.
 discuss some of the other structural devices and their effects: introduction, body and
  conclusion, listing of actions to be taken, balance of “you” instances and “we” instances,
  informal in style and in tone, etc.
 discuss some of the stylistic features and their effects: use of descriptive detail, variety of
  sentence structure, integration of anecdote, use of action verbs to convey advice (never forget,
  enjoy, make mistakes, take all), etc.
 discuss the visual features – colours, banner, headline, image, interactivity
 offer consideration of how this letter works on both a personal and private level: informative
  about growing up in the White House with both its pluses and minuses, of interest on a human
  level (children and parents), the use of an understanding tone, and a sensitivity of the older
  sisters to the situation of the younger girls, offering both advice and encouragement.


A good to very good analysis may also:

 offer a much more in-depth and perhaps critical discussion of context, audience and purpose –
  perhaps mentioning the empowerment of women or perhaps mentioning the context of the
  recent shift in presidential power from one political party to another and bridging the gap
  between these political parties. These are Republican 1st children addressing Democrat 1st
  children; the possible promotional or public relations purpose
 offer a more detailed and insightful discussion of the structure, style and techniques used in the
  letter, examining clearly the effects of such choices – may also explore the image in more detail
 consider more closely the public and private nature of the letter, seeing it as both universal and
  yet particular, for both the USA and for the world
 consider what the readers learn about the writers of this letter
 consider why this was an apt choice for the IDEAS magazine.
                                                 –5–             N18/1/AYENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Text 2

This question asks candidates to analyze a 2015 cartoon by Australian cartoonist, Andrew Marlton.

An adequate to good analysis will:

 offer some consideration of audience, context and purpose as implied by the cartoon itself and
  the footnote
 consider some of the techniques employed (on-going narrative voice at top of frames, informal
  language juxtaposed with factual detail, cartoon figures illustrating the narrative in a humourous
  manner, speech bubbles, labeling, use of colour, attention to detail, etc.) and determine what
  tone and meaning the author conveys (humour, scorn, contempt…?) through these techniques
 offer some close consideration of the details in the cartoon and what they imply: the purple
  Martian, the rover, the Super-Duper Space-o-Scope, the dog (or other valid animal
  interpretations) with goggles and snorkel, the drawing not to scale, cooties, dog with jar on
  head, the illustrated list in the final panel, the lobster, etc.
 comment on the drawing style, colours and font choice
 draw a reasonable conclusion about the purpose of the cartoon, discussing “uncomfortable
  truths” such as human arrogance and indifference, perhaps noting the use of irony and humour.


A good to very good analysis may also:

 offer a more in-depth consideration of audience, context and purpose, perhaps noting the liberal
  perspective of the Guardian, the socio-economic class of the audience and the globalized
  context of space exploration vs. humanitarian concerns
 consider the nuances of the political cartoon’s style and tone
 consider with greater detail and insight the use of various techniques employed in the cartoon
  and how they work in unison to convey the writer’s tone and meaning – for example, the title,
  the use of The First Dog on the Moon as the cartoonist’s alter ego, the anthropomorphism, and
  how the name is reflected in the content
 offer a close consideration of the details to see the numerous implications they have: human
  tendency to racially profile, to think of themselves as greater than they really are, to suspect
  others of “having cooties”, to think only of financial gain while others struggle just to carry water
  to their home, that humans engage in costly (both economically and environmentally)
  conveniences rather than to assist others, etc.
 consider how the images offer humour and wit and yet ironically make the reader complicit in
  the problems mentioned
 offer some consideration of the shift in tone as the cartoon progresses.
