No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
http://www.ibo.org/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-
publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat
ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur,
des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des
gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs
d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit préalable de
l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre
pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse http://www.ibo.org/fr/contact-the-
ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-
to-apply-for-a-license.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de
apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de
aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan
recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido y estará
sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este enlace
encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia: http://www.ibo.org/es/
contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-
providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.
N19/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




Global politics
Higher level and standard level
Paper 1


Thursday 14 November 2019 (afternoon)


1 hour 15 minutes


Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y Answer all the questions.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [25 marks].




                                                                                             8819 – 5951
     4 pages                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2019
                                                         –2–                       N19/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Unit 4      Peace and conflict

  Evolution of conflict : Third-party involvement in conflict, including humanitarian intervention

Read all the sources carefully and answer all the questions that follow.

Source A                 A bar chart using World Bank data to show the percentage of top contributors
                         to United Nations peacekeeping1 operations in relation to the world population,
                         www.cfr.org (2015).

    Top peacekeeping troop contributors: Percent peacekeepers v. percent world population


                        Percent total peacekeepers                       Percent world population

            20 %

            15 %

            10 %

             5%

             0%
                        h


                               ia


                                        ia

                                                tan




                                                                             l


                                                                                     a
                                                         da




                                                                                           ina


                                                                                                    a
                                                                   l

                                                                           ga
                                                                  pa
                     es




                                                                                   an




                                                                                                   eri
                             iop


                                      Ind




                                                        an




                                                                         ne




                                                                                         Ch
                                                                Ne
                                               kis
                   lad




                                                                                 Gh




                                                                                                 Nig
                            Eth




                                                      Rw




                                                                        Se
                                             Pa
                   ng
                Ba




                                    [Source: courtesy of Council on Foreign Relations]



Source B                 Adapted from “Guidance: Sanctions2, embargoes3 and restrictions”, an article
                         from the Department of International Trade, www.gov.uk (2016).

Sanctions and embargoes are political trade restrictions put in place against target countries with the aim
of maintaining or restoring international peace and security. Their principal purpose is usually to change
the behaviour of the target country’s government individuals or groups in a direction which will improve
the situation in that country. The UN Security Council4 imposes sanctions through Security Council
Resolutions. The European Union (EU)5 imposes sanctions and embargoes to further its Common
Foreign and Security Policy objectives and to uphold respect for human rights, democracy and the rule
of law.

When a sanction or embargo is set, the UK follows international procedure to put it in place in British
law. Failure to comply with financial sanctions is a criminal offence. The ultimate objective of a sanction
varies according to the situation. Financial sanctions measures can vary from prohibiting the transfer
of funds to a sanctioned country and freezing the assets of a government, to targeted asset freezes on
individuals. An arms embargo and a ban on the export of certain items or raw materials could be aimed
at supporting a peace process and restricting the financing of weapons by the combatants.

              [Source: contains public sector information licensed under the Open Government Licence v3.0]
                                                         –3–                       N19/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Source C                  Adapted from “The Dilemma of Humanitarian Intervention”, by Jayshree
                          Bashoria and Robert McMahon from the Council on Foreign Relations6 website,
                          www.cfr.org (2013).

Syria’s widening civil war and the growing toll on civilians have raised new debate about the international
community’s responsibility to launch a humanitarian intervention by outside forces.

The responsibility to protect (R2P) doctrine7 was hailed as a new dawn for peace and security. However,
global support for the doctrine weakened after the UN-endorsed no-fly zone that helped topple Libya’s
regime in 2011. Member states were authorized to “take all necessary measures” to protect civilians
under attack from Muammar al-Qaddafi’s government. Western-led air strikes ultimately removed
Qaddafi from power but led to criticism from Security Council members like Russia that the R2P doctrine
was cover for a regime change strategy. Experts say such ideas, combined with concern about the
way Libya’s upheaval affected much of the region, have now given pause to humanitarian interventions
backed by regional or global bodies.

The willingness to use armed force is inevitably influenced not only by the desperation of the affected
population but also by the relevance of the country to the world community, regional stability, and the
attitudes of other major players, say experts. At present, the world community has limited options for
responding to humanitarian crises.

                                    [Source: courtesy of Council on Foreign Relations]



Source D                  Adapted from “South Sudan: Deployment of UN-mandated regional protection
                          force begins”, a news article by Isaac Billy, www.news.un.org (2017).

The deployment in South Sudan of the United Nations-authorized Regional Protection Force has
begun, freeing existing peacekeepers to extend their presence to conflict-affected areas beyond the
capital, Juba. Despite the August 2015 peace agreement, South Sudan slipped back into conflict due
to renewed clashes between rival forces – the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) loyal to the
President and the SPLA in Opposition. The deployment of the 4,000-strong Regional Protection Force
was authorized by the UN Security Council in 2016. The force will provide protection to key facilities in
the nation’s capital and the main routes into and out of the city. It will also strengthen the security of UN
protection of civilians’ sites and other UN premises.

“Having additional troops means we can carry out more tasks related to our mandate, to protect civilians
 and build durable peace,” the head of UN Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), told a news conference.
The arrival of Rwandan troops in addition to Nepalese and Bangladeshi troops already in the mission
 area will allow the existing UNMISS troops to be reassigned to different locations across South Sudan
 to protect civilians, support humanitarian assistance, and monitor and report on human rights abuses.
“While the Regional Protection Force is separate in a sense of its mandate and its delivery here, it
 remains under UNMISS Command” he said.

          [Source: from South Sudan: Deployment of UN-mandated regional protection force begins, by Isaac Billy,
                       © (2017) United Nations. Reprinted with the permission of the United Nations]




                                                                                                              Turn over
                                                    –4–                   N19/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

1
     peacekeeping: the activity of preventing war and violence, especially using armed
     forces not involved in a disagreement to prevent fighting
2
     Sanctions: threatened penalties for disobeying a law or rule
3
     embargoes: official bans on trade or other commercial activity with a
     particular country
4
     UN Security Council: a grouping of 15 states with primary responsibility for the
     maintenance of international peace and security
5
     European Union (EU): a political and economic union of states
6
     Council on Foreign Relations: an American non-profit think tank specializing in US
     foreign policy and international affairs
7
     responsibility to protect (R2P) doctrine: a global commitment to prevent genocide,
     war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity


1.     Outline what Source A tells us about state involvement in conflict.                        [3]


2.     With explicit reference to Source B and one example you have studied, suggest how states
       and international organizations may use pressure on parties to conflict.                   [4]


3.     Compare and contrast what Source C and Source D tell us about third parties and their
       involvement in conflict.                                                                   [8]


4.     Using all the sources and your own knowledge, discuss the influence of third-party
       involvement on the evolution of conflict.                                                 [10]




