N19/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                        November 2019


                         Global politics


          Higher level and standard level


                               Paper 1




8 pages
                                           –2–                 N19/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
http://www.ibo.org/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-
publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat
ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur,
des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des
gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs
d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit préalable de
l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre
pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse http://www.ibo.org/fr/contact-the-
ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-
to-apply-for-a-license.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de
apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de
aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan
recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido y estará
sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este enlace
encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia: http://www.ibo.org/es/
contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-
providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.
                                                    –3–                 N19/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Unit 4       Peace and Conflict

Bulleted lists in this markscheme indicate likely points that candidates may include in their answer: they
are not exhaustive, and examiners should credit other valid points not listed.

     Evolution of Conflict: Third-party involvement in conflict, including humanitarian intervention

1.      Outline what Source A tells us about state involvement in conflict.                              [3]

        Answers may include:
         Source A shows that many states are involved in conflict through supply of their troops/UN
          peacekeeping
         Source A shows that the world’s most populous state, China, is not the most significant
          contributor of state troops to assist in conflict resolution
         Source A shows that less developed states, such as Ethiopia and Bangladesh, contribute
          the greatest number of troops to the UN
         Source A shows that population size is not directly related to troop contribution.

        Award [1] for each relevant point up to a maximum of [3]. Other relevant points not listed can
        also be rewarded.
                                                  –4–                 N19/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   With explicit reference to Source B and one example you have studied, suggest
     how states and international organizations may use pressure on parties to conflict.               [4]

     Answers may include, but are not limited to:
      Source B shows that states and international organizations have adopted means to
       promote security and support peace through formal sanctions or trade limitations
      Source B shows that international organizations such as the UN and EU use sanctions
       and trade limitations in two specific areas – financial and weapons – to limit hostile actors
       and promote peace
      Source B shows that states can apply or target pressure on a range of different actors
       such as governments or groups or individuals.

     Own knowledge may include reference to a range of means in which pressure is applied.
     This could include use of force and specific missions and examples where states and their
     forces have had an impact on operations to promote peace. Negative examples and
     positive examples may be used. For example, peacekeepers implicated in violence
     towards civilians (Liberia), peacekeepers undertaking successful missions (Côte d’Ivoire)
     or with very limited mandates for civilian protection, as determined by the politics of the
     UN Security Council (Congo). Answers may include reference to sanctions that have
     limited states’ military or economic or diplomatic power for example and brought them
     more quickly to the negotiating table (Sudan and Côte d’Ivoire).
     Answers may refer to soft power such as attempts by states and international organizations
     such as the UN, ASEAN and EU to publicize the failings of other states in terms of human
     rights.

     Other relevant points not listed can also be rewarded. Candidates are not expected to make
     four separate points in order to achieve full marks. For each valid point a maximum of [2]
     may be awarded, up to a total of [4]. If there is no reference to one example studied award a
     maximum of [2].
                                                  –5–                 N19/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   Compare and contrast what Source C and Source D tell us about third parties and their
     involvement in conflict.                                                                          [8]

     Potential points of comparison:

      Source C and Source D focus on how third parties can intervene in conflict to help to
       secure peace
      Source C and Source D focus on the United Nations as an international actor involved in
       intervention or conflict resolution
      Source C and Source D both refer specifically to the role of the United Nations Security
       Council (a specific grouping of states) in terms of authorizing use of force
      Source C and D refer to civilians targeted in conflict and the humanitarian driver for third
       party involvement
      Both sources also show how military power provided by states – in terms of ground troops
       and airstrikes – is central to protecting civilians.

     Potential points of contrast:

      Source C suggests that humanitarian intervention is less viable or attractive to states.
       Source D is more positive in outlining capacity in the international community and refers
       to the protection of civilians and the newly authorized United Nations Regional
       Protection Force
      Source C focuses on the use of airstrikes by states to protect civilians. Source D outlines
       the role of increasing troops to protect civilians
      While Source C focuses on the protection of civilians, Source D also mentions the
       protection of key facilities and main routes.
      Source C focuses on Western nations intervening, whereas Source D refers to regional
       and developing countries troops.
      Source C suggests the difficulties intervention can bring, particularly if there may be other
       political motives.

     If the view of only one source is discussed award a maximum of [4]. For a response which
     focuses significantly on one source with only minimal reference to the other source, award a
     maximum of [5]. Award [2] per effective point of contrast/comparison up to a maximum of
     [8]. For responses that discuss the sources separately, rather than in a running contrast,
     award a maximum [6]. For responses which only compare or only contrast, award a
     maximum [6]. For an [8] response expect detailed comparison and contrast but do not
     expect all of the points above, and allow other valid points.
                                                  –6–                N19/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   Using all the sources and your own knowledge, discuss the influence of third-party
     involvement on the evolution of conflict.                                                         [10]

     Question 4 is assessed according to the markbands that follow, in conjunction with these
     marking notes.

     Source material may include, but is not limited to:

     Source A
      Source A highlights a wide range of states who volunteer troops suggesting their
       commitment to peace operations and the importance or centrality of this measure.

     Source B
      Source B states that UN and the EU have established means of applying pressure
       through trade limitations (further enshrined in state law). Related to this, policies can be
       enacted on a wide scale through agreement – creating practical and symbolic pressure
      The use of sanctions highlighted in Source B shows that violence by warring parties is an
       international issue that requires international agreement to combat. The will of other states
       may be needed to help limit and contain the resources of warring parties such
       as weapons.

     Source C
      Source C draws attention to different perceptions of humanitarian intervention and a
       reduced willingness to use force to protect civilians – suggesting a divided international
       community (distrustful of Western action) and prolonged conflict
      Source C shows that airstrikes were used to protect civilians on the ground and to
       bring an end to the conflict in Libya – also showing that conflict can be intense before
       it is resolved
      Source C suggests that geopolitical factors, including the relevance of the country to the
       world community, regional stability, and the attitudes of major players can play a part in
       the evolution or ending of a conflict.

     Source D
      Source D suggests that there can be high levels of violence during peacekeeping
       missions and that states can slip back to war despite efforts made by international actors
       – showing limited influence at times
      Source D makes reference to the influence of the United Nations as a global organization
       – in shaping responses to ending violence through force and in remaining in command of
       the regional protection force
      Source D shows that the UNSC can provide a mandate for force if necessary and to meet
       the changing aspects of conflict as it evolves
      Source D shows that an increase in UN peacekeepers might enable further protection of
       civilians and arguably pave the way for a more sustainable peace.
                                            –7–                 N19/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Own knowledge may include, but is not limited to:

 Answers may problematize the doctrine of R2P (Responsibility to Protect) and discuss the
  issue of humanitarian intervention and third-party intervention more generally
 Answers may consider the role of the international community in providing different forms
  of pressure (ie economic or diplomatic), in contrast to force or coercion
 Answers may consider the long term and complex nature of conflicts such as civil wars,
  which may in turn create barriers to agreement on humanitarian intervention amongst
  third parties
 Answers may consider the ongoing conflict in Syria and the role or intentions of Russia,
  and other actors since the article was written
 Answers may suggest that conflicts vary in nature and that factors such as the number
  of civilian causalities can have a bearing on the speed and resourcing of
  international responses
 Answers may highlight theories of realism and power politics which argue for self-interest
  and national security to remain paramount, as evidenced in the history of the UN Security
  Council. The fact that states volunteer troops may be used to evidence this point
 Answers may draw attention to other actors engaged in ending conflicts including
  coalitions of states prior to UN sanctioned activities
 Answers may consider if intervention may have a detrimental effect on securing peace in
  the long term, or a sustainable peace, if R2P principles are not upheld by third actors
 Answers may draw attention to the conduct of personnel which may create further
  destabilization (eg UN peacekeepers in scandals such as sexual abuse)
 Answers may refer to conflicts as complex emergencies and discuss the influence of other
  actors drawn from outside states such as NGOs.

Do not expect all of the above, and reward other relevant points not listed. Students should
synthesize and evaluate evidence from the sources and from their study of the prescribed
content and key concepts of the course. If only source material or only own knowledge is
used, the response can only be awarded a maximum of [6].

To achieve the maximum [10], responses must refer to all four sources.
                                              –8–                  N19/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Markbands for question 4

       Marks                                    Level descriptor

          0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

                  There is little relevant knowledge and a very limited awareness of the
                   demands of the question.
                  There is little or no attempt to synthesize own knowledge and source
         1–2
                   material.
                  Responses at this level are often largely descriptive and contain
                   unsupported generalizations.

                  There is limited awareness of the demands of the question or the question is
                   only partially addressed.
         3–4      There is some knowledge demonstrated, but this is not always relevant or
                   accurate, and may not be used appropriately or effectively.
                  Responses at this level are often more descriptive than evaluative.

                  Answers show some awareness of the demands of the question.
                  Knowledge is mostly accurate and relevant, and there is some limited
         5–6
                   synthesis of own knowledge and source material.
                  Counterclaims are implicitly identified but are not explored.

                  Answers are focused and show good awareness of the demands of the
                   question.
         7–8      Relevant and accurate knowledge is demonstrated, there is some synthesis
                   of own knowledge and source material, and appropriate examples are used.
                  The response contains claims and counterclaims.

                  Answers are clearly focused and show a high degree of awareness of the
                   demands of the question.
                  Relevant and accurate knowledge is demonstrated, there is effective
        9–10       synthesis of own knowledge and source material, and appropriate examples
                   are used.
                  The response contains clear evaluation, with well-balanced claims and
                   counterclaims.
