No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
http://www.ibo.org/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-
publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat
ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur,
des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des
gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs
d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit préalable de
l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre
pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse http://www.ibo.org/fr/contact-the-
ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-
to-apply-for-a-license.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de
apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de
aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan
recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido y estará
sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este enlace
encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia: http://www.ibo.org/es/
contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-
providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.
N19/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX




Philosophy
Higher level
Paper 3


Monday 18 November 2019 (morning)


1 hour 15 minutes


Instructions to candidates
y Do not turn over this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y Read the text and write a response.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [25 marks].




                                                                                               8819 – 5603
     2 pages                                               © International Baccalaureate Organization 2019
                                                          –2–                       N19/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX

Unseen text – exploring philosophical activity

Compare and contrast the view(s) of philosophical activity presented in the text below, with your own
experience and understanding of what is involved in doing philosophy [25 marks].

                The portrait of the philosopher is often drawn by friends, but more frequently by enemies.
        Pictures drawn by enemies are common because they are preserved by the humour of the
        philosopher. The philosopher is seen as a person who wanders the world aimlessly, as a person
        who builds complex spider webs and who mistakes fantasy for reality. The philosopher thinks
    5   nothing of believing what is seen in their mind, without evidence – therefore, the philosopher
        is criticized by the scientist. The artist criticizes the philosopher for reducing the beauty of
        the world to mere analysis. The philosophers see themselves as caricatures, and have also
        been caricaturized. This self-portraiture is not uncommon amongst great philosophical writers.
        Sometimes it is a mere sketch that we find, dismissed almost by the way. At other times we
   10   have a finished and full-length picture of a professional philosopher.
                Of all these descriptions the most famous and most comprehensive is that which Plato
        connects with the meaning of the word “philosophy”. It is not wisdom that the word signifies, but
        love of wisdom (Phaedrus, 278). And in the lover, Plato finds the analogue of the philosopher:
        the soul of a philosopher pure and true is as the soul of a lover (Phaedrus, 249). The lover who
   15   follows and worships beauty is already on the path which leads to philosophy. “The true order of
        going… is to use the beauties of earth as steps” towards celestial beauty. Going thus “from fair
        forms to fair practices, and from fair practices to fair notions, until from fair notions they arrive
        at the notion of absolute beauty, and at last knows what the essence of beauty is” (Symposium,
        211).
   20           And as love, if it has its way, lands one in philosophy, so the philosopher also displays all
        the features of love. For Love, as the myth has it, is half divine and half human, the offspring of
        Plenty and Poverty. The philosopher shares the characters of both parents, allied to the gods
        and yet among the poorest of the poor. No god or wise person is a seeker after wisdom: the
        philosopher does not need to seek what they already have. And the ignorant and foolish do not
   25   seek wisdom, for they do not feel the want of it. Thus, the philosopher is in a mean between
        two, just as Love was born of opposites. The most essential point in this description – so it
        seems to me – is not the fervour, the passion, the disinterestedness, with which the seeker
        follows truth, as the lover does towards the object of their love.
                This is a real characteristic that springs from a deeper source. What is it that causes the
   30   restless eagerness of the lover? Plato’s mythology is bold enough to answer, it is because the
        object which the lover seeks was once part of their identity, until a jealous god divided them,
        and he or she cannot rest until he or she has regained what is akin to him or her by nature. And
        this is the poetical rendering of the answer to the other question, when we ask, what is it that
        compels the philosopher to the unresting search for truth? The reply must be: because there is a
   35   natural affinity between the mind and the truth which is sought. The philosopher is not yet wise,
        for truth has to be sought; they can never be completely wise, for there are hindrances to the
        full view of truth which mortal nature can never ultimately overcome. Therefore, the philosopher
        does not need to wait for truth to come from the outside. The philosopher is active in its pursuit,
        driven onwards by an impulse which is of identical nature with the goal which is pressed.

             [Source: adapted from “The Philosophical Attitude” by W. R. Sorley (The International Journal of Ethics,
                               Issue 20, no. 2 : 152–168). © 1910 by The University of Chicago.]
