N19/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                        November 2019


                           Psychology


                           Higher level


                               Paper 3




7 pages
                                           –2–                 N19/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
http://www.ibo.org/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-
publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat
ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur,
des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des
gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs
d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit préalable de
l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre
pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse http://www.ibo.org/fr/contact-the-
ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-
to-apply-for-a-license.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de
apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de
aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan
recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido y estará
sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este enlace
encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia: http://www.ibo.org/es/
contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-
providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.
                                                  –3–                 N19/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 3 markbands



 Marks                                          Level descriptor


   0       The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.


          The question is misunderstood, and the central issue is not identified correctly, resulting in
           a mostly irrelevant argument.
  1–3
          The response contains mostly inaccurate references to the approaches to research or
           these are irrelevant to the question.
          The reference to the stimulus material relies heavily on direct quotations from the text.

          The question is understood, but only partially answered resulting in an argument of
           limited scope.
  4–6
          The response contains mostly accurate references to approaches to research which are
           linked explicitly to the question.
          The response makes appropriate but limited use of the stimulus material.

          The question is understood and answered in a focused and effective manner with an
           accurate argument that addresses the requirements of the question.
  7–9
          The response contains accurate references to approaches to research with regard to the
           question, describing their strengths and limitations.
          The response makes effective use of the stimulus material.
                                                  –4–                N19/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.   (a)   Identify the research method used and outline two characteristics of the method.          [3]

           Award [1] for stating lab experiment (or true experiment). Stating ‘experiment’
           without specification is acceptable.

           Answers related to characteristics of the method may include two of the following
           characteristics: [1] per relevant point. Maximum of [2].

           Answers that outline characteristics such as controls, cause effect relationship, IV
           and DV may be awarded marks for this even if they have not identified the research
           method as a lab experiment

           • A lab experiment involves random allocation of participants to the experimental groups
             (alternative: to the exposure of the independent variable).
           • An experiment involves at least two conditions. In this study condition 1 was the
             “math-test” condition alone, and condition 2 was the “math-test and teaching intervention”.
           • The IV was whether participants were exposed to the teaching intervention or not, and the
             DV was the score on the math test.
           • An experiment has a hypothesis: the hypothesis was that female participants in condition
             2 (with the teaching intervention) would score higher on the math test than female
             participants in condition 1 (without the teaching intervention).
           • A lab experiment is characterized by rigorous control to avoid confounding variables, for
             example, participant variables. The participants were randomly allocated into the two
             groups.
           • The lab experiment can establish a cause-effect relationship between manipulation of the
             IV and its effect on the DV. In this study there was a causal relationship between the IV
             (learning about stereotype threat) and the DV (scores on the math test).

     (b)   Describe the sampling method used in the study.                                           [3]

           Award [1] for stating convenience (or opportunity) sampling.

           Description of the sampling method may include two of the following characteristics:
           [1] per relevant point. Maximum of [2].

           • A convenience/opportunity sample consists of participants representing the
             population of interest. In the case of the study in the stimulus material, the
             population is female university students and the topic is of general interest
             (stereotype threat related to math performance).
           • A convenience/opportunity sample consists of participants based on availability
             and willingness to participate. It is an easy and quick way to get a sample and
             often used in research at universities as in this study.
           • Convenience (or opportunity) sampling is a non-probability sampling method,
             which means that participants are not chosen randomly.
           • A convenience/opportunity sample suffers from selection bias and is therefore not
             necessarily representative of the population being studied (may lack population
             validity)
           • Any other relevant point(s).
                                             –5–                 N19/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(c)   Suggest an alternative or additional research method giving one reason for your
      choice.                                                                                    [3]

      Award [1] for naming an alternative or additional research method and [2] for rationale.

      Alternative or additional research methods include, but are not limited to:

      Focus group interviews

      Rationales for using focus group interviews could include, but are not limited to:
      • The female students' own perception of stereotype threat in relation to math and test
        anxiety could be explored. The facilitator would encourage the participants to share
        their views and experiences of anxiety and lack of confidence in math.
      • This qualitative approach would give a subjective view on each participant’s
        experiences with stereotypes, and how this might have affected their performance.
      • The qualitative data could supplement the experimental data and give the
        researchers insight into aspects of the stereotype threat that they had not thought of
        themselves or, initiate further experimental research based on the findings of the
        focus group interviews.

      Semi-structured interviews

      Rationales for using semi-structured interviews could include, but are not limited to:
      • Semi-structured interviews could make a valuable contribution to an overall
        understanding of issues involved in gender stereotypes and math. The use of semi-
        structured interviews gives the participants the possibility to provide in-depth
        answers and to elaborate on specific points.
      • The inductive content analysis of the semi-structured interview may reveal themes
        related to everyday stereotyping or negative expectations in relation to women and
        math that could contribute to a deeper understanding of the problem than that found
        in an experiment.
                                                  –6–                 N19/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   Describe the ethical considerations that were applied in the study and explain if further
     ethical considerations could be applied.                                                        [6]

     For describing the ethical considerations that were applied in the study: [1] per relevant
     point made, up to a maximum of [3].

     • The participants signed a consent form before the start of the study and agreed to
       participate. They were only informed that the study was about math and gender so there
       was slight deception involved.
     • They were guaranteed the right to withdraw from the study at any time and/or withdraw
       their data at any time as part of consent.
     • They were guaranteed confidentiality and anonymity as part of consent.
     • The participants were debriefed after they had completed the study. This is to ensure
       that the participants leave the study with a full understanding of it and in the same
       condition as they entered it.

     For explaining further ethical considerations that could be applied: [1] per relevant point
     made, up to a maximum of [3].

     • In principle, participants should be fully informed about the aim and procedures of the
       study, but this was not done here because this would make it impossible to conduct
       this particular study. For example, participants were not told the purpose of writing their
       gender on the paper. This would serve as a primer and is known to create anxiety in
       females before a math test because of the stereotype threat.
     • In a study like this one, on quite a sensitive issue that could potentially stress the
       female participants, they should have been told that they could contact the researchers
       if they had any questions about the study. The researchers should make sure that the
       female participants did not suffer any psychological harm.
     • Deception is used in the study. It must be clearly justified in a research ethics
       application form why (minor) deception is necessary in this particular study.
     • The researcher could inform participants during debriefing that they could still withdraw
       their data. Participants may not feel they can leave the study because they have given
       consent.
     • Students may feel coerced to participate when they receive extra credit. Students who
       do not wish to participate in this research should not be disadvantaged in any way and
       they should be offered a comparable alternative task to receive the same credits.
     • Any other relevant point(s).
                                                  –7–                 N19/3/PSYCH/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   Discuss how the researcher in the study could avoid bias.                                        [9]

     Refer to the paper 3 markbands when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered and balanced
     review of how a researcher could avoid bias.

     Biases in research may originate from design of the experiment, the researchers, as well
     as the participants.

     Possible ways for the researcher to avoid bias in this study could include but are not
     limited to:
     • Researchers could reduce bias by having a well-designed research protocol that
        explicitly outlines how data is collected and analysed in this experiment.
     • The researcher could conduct a pilot study in order to test the suitability of the overall
        design, procedures and measures used in the experiment (for example, with regard to
        operationalization of variables) to see if a cause–effect relationship can be established
        between the IV and the DV (internal validity) .This would also help to see if all possible
        confounding variables have been taken into account. However, a pilot study may not
        be possible due to time restraints or lack of resources.
     • A pilot study is an important step in ensuring construct validity, that is, making sure that
        the study in question actually is measuring ‘stereotype threat’ in relation to math so that
        the results can be generalized and used for prediction.
     • Sampling bias (selection bias) is a danger in the case of a non-probability sample, as in
        this study. Although sampling bias may occur when participants in a sample are not
        selected randomly, but participants can then be randomly allocated to the experimental
        conditions in order to control for participant bias. This was also done in this study.
        Random allocation may increase the possibility of generalization. Another way to avoid
        sampling bias is to have a random sample but this is often not done in research like
        this one with a student sample.
     • To prevent experimenter bias (researcher bias, the Rosenthal effect), the researcher
        could ensure that the experimenter is blind to the hypothesis of the study. This would
        help prevent threats to external validity. The researcher should also be aware of
        personal biases when formulating a research question and analysing data,
     • The researcher can control for demand characteristics (i.e. participants respond to
        cues in the experiment, which somehow tell them what is expected of them) or the
        Hawthorne effect (i.e. the mere fact of being in a study makes participants perform
        better). This could affect their behaviour in this experiment and thus affect internal
        validity of the study. A possible way to control for this is using some degree of
        deception, which was also the case in this experiment.
     • The researcher could control for bias related to having a male experimenter in a study
        with only female participants by having a female experimenter conduct the experiment.
        This was also the case in this study.
     • The researcher could try to avoid confirmation bias and gender bias during analysis of
        data by having other researchers participate in the collection, analysis, and
        interpretation of data (researcher triangulation). This is important with regard to
        generalization of results, especially in a study with a single sex sample and a sensitive
        topic related to stereotyping.

     Arguments based on a conceptual framework related to qualitative research, for example,
     personal reflexivity should not be credited.

     Marks should be awarded according to the descriptors in the markbands. Each level of the
     markband corresponds to a range of marks to differentiate candidates' performance. A
     best-fit approach is used to ascertain which particular mark to use from the possible range
     for each level descriptor.
