No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
http://www.ibo.org/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-
publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat
ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur,
des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des
gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs
d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit préalable de
l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre
pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse http://www.ibo.org/fr/contact-the-
ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-
to-apply-for-a-license.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de
apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de
aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan
recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido y estará
sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este enlace
encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia: http://www.ibo.org/es/
contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-
providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.
N19/3/SOCAN/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX




Social and cultural anthropology
Higher level
Paper 2


Thursday 7 November 2019 (morning)


2 hours 30 minutes


Instructions to candidates
yy Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
yy Section A: answer the question.
yy Section B: answer two questions.
yy The maximum mark for this examination paper is [45 marks].




                                                                                              8819 – 5802
     4 pages                                              © International Baccalaureate Organization 2019
                                                    –2–                  N19/3/SOCAN/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                               Section A

Answer the question.

1.    With reference to ethnographic material from one area of inquiry you have studied, discuss
      how society or materiality or culture helps you understand one of the following issues that is
      grounded in a contemporary, real-world example:
      yy human rights
      yy globalization
      yy sustainability
      yy poverty
      yy violence.[15]

                                               Section B

Answer two questions from the three remaining areas of inquiry you have studied. Each question must
be from a different area of inquiry. You must use specific and clearly identified ethnographic illustrations.
Each question is worth [15 marks].

Belonging

2.    Compare and contrast ways in which culture or identity may be reproduced and contested.

3.    To what extent can either ethnicity or race help us understand one of the following:
      yy everyday violence
      yy family
      yy community
      yy participation in leisure, work and schooling?


Classifying the world

4.    Compare and contrast systems of classification in two societies you have studied in relation
      to either nature/culture or sacred/profane.

5.    Examine either power or cosmology in relation to one of the following:
      yy boundaries
      yy knowledge systems
      yy morality
      yy ritual and religion.


Communication, expression and technology

6.    To what extent has the globalization of technology contributed to either cultural hegemony or
      transnationalism?

7.    Discuss change in forms of communication in relation to one of the following:
      yy political discourse
      yy hybridity
      yy performance
      yy symbolic language.
                                                   –3–                  N19/3/SOCAN/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Conflict

8.    Discuss ways in which power can help us understand everyday social relations in relation to either
      social control or resistance.

9.    Examine the relationship between change and resistance in relation to one of the following:
      yy ideology
      yy systems of inequality
      yy hegemony
      yy indigenous issues.


Development

10.   Evaluate the claim that development is the new colonialism.

11.   Examine the relationship between culture and one of the following:
      yy poverty and wealth
      yy sustainability
      yy local and global social movements
      yy development.


Health, illness and healing

12.   To what extent does either symbolism or belief and knowledge contribute to an understanding
      of health?

13.   Discuss how inequality contributes to our understanding of one of the following:
      yy illness
      yy global health politics
      yy suffering
      yy biomedicine.


Movement, time and space

14.   Discuss either society or identity in relation to transnational communities.

15.   Compare and contrast ways in which boundaries can be constructed or contested in two societies
      you have studied in relation to one of the following:
      yy exclusion
      yy movement
      yy cosmopolitan communities
      yy tourism.




                                                                                              Turn over
                                                  –4–                 N19/3/SOCAN/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Production, exchange and consumption

16.   Compare and contrast the relationship between identity and consumption in two societies you
      have studied.

17.   Discuss ways in which globalization has altered one of the following:
      yy exchange
      yy labour
      yy meanings of economic morality
      yy roles of women in the economy.


The body

18.   Examine ways in which culture is inscribed on the body in relation to either symbolism or
      social relations.

19.   Discuss the relationship between the body and personhood in relation to one of the following:
      yy commodification
      yy disability
      yy gender
      yy subjectivity.
