M10/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                           May 2010



           BUSINESS AND MANAGEMENT



                      Standard Level



                               Paper 1




17 pages
                              –2–            M10/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                               –3–              M10/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



The markbands on pages 3–4 should be used where indicated in the markscheme.



               Section A

              (c) questions
                                                         Level descriptors
     Q1 (c)      Q2 (c)       Q3 (c)

                 Marks
                  0–7

                                       • No knowledge or understanding of relevant issues,
                  0                      concepts and theories.
                                       • No use of appropriate terminology.

                                       • Little knowledge and understanding of relevant
                                         issues, concepts and theories.
                1–2                    • Little use of appropriate terminology.
                                       • No reference is made to the information in the case
                                         study.

                                       • A description or partial analysis/examination with
                                         relevant knowledge and/or understanding of relevant
                                         issues, concepts and theories.
                                       • Some use of appropriate terminology.
                3–5
                                       • Some reference is made to the information in the
                                         case study, not just to the name of the organization.
                                       • At the lower end of the markband responses are
                                         mainly theoretical.

                                       • A balanced analysis/examination with accurate,
                                         specific, well-detailed knowledge and understanding
                                         of relevant issues, concepts and theories.
                6–7                    • An analysis/examination that uses appropriate
                                         terminology throughout the response.
                                       • Explicit references are made to the information in
                                         the case study.
                        –4–              M10/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Section B

 Q4 (d)
                                  Level descriptors
 Marks
  0–8

            • No knowledge or understanding of relevant issues, concepts
   0          and theories.
            • No use of appropriate terminology.

            • Little knowledge and understanding of relevant issues,
              concepts and theories.
  1–2       • Little use of appropriate terminology.
            • No evidence of judgments and/or conclusions.
            • No reference is made to the information in the case study.

            • A description with some knowledge and/or understanding of
              relevant issues, concepts and theories.
            • Some use of appropriate terminology.
  3–4       • No evidence of judgments and/or conclusions.
            • Some reference is made to the information in the case study,
              not just to the name of the organization.
            • The response is mainly theoretical.

            • A response with relevant knowledge and understanding of
              relevant issues, concepts and theories.
            • A response that uses relevant and appropriate terminology.
  5–6       • Evidence of judgments and/or conclusions that are little
              more than unsubstantiated statements that has balanced
              analysis and demonstrates understanding.
            • Explicit references to the information in the case study are
              made at places in the response.

            • A response with accurate, specific, well-detailed knowledge
              and understanding of relevant issues, concepts and theories.
            • A response that uses appropriate terminology competently
  7–8         throughout the response.
            • A response that includes judgments and/or conclusions that
              is well supported and underpinned by a balanced analysis.
            • Explicit references to the information in the case study are
              made throughout the response.
                                                       –5–              M10/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                                   SECTION A

1.   (a)   Define the following terms:

           (i)   product life cycle (line 32)                                                  [2 marks]

                 Product life cycle refers to the fact that any new product, once
                 commercialized (i.e. first launched on the market) progresses through a
                 sequence of stages conventionally called “introduction”, “growth”,
                 “maturity” and “decline”. The product life cycle (often abbreviated as PLC)
                 is mainly associated with changes in marketing (as the marketing strategy
                 needs to adapt according to the stage).
                    Product sales




                                    Introduction   Growth    Maturity     Decline


                 Candidates may include a figure showing a product life cycle (with the
                 named stages); this can enable them to score [2 marks] but this is not
                 required.

                 Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

                 Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and
                 understanding.

                 Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
                 understanding similar to the answer above. Key concept: sequential stages.

                 For only a relevant: example or application to the case study award
                 [1 mark].
                                         –6–               M10/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(ii)   brand loyalty (line 51).                                                            [2 marks]

       Brand loyalty refers to consumers’ commitment to purchase products from a
       particular brand (literally, it means “fidelity”, “allegiance”, “faithfulness” to
       one brand and not to its competitors). The central idea is that of
       repurchasing. Brand loyalty is often regarded as the ultimate goal of
       marketing.


       Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

       Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and
       understanding.

       Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
       understanding similar to the answer above. Key concept: repurchasing.

       For only a relevant: example or application to the case study award
       [1 mark].
                                            –7–              M10/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   With reference to N-Pharma and its new drug Pharmatics, distinguish
      between “above the line and below the line promotion” (line 45).    [4 marks]

      Above the line (ATL) promotion refers to advertising a brand (N-Pharma, in this
      case) through conventional forms of mass media such as television, radio and
      newspaper. To launch its new anti-aging drug Pharmatics, N-Pharma may have
      led a national campaign on television, with famous actresses praising the
      beneficial effects of Pharmatics to keep their skin smooth and youthful.

      Below the line (BTL) promotion refers to advertising through short-term, focused
      methods such as direct mail, public relations and sales promotions; for N-Pharma,
      it could include discount coupons, sponsorship of health-related events,
      point-of-sale displays (e.g. in drug stores) or giving away samples of Pharmatics
      through doctors. (Most of the pharmaceutical companies actually do BTL
      promotion through doctors, as for a patient, personal advice from a doctor may
      hold more value than commercial advertisements.)

      NB: “Direct to Consumer” (DTC) advertising is only permitted in some
      countries. Candidates should not be penalized if they do not discuss TV adverts.

      Accept any other relevant answer.


      [1 mark]
      The answer shows some confused or limited understanding of the difference
      between ATL and BTL promotion.

      [2 marks]
      The two concepts are understood, but they are not clearly defined or not applied
      to the case study.

      [3 marks]
      The two types of promotion are presented and the distinction is clear; one type of
      promotion (ATL or BTL) is well illustrated but the other is not.

      [4 marks]
      The two types of promotion are well presented and the distinction is clear;
      ATL and BTL are defined as two advertising strategies and the distinction
      between them is clearly illustrated.
                                                          –8–   M10/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(c)   Apply The Boston Consulting Group (BCG) matrix to N-Pharma’s product
      portfolio.                                                           [7 marks]

      The BCG matrix distinguishes between four types of products according to their
      market share and to the growth rate of the market in which they are sold.

                                      Relative market share
                                       High            Low
         Market growth rate




                                                    Question
                              High




                                       Stars         marks
                              Low




                                     Cash cows        Dogs



      N-Pharma’s product portfolio lends itself well to a BCG matrix:
      • Pharmax is a cash cow (well-established, high market share of “around
        one-third of the market for painkillers in Japan and the USA” (lines 33–34) in a
        market which is “growing very slowly” (line 35))
      • Pharmaflo is a star (launched less than ten years ago, it “already has a high
        15 % share in a market that is still growing rapidly”)
      • Pharmaslim is a question mark: “the market […] is growing rapidly” but
        “gaining market share is proving more difficult than anticipated” (lines 41–43).

      Accept any other relevant application e.g. about Pharmatics.


      Award a maximum of [2 marks] if the matrix is only drawn with no application.
      Award a maximum of [4 marks] if the matrix is correctly applied but with
      no explanation.

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                 –9–             M10/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   (a)   “Since 1980, N-Pharma has been a public limited company with its shares
           traded on the Tokyo Stock Exchange” (lines 83–84). Outline two key aspects
           of this form of ownership.                                                 [4 marks]

           The key aspects of this form of ownership include the following points:
           • N-Pharma sells its shares to the general public, so anyone can be an investor
             and have part ownership of the company
           • N-Pharma has access to capital markets and is thereby able to raise more funds
             (which was not so easy when it was a private company prior to 1980)
           • N-Pharma’s accounts must be audited and released to the public (they are
             public information)
           • N-Pharma may be vulnerable to takeover bids (line 117); its value may also be
             very dependent upon stock exchange fluctuations
           • any other relevant aspect.


           Award [1 mark] for each correct key aspect identified, and [1 mark] for the
           development of each of these key aspects.

     (b)   Prepare a SWOT analysis showing only the opportunities and threats for
           N-Pharma.                                                              [4 marks]

           The case study refers to several opportunities and threats (see below) though
           candidates may be credited for others, if appropriate (for example about exchange
           rates between currencies):

           Opportunities include:
           • illnesses and more health problems all around the world, resulting in an
             increasing demand for drugs (e.g. the more people at risk of heart attacks,
             the higher the demand for Pharmaflo) (lines 38–39)
           • further trends for youth-obsessed looks, resulting in an increasing demand for
             anti-aging products such as Pharmatics (line 44)
           • financial difficulties for competitors (especially small ones who could then be
             taken-over more easily) (lines 129–130)
           • changes in the regulations on joint ventures at the European Union
             Commission (as it would enable the joint venture with R-Taylor)
             (lines 135–136).

           Threats include:
           • economic recession, leading to customers buying cheaper generic drugs rather
             than N-Pharma branded products (lines 53–54)
           • another financial crisis, leading to a drop in the price of shares as in 2008
             (lines 109–110)
           • political tensions between China and Japan, creating problems with the
             development of the Beijing subsidiary (lines 146–147)
           • more instances of PR problems e.g. another ethical scandal (lines 88–91).

           Accept any other relevant answer.
                                             – 10 –               M10/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


      In a SWOT analysis, opportunities and threats are external factors; consequently,
      an “internal threat” (such as industrial action in the Canadian subsidiary) and an
      “internal opportunity” (such as Susan James adopting a new leadership style) are
      not acceptable. They are misclassifications and the candidate cannot gain any
      marks for them.

      Candidates are not expected to explain nor develop the opportunities and threats
      they identify; a list is acceptable.

      [1 mark]
      For a limited answer, with just a couple of valid points.

      [2 marks]
      For a basic answer, some of the opportunities and threats are correct and
      appropriate but some are not.

      [3 marks]
      For a satisfactory answer overall; most opportunities and threats are correct and
      appropriate, but the answer shows a slight imbalance (for example: three
      opportunities but only one threat).

      [4 marks]
      For a clear answer, with at least two correct and appropriate opportunities, and at
      least two correct and appropriate threats. One or two misclassifications may
      be present.

(c)   Analyse N-Pharma’s position using the information in the SWOT analysis
      (additional information, page 3) and your answer to part (b).          [7 marks]

      Analysing an organization’s market position using a SWOT analysis can be done
      in several ways, so this task may be addressed differently by candidates.
      For example:
      • some candidates may develop a position map and answer in terms of marketing
         (with references to concepts such as positioning and USP)
      • some candidates may decide to use Porter’s five forces model in their answer
         and to examine N-Pharma’s position towards its competitors
         (i.e. analysing N-Pharma’s competitive advantage)
      • some candidates may structure their analysis by successively examining
         N-Pharma’s position in different national/continental markets
       • some candidates may not use additional tools but can analyse the SWOT using
         the key points from the SWOT analysis (additional information and answer to
         part (b)).

      Accept any other relevant analysis.
                                                  – 11 –            M10/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


           All these approaches are fine – what is assessed here is the candidate’s ability to
           analyse N-Pharma’s position by referring to the SWOT analysis. Just repeating
           key points from the SWOT analysis (additional information and answer to
           part (b)) should not be credited though: candidates must use these elements in
           their answer, and not just copy them.

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.


3.   (a)   Define the following terms:

           (i)   profitability (line 64)                                                         [2 marks]

                 The ability of a business to generate consistent sales revenue to cover costs
                 over a period of time. It can be measured by using profit ratios such as
                 GPM, NPM or ROCE.


                 Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

                 Do not award any extra mark for the formulae of the profitability ratios
                 (gross profit margin, net profit margin).

                 Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and
                 understanding.

                 Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
                 understanding similar to the answer above. Key concept: consistent.

                 For only a relevant example or application to the case study award
                 [1 mark].

                 For a definition of profit (as opposed to profitability): award [1 mark].
                                               – 12 –             M10/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


      (ii)   liquidity (line 111).                                                                 [2 marks]

             The term “liquidity” is used in several cognate ways, which all relate to the
             availability of cash or the convertibility of assets into cash. The liquidity of
             an asset is its ability to be sold quickly and without any price discount – but
             a business itself could be described as having liquidity if it can easily meet
             its needs for cash (i.e. in simple terms, liquidity is the ability of a business to
             pay the bills). Two ratios can help calculate the liquidity of a business: the
             current ratio and the acid test (quick) ratio.


             Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

             Do not award any extra mark for the formulae of the profitability ratios
             (current ratio, acid test (quick) ratio).

             Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and
             understanding.

             Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
             understanding similar to the answer above. Key concept: convertibility.

             For only a relevant: example or application to the case study award
             [1 mark].

(b)   Using data from Appendix 2, calculate the liquidity ratios for the USA
      subsidiary of N-Pharma in the financial years 2008 and 2009.           [4 marks]

                         Current assets
      Current ratio =
                        Current liabilities

                                  Current assets − stock
      Acid test (quick) ratio =
                                   Current liabilities

                 Current ratio        Acid test ratio
       2008 1.02 (accept 1)           0.68 (accept 0.7)
       2009 0.89 (accept 0.9)         0.48 (accept 0.5)
      (this is to 2 d.p.)


      Award [1 mark] for each correct calculation.
                                            – 13 –           M10/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(c)   Analyse the liquidity ratios calculated in part (b) from the perspective of two
      stakeholders of N-Pharma.                                                       [7 marks]

      This is a case of “own figure rules” – candidates may make valid points in their
      answer even if they did not accurately calculate the ratios in 3(b).

      The contents of the answer will depend on the choice of the two stakeholders.
      There is no expectation that candidates will choose one external and one
      internal stakeholder.

      Examples:
      • Chosen stakeholder: suppliers. The current ratio has dropped from just over 1
        in 2008 to 0.89 in 2009, which means that the USA subsidiary may not be able
        to pay off its debts and bills. Suppliers should be very concerned by this
        decrease, as the USA subsidiary may not have enough liquidity over the next
        12 months. The decrease in cash directly available (from US$190m in 2008 to
        US$60m in 2009) only worsens the subsidiary’s financial situation and some
        suppliers may insist on rapid payment and terminate or renegotiate contracts.
        This could affect the operations and add operational problems to the subsidiary.
      • Chosen stakeholder: Suzuko Tanaka. As auditor, her role is to analyse the
        situation and make recommendations to the Tsukuba headquarters. She may
        recommend that the Tsukuba headquarters review the status of all the current
        borrowings of the USA subsidiary. As auditor, she should also examine why
        the stock is increasing so much (from US$250m in 2008 to US$356m in 2009)
        and what can be done to help get rid of the stock (although the high amount of
        stock could just mean that sales are booming and that they are producing
        masses to keep up with demand). Suzuko will need other data to understand
        the overall situation.

      Accept any other relevant analysis.


      If only one stakeholder is taken into consideration, or if the answer is generic
      without referring to the perspective of two different stakeholders, the answer
      cannot score above the [3–5 marks] markband.

      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                  – 14 –           M10/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                              SECTION B

4.   (a)   Define the following terms:

           (i)    delegation (line 59)                                                         [2 marks]

                  Delegation (sometimes called “deputation”) refers to the transfer and
                  sharing of authority and control of tasks and duties to another person.
                  Typically, it allows a subordinate to make decisions and to feel empowered
                  at work. The overall responsibility remains with the manager.


                  Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

                  Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and
                  understanding.

                  Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
                  understanding similar to the answer above. Key concepts: transfer of
                  authority within limits.

                  For only a relevant: example or application to the case study award
                  [1 mark].

           (ii)   performance-related pay (PRP) (line 72).                                     [2 marks]

                  Performance-related pay (PRP) is a method of financial motivation whereby
                  employees earn according to how well (or how much) they work.
                  “Piece work” is the most common example of PRP, although many schemes
                  of commission are also based on the principle of PRP.


                  Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

                  Award [1 mark] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and
                  understanding.

                  Award [2 marks] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and
                  understanding similar to the answer above. Key concept: rewarding
                  performance.

                  For only a relevant: example or application to the case study award
                  [1 mark].
                                            – 15 –           M10/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(b)   N-Pharma is considering several strategic options for its future growth,
      including a takeover (Option 1(b)) and a merger (Option 3). Distinguish
      between a merger and a takeover.                                         [4 marks]

      A merger occurs when two companies combine and form a new, larger company:
      the merger of N-Pharma and Anigam would result in the creation of a new
      company (which would develop and market both human and animal drugs, and be
      present in all the countries where N-Pharma and Anigam already separately
      operate). Senior managers of both companies would need to support the merger.

      A takeover can be defined as the acquisition of a company; typically a large
      company (such as N-Pharma) takes control of a smaller one (small European
      pharmaceutical ones, line 126). A takeover may occur even if the senior
      managers of the company being purchased do not want it.

      The main difference is the fact that mergers are usually the result of positive
      negotiations and decisions, whereas takeovers are often “hostile”, creating tension
      and resentment in the smaller company that has been absorbed by the other.

      Accept any other relevant answer.


      Award [1 mark] for a correct definition of one of the two concepts.

      Award [2 marks] if both concepts are correctly defined; such an answer is
      just theoretical.

      Award [3 marks] if both concepts are defined with reference to N-Pharma and the
      case study.

      Award [4 marks] if the answer explicitly stresses the difference between a merger
      and a takeover.

      To acheive full marks [4 marks], the answer must clearly distinguish between a
      merger and a takeover. The question is not “define a merger and define
      a takeover”: it is not marked as 2+2. The aim of this point of assessment is to
      ensure that candidates understand the difference between the two.
                                            – 16 –            M10/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(c)   Laura Davies anticipates “that the Australian employees of N-Pharma will
      respond positively to non-financial rewards” (lines 80–81). Explain how
      non-financial rewards might affect job satisfaction and productivity.                  [4 marks]

      Some employees (such as the Australian employees of N-Pharma) may prefer
      non-financial rewards (such as job enrichment, job enlargement, empowerment
      and teamwork) to financial rewards (unlike the Canadian employees who are more
      motivated by financial rewards). Different types of non-financial rewards can
      affect job satisfaction and productivity in slightly different ways:
      • Job enrichment means giving employees more interesting, challenging and
         complex tasks. It gives them the chance to test themselves and to use their full
         range of skills and abilities, which may be very relevant for N-Pharma’s
         researchers and scientists. They can thereby obtain a greater sense of
         achievement and possibly more praise or recognition of their work. Besides,
         employees may respond better as their managers have shown trust in the fact
         that they possess the ability to handle the increasing complexity and pressures
         of their work.
      • Job enlargement means giving employees more tasks to do of a similar nature
         or complexity. This will reduce the monotony or repetition involved in
         their work; job rotation is a part of this and involves having a wider variety of
         tasks to do, perhaps rotating jobs with other members in one’s team, but not
         increasing the challenge of the job. This might be more relevant for some of
         the lower skilled employees of N-Pharma.
      • Empowerment means that power or authority is given to employees so they can
         make their own decisions regarding their working life. For instance employees
         may have control over how to use their time and decide which tasks could be
         done from home. According to the case study, the Australian employees are
         very keen on flexitime and teleworking, so empowerment could be a good
         strategy for Laura to change the employment patterns and practices at
         the Australian subsidiary so as to ensure higher productivity and stronger
         job satisfaction.
      • Teamworking is where employees work in groups or teams. This can also
         meet an employee’s social needs, as a person can more easily build friendships
         and feel a sense of belonging to a unit or group and hopefully to the business as
         a whole. It is very likely that N-Pharma researchers and scientists already
         work in teams, as R&D is a collective process, but Laura could put other teams
         in place, for example quality circles and management teams.

      Accept any other relevant explanation as well as reference to methods such as
      flexi-working which arguably exemplifies non-financial rewards in practice.


      Candidates are likely to write about these four methods/rewards; some could
      equally decide to answer firstly about job satisfaction (what it means and how
      non-financial rewards affect it) and secondly about productivity (what it means
      and how non-financial rewards affect it).

      Award [1 mark] for each correct reward identified, and [1 mark] for the
      explanation of each of these rewards.
                                           – 17 –           M10/3/BUSMT/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


(d)   To what extent would a change in Susan James’ leadership style improve
      productivity and morale at the Canadian subsidiary of N-Pharma?        [8 marks]

      Susan’s authoritative leadership style contradicts with the Canadian employees’
      desire for more delegation and a wider span of control. Her inability to
      communicate and the tall organizational structure have only made the situation
      worse.

      On the one hand, changes in her leadership style could improve productivity
      and morale:
      • Employees are dissatisfied and disillusioned, which explains why their
         productivity is lower than in other N-Pharma subsidiaries (resulting in the
         Canadian subsidiary trading at a loss). By listening to the employees and
         providing them with the delegation, empowerment and other non-financial
         rewards they want, Susan could boost their morale and enhance their
         productivity.
      • By becoming more democratic, Susan could involve employees in the
         decision-making processes to help identify some of the problems at the
         subsidiary (for example there might be some issues about supply chain or
         organizational culture that she is not aware of). Once involved by a
         democratic leader, employees could help solve the problems and prevent the
         causes of low productivity.
      • By becoming more democratic, Susan could develop good two-way
         communication with her staff; communication has clearly been a problem in
         the past, hence the escalation towards industrial action could be avoided
         through a different leadership style.

      On the other hand, further problems could arise from a (sudden) change in
      leadership style:
      • Susan could lose the support from her management team and even from Yukio
         who sent her there because of her non-compromising attitude.
      • Employees and negotiators may feel that she is malleable and threaten
         further action; to be successful, a democratic leader needs the support of the
         employees, but the situation may have been too conflictual to change.
      • Susan herself could struggle psychologically as leadership styles are
         intrinsically linked to a person’s own values and belief system; although she
         could be trained and coached to change her leadership style, it would remain
         unnatural for her (not believing in it herself, would she be able to make her
         workforce believe she has changed?).

      Accept any other relevant answer.


      Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 4.
