M10/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                               May 2010



                        PHILOSOPHY



                         Higher Level



                               Paper 3




4 pages
                              –2–             M10/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                                       –3–                 M10/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Note to examiners
This markscheme outlines what members of the paper setting team had in mind when they devised the question.
The topics listed in the bullet points indicate possible areas candidates might cover in their answers. They are not
compulsory points and not necessarily the best possible points. They are only a framework to help examiners in
their assessment. Examiners should be responsive to any other valid points or any other valid approaches.

Using the assessment criteria
Answers on Paper 3 are assessed according to the assessment criteria set out in the Subject guide.
                                                       –4–                M10/3/PHILO/HP3/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Unseen text – exploring philosophical activity

The purpose of the exercise is to allow students to reflect upon the nature, function, methodology and meaning of
philosophical activity, relating this to the candidate’s experience of doing philosophy throughout the whole course.
Candidates may reflect this in very different ways in their responses, giving examples which draw from their
experience of the course or from their experience in general. The following points – referring to the
text extract – might be included in a response, but they are neither exhaustive nor prescriptive.

Key Points
 Philosophy extending humans beyond the commercial and economic mode of operating
 A way to seek meaning to our lives in what might seem to be a meaningless world
 In the search for meaning we can rise above the hectic bustle of everyday life and its mundane activities
 The human need to explain and understand experience
 The desire to see relationships and meaning in all aspects of human activity
 The desire to seek wisdom; wisdom supplanting mere knowledge of facts
 The hope to find truth and in doing so to find freedom
 The reason why philosophy might not be useless as it gives us insights into aspects of life that no other
   discipline can give us. It gives holistic views in a world which is increasingly fragmented
 The contrast with science which describes the world and human action in terms of fact and precisely
   dissected parts, whereas philosophy looks at qualitative issues and tries to derive value
 The importance of interpretation within philosophical activity
 The nature of value judgments within philosophy and the absence of these in the scientific view of the world
 The perceived need to have time to reflect and see sense and meaning in even the small things, given the
   increasing complexity of our world
 The ability to try to find wisdom can bring a sense of pleasure
 The degree to which the passage enables the candidate to reflect on his/her experience of philosophy as an
   activity in the course

Discussion
 How far does philosophy really explore values and the qualities of life?
 Is a quiet reflection necessary as the world becomes more complex?
 Is the distinction between science and philosophy as clear cut as is suggested?
 Could science be becoming more philosophical?
 Is a human’s search for meaning a route to pleasure?
 In our market driven society in everyday life do we really search for meaning?
 Might it be possible that some aspects of philosophical activity are as analytical as any scientific activity?
 Can wisdom be a route to achieving freedom?
 What experiences encountered during the course have revealed both an analytical approach and a holistic
    approach to the world?
 What personal reflections have been developed throughout the course and in what ways?
 What aspects of the study of philosophy have revealed that philosophical activity is not a useless pursuit?
 How far is philosophical activity separate to the economic mode of activity?
 How far has the study of philosophy given pleasure?
