M10/3/PHILO/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




       22105601


Philosophy
Higher level
PAPER 1

Tuesday 4 May 2010 (afternoon)

2 hours 30 minutes


INSTRUCTIONS to candidates

 Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Section A: answer one question.
 Section B: answer two questions, each chosen from a different Optional Theme.




2210-5601                                                                                         5 pages
                                                          © International Baccalaureate Organization 2010
                                                                –2–                       M10/3/PHILO/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

In your answers you are expected to:

        present an argument in an organized way
        use clear, precise and appropriate language
        identify any assumptions in the question
        develop a clear and focused argument
        identify the strengths and weaknesses of your response
        identify counter-arguments to your response, and address them if possible
        provide relevant supporting material, illustrations and/or examples where appropriate
        conclude by making a clear, concise and philosophically informed personal response to the
         examination question.

                                                           SECTION A

Answer one question from this section. Each question in this section is worth [30 marks].

Core Theme: What is a human being?

1.       Read the following passage and develop your response as indicated below.

         “They say I am not me except in terms of relations to other people. If there weren’t any other people
         there wouldn’t be any me, because what I am only has meaning in relation to other people.”

            [Source: Adapted from Robert Penn Warren, http://thinkexist.com/quotes/robert_penn_warren/2.html, 8 August 2008]


         Write a response (of approximately 800 words) in which you:

         • identify a central philosophical concept or philosophical issue in this passage that addresses
           the question, “what is a human being?”
         • explore two different philosophical approaches to the philosophical concept or philosophical
           issue you identified
         • explain and evaluate the philosophical concept or philosophical issue you identified.




2210-5601
                                                     –3–                       M10/3/PHILO/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

2.    Study the following image and develop your response as indicated below.




                                              [Source: John Brack
                                              Australia 1920–1999
                                             Collins St., 5p.m. 1955
                                                  oil on canvas
                                               114.8 × 162.8 cm
                                     National Gallery of Victoria, Melbourne
                                                Purchased, 1956
                                         © National Gallery of Victoria]


      Write a response (of approximately 800 words) in which you:

      • identify a central philosophical concept or philosophical issue in this image that addresses
        the question, “what is a human being?”
      • explore two different philosophical approaches to the philosophical concept or philosophical
        issue you identified
      • explain and evaluate the philosophical concept or philosophical issue you identified.




2210-5601                                                                                        Turn over
                                                     –4–                  M10/3/PHILO/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                                SECTION B

Answer two questions from this section, each chosen from a different Optional Theme. Each question in
this section is worth [30 marks].

Optional Theme 1: Grounds of epistemology

3.    Critically evaluate the extent to which justified, true belief is knowledge.


4.    Critically evaluate the claim that there is nothing in the mind that has not first been in the senses.



Optional Theme 2: Theories and problems of ethics

5.    Critically evaluate the view that ethics should be more concerned with who you are than what
      you do.


6.    “You cannot derive an ought from an is.” Discuss and critically evaluate this claim.



Optional Theme 3: Philosophy of religion

7.    Explain and discuss the concept of a higher being.


8.    Critically evaluate the claim that just one religious perspective is correct in a world with diverse
      religious beliefs.



Optional Theme 4: Philosophy of art

9.    Critically evaluate the claim that what is called great art expresses both a personal response to
      experience and a universal human condition.


10.   “The artist is the one who has the ability to understand, with empathy, contradictory and opposing
      points of view or ways of being without taking sides.” Discuss and critically evaluate this claim.




2210-5601
                                                     –5–                   M10/3/PHILO/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Optional Theme 5: Political philosophy

11.   Critically evaluate the claim that benevolent dictatorship is the best form of government.


12.   Evaluate philosophically the relationship between power and the state.



Optional Theme 6: Non-Western traditions and perspectives

13.   Evaluate philosophically the nature and importance of community in at least one of the non-Western
      traditions you have studied.


14.   Evaluate philosophically the attitude towards the environment with reference to at least one
      non-Western tradition that you have studied.



Optional Theme 7: Contemporary social issues

15.   To what extent should sex, gender, race, class, or belonging to different kinds of groups,
      be acknowledged as constitutive of our identity?


16.   To what extent does social organization in the present world allow for the development and realization
      of human beings?



Optional Theme 8: People, nations and cultures

17.   Critically evaluate the view that internationalism is a fine ideal, but that its problem is that nobody can
      agree upon a set of principles which will always override cultural interests.


18.   Evaluate philosophically the impact globalization might have on cultural identity.




2210-5601
