M10/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                           May 2010



                      PSYCHOLOGY



                        Higher Level



                               Paper 1




12 pages
                              –2–            M10/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                                 –3–              M10/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


                                             SECTION A

Paper 1 section A markbands

In applying the markbands the concept of “best fit” should be used: a response that meets most of the
statements in a particular band, but not necessarily all, can still be awarded marks in the markband.
The markband that best fits the response should be determined first. Then, by reference to the markband
above and the markband below, the mark should be determined.

Markband

7 to 8     The demands of the question are addressed effectively within a logical structure. The
           argument is clearly supported by appropriate knowledge and understanding from the
           perspectives. The answer contains appropriate analysis but there may be minor omissions.
           At the top of this markband the demands of the question are addressed effectively, in a
           focused and logical structure. Arguments are supported by appropriate knowledge and
           understanding, and analysis.

5 to 6     At the bottom of this markband the question is addressed. The answer contains accurate
           knowledge and understanding but is mainly descriptive with some implicit analysis that is not
           sufficiently related to the question. There is a basic structure to the answer.
           At the top of this markband the demands of the question are addressed, mainly within a
           logical structure. The response is sufficiently accurate, relevant and adequate to support a
           sound answer. Analysis may not be well developed.

3 to 4     The question is partially addressed, with limited accurate, relevant and factual knowledge and
           understanding. There is an attempt to structure the answer but it is not sustained throughout
           the answer.

1 to 2     There is an attempt to answer the question, but knowledge and understanding of the
           perspective is limited, often inaccurate and of marginal relevance to the question.

0          If the answer does not achieve the standard described in markband 1 to 2, a mark of 0 should
           be recorded.
                                                 –4–               M10/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Biological Perspective

1.   Outline one strength and one limitation of the biological perspective in explaining
     one psychological or social question.                                               [8 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands when marking this question.

     A social or psychological question appropriate to a biological explanation should be
     identified. There is no need for responses to distinguish between psychological and
     social questions. Such questions could include aggression, gender differences, stress,
     depression or anxiety.

     Award [7 to 8 marks] for responses that clearly outline one appropriate strength and one
     limitation of the biological perspective in explaining a relevant psychological or social
     question.

     Award [4 to 6 marks] for an appropriate explanation of a social or psychological
     question. One relevant strength and one relevant limitation are identified, but outlines
     offered lack precision.

     Award [1 to 3 marks] where a psychological or social question from the biological
     perspective is stated, but the associated strength and limitation lack clarity. Responses
     that offer strengths and limitations related to the perspective as a whole should be
     awarded marks in this range.

     Award up to a maximum of [4 marks] for an appropriate explanation of a social or
     psychological question from the biological perspective where only a strength or a
     limitation is outlined.
                                                 –5–              M10/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Cognitive Perspective

2.   Explain one theoretical explanation of human behaviour from the cognitive
     perspective.                                                              [8 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands when marking this question.

     Candidates have a wide range of cognitive explanations from which to select one. The
     syllabus includes the following theoretical explanations from the cognitive perspective:
     perceptual set, conformity, cognitive dissonance, memory.            Other theoretical
     explanations are equally suitable and can include models such as the information
     processing approach.

     Award [7 to 8 marks] for responses offering a well-structured explanation of human
     behaviour from the cognitive perspective.

     Award [4 to 6 marks] for responses that offer a limited explanation of human behaviour
     from the cognitive perspective.

     Award [1 to 3 marks] for responses offering a basic description of human behaviour from
     the cognitive perspective.
                                                 –6–              M10/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Learning Perspective

3.   Explain one contribution of the learning perspective to the scientific study of
     behaviour.                                                                      [8 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands when marking this question.

     Contributions should be related to the scientific study of behaviour within the learning
     perspective. Research studies may be used to illustrate the contributions, but they are
     not necessary.

     Contributions could include:

      reliance on empirical data to support/generate theories;
      focus on observable, recordable, data;
      typical use of quantitative data (but qualitative data are also used);
      control of variables in observational and experimental research (in experiments,
       manipulation of an independent variable);
      intention to generalize from studies to wide populations (including animal to human
       generalization).

     Award [7 to 8 marks] where a contribution, clearly related to the scientific study of
     behaviour, has been accurately explained, using appropriate technical language.

     Award [4 to 6 marks] where a contribution has been accurately explained but is not
     sufficiently related to the study of scientific behaviour.

     Award [1 to 3 marks] for responses that offer a contribution from the learning
     perspective unrelated to the scientific study of behavior, e.g. classical or operant
     conditioning.
                                                 –7–               M10/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Humanistic Perspective

4.   Describe one research study from the humanistic perspective.                                [8 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands when marking this question.

     Responses could make reference to studies such as Maslow’s (1954) studies on self-
     actualization, Coopersmith’s (1967) on self-esteem, Chodorkoff’s (1954) on self-
     perception, Aaronson & Mettee (1968) on congruence, Aronoff (1967) on hierarchy of
     needs. Candidates should describe aspects of the research study, e.g. aim, how the
     research was conducted, findings.

     Award [7 to 8 marks] for an accurate and clear description of one research study that is
     relevant to the humanistic perspective.

     Award [4 to 6 marks] for a description of a research study from the humanistic
     perspective that is reasonably clear but may have some inaccuracies.

     Award [1 to 3 marks] for a very basic description of a research study that is relevant to
     the humanistic perspective.

     No marks should be awarded for a description of humanistic theories or research
     methods unless these contain an explicit and relevant research study.
                                                  –8–             M10/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


                                             SECTION B

Paper 1 section B markbands

In applying the markbands the concept of “best fit” should be used.
A response that meets most of the statements in a particular band, but not necessarily all, can still be
awarded marks in the band.
The band that best fits the response should be determined first. Then, by reference to the band above and
the band below, the mark should be determined.

Markband

17 to 20   The demands of the question are addressed effectively in a focused and logical structure.
           Arguments are supported by appropriate knowledge and understanding and in-depth analysis.
           Evaluation is balanced and well-developed. Cultural, ethical, gender or methodological
           considerations are an integral part of the response.

14 to 16   The demands of the question are addressed effectively within a structured framework. The
           argument is supported by appropriate knowledge and understanding from the perspectives.
           The answer contains appropriate analysis, but there may be minor omissions. Evaluation is
           clear and applied appropriately. Cultural, ethical, gender or methodological considerations
           are present and appropriate to the question.

11 to 13   The demands of the question are addressed mainly within a structured framework. The
           answer contains accurate knowledge and understanding. Some limited analysis is offered.
           Evaluation is limited or may not be well developed. Cultural, ethical, gender or
           methodological considerations are present and appropriate to the question.

8 to 10    There is a basic structure to the answer. The question is addressed. The answer contains
           accurate knowledge and understanding but is mainly descriptive. There may be minimal
           reference to cultural, ethical, gender or methodological considerations appropriate to the
           question.

6 to 7     There is an attempt to structure the answer but it is not sustained throughout the answer. The
           question is partially addressed, with limited accurate, relevant and factual knowledge and
           understanding. There may be minimal reference to cultural, ethical, gender or methodological
           considerations appropriate to the question.

4 to 5     There is little sense of structure in the answer. Although there is an attempt to answer the
           question, knowledge and understanding of the perspectives is limited, often inaccurate and of
           marginal relevance to the question. There is no reference to cultural, ethical, gender or
           methodological considerations.

1 to 3     There is almost no organizational structure. There is very little or no understanding of the
           question, nor evidence of knowledge of the perspectives. The answer consists of no more
           than a few relevant facts.

0          If the answer does not achieve the standard described in mark band 1 to 3, a mark of 0 should
           be recorded.
                                                  –9–              M10/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M



5.   Evaluate two research methods (e.g. experiments, case study) used in the
     biological perspective.                                                                      [20 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B markbands when awarding marks.

     The methods used in research from the biological perspective cover a very wide range,
     both quantitative and qualitative. Candidates are expected to discuss research methods
     such as, experiments, correlational studies, interviews, case studies or questionnaires.
     Evaluation of these methods can be at many levels, e.g. appropriateness for the method,
     effectiveness in producing valid and reliable data, comparison (e.g. of effectiveness,
     ease of use, cost) with other methods, or cultural issues considered in their use. Ethical
     considerations are likely to be of high importance, as in the use of animals in studies.

     If specific techniques such as double-blind trials, fMRI or PET scanning are evaluated
     this must be done in the context of the experimental method (experiment, observation)
     to attract marks.

     Award [14 to 20 marks] where two research methods from the biological perspective
     are thoroughly evaluated and supported by empirical research studies.

     Award [8 to 13 marks] for mainly descriptive accounts of two relevant research
     methods, with limited evaluation. The two research methods may be only implicitly
     related to the biological perspective.

     Award [1 to 7 marks] for responses that offer limited description of two research
     methods with little or no evaluation Responses that evaluate research methods in
     general without reference to the biological perspective should be awarded marks in this
     range.

     Award up to a maximum of [10 marks] where only one research method is evaluated.
                                                  – 10 –            M10/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M



6.   Explain the extent to which free will and determinism relate to the cognitive
     perspective.                                                                                  [20 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B markbands when awarding marks.

     Free will implies that we choose to act in certain ways, whereas determinism implies
     not being able to choose, as our actions are caused by influences beyond our control.
     Candidates may give more sophisticated explanations of determinism (e.g. highlighting
     the idea of predictability, due to behaviour occurring in a regular, systematic way, or
     discussing the various meanings of “cause”, which relate to the distinction between
     “hard” and “soft” determinism) or of free will (e.g. whether it refers to having a choice,
     not being forced to do something, or acting in an involuntary way).

     The extent to which these concepts are shown to relate to the cognitive perspective will
     probably depend in large measure on how well they are explained. A case can be made
     for the cognitive perspective to be very deterministic, if the distinction between internal
     and external behaviours is minimized; on the other hand, the idea of conscious mental
     life implies that many actions are free and voluntary, thus indicating free will at work.

     Award [14 to 20 marks] for responses discussing the extent to which the concepts of
     determinism and free will relate to the cognitive perspective. Answers in this category
     should demonstrate clear understanding of the concepts of determinism and free will.
     Such responses are unlikely to argue for either complete determinism or complete free
     will. Elements of each (but with probable “weighting” in one direction or the other) are
     expected.

     Award [8 to 13 marks] for responses that provide limited discussion of the link between
     determinism or free will and the cognitive perspective. Responses in this range may not
     adequately address “the extent to which” element of the question, but should at least
     give some indication of whether the cognitive perspective is characterized by
     determinism or free will.

     Award [1 to 7 marks] for responses in which the concepts of free will and determinism
     are poorly or inadequately understood (statements like “determinism is where behaviour
     is determined” cannot be given much credit). Responses in this band will also show
     very weak links to the cognitive perspective, and will not substantially answer the
     question about the degree of determinism or free will involved.
                                                 – 11 –            M10/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M



7.   Evaluate one or more applications of one theory from the learning perspective.              [20 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B markbands when awarding marks.

     Areas of application could include education, work or therapy. Answers can embrace a
     range of applications with relatively less depth to each, or could focus in depth on just
     one application.

     Award [14 to 20 marks] where a clear, comprehensive evaluation of one or more
     appropriate applications are provided.

     Award [8 to 13 marks] where a descriptive account of one of more applications is
     provided but with a limited evaluation.

     Award [1 to 7 marks] where a superficial description of one or more applications is
     provided with no evaluation.

     Award up to a maximum of [3 marks] for answers that describe a theory but do not
     provide an application.
                                                  – 12 –             M10/3/PSYCH/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M



8.   Evaluate the influence of historical or cultural conditions on the humanistic
     perspective.                                                                                   [20 marks]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B markbands when awarding marks.

     A broad range of historical/cultural conditions can be relevant in response to this
     question, including:
      historical events (e.g. the Second World War);
      the “zeitgeist” (social, political and cultural climate) of the United States in the post-
       war period (e.g. the emphasis on competitive individual achievement, through, for
       example, education, patriotism, international relations, the media);
      philosophy and literature (especially European existentialism);
      reaction to the assumptions, theories and applications (especially to therapy) of other
       perspectives;
      the backgrounds of the theorists (e.g. the influences of religion, psychodynamic
       training, war experiences).

     Responses should discuss at least two relevant historical or cultural conditions.
     Examiners can expect a depth versus breadth tradeoff. Responses may focus on the
     beginnings of the perspective or later developments that have influenced the evolution
     of the perspective.

     Award [14 to 20 marks] for responses that effectively evaluate the influence of more
     than one cultural and historical condition on the influence on the humanistic
     perspective.

     Award [8 to 13 marks] for responses that identify some relevant conditions, but offer
     only limited evaluation of their influence on humanistic psychology. The link between
     the perspective and the conditions may only be implicit.

     Award [1 to 7 marks] for responses that identify relevant conditions but do not evaluate
     their influence on the humanistic perspective.
