M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                   MARKSCHEME


                           May 2010




                      PSYCHOLOGY



             Higher and Standard Level



                               Paper 2




28 pages
                              –2–            M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                                  –3–             M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Paper 2 Markbands

In applying the markbands the concept of “best fit” should be used.
A response that meets most of the statements in a particular band, but not necessarily all, can still be
awarded marks in the band.
The band that best fits the response should be determined first. Then, by reference to the band above and
the band below, the mark should be determined.

Markband

17 to 20   The demands of the question are addressed effectively in a focused and logical structure.
           Arguments are supported by appropriate knowledge and understanding and in-depth analysis.
           Evaluation is balanced and well developed. Cultural, ethical, gender or methodological
           considerations are an integral part of the response.
14 to 16   The demands of the question are addressed effectively within a structured framework. The
           argument is supported by appropriate knowledge and understanding from the options. The
           answer contains appropriate analysis, but there may be minor omissions. Evaluation is clear
           and applied appropriately. Cultural, ethical, gender or methodological considerations are
           present and appropriate to the question.
11 to 13   The demands of the question are addressed mainly within a structured framework. The
           answer contains accurate knowledge and understanding. Some limited analysis is offered.
           Evaluation is limited or may not be well developed. Cultural, ethical, gender or
           methodological considerations are present and appropriate to the question.
8 to 10    There is a basic structure to the answer. The question is addressed. The answer contains
           accurate knowledge and understanding but is mainly descriptive. There may be minimal
           reference to cultural, ethical, gender or methodological considerations appropriate to the
           question.
6 to 7     There is an attempt to structure the answer but it is not sustained throughout the answer. The
           question is partially addressed, with limited accurate, relevant and factual knowledge and
           understanding. There may be minimal reference to cultural, ethical, gender or methodological
           considerations appropriate to the question.
4 to 5     There is little sense of structure in the answer. Although there is an attempt to answer the
           question, knowledge and understanding of the options is limited, often inaccurate and of
           marginal relevance to the question. There is no reference to cultural, ethical, gender or
           methodological considerations.
1 to 3     There is almost no organizational structure. There is very little or no understanding of the
           question, nor evidence of knowledge of the options. The answer consists of no more than a
           few relevant facts.
0          If the answer does not achieve the standard described in markband 1 to 3, a mark of 0 should
           be recorded.
                                                 –4–               M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Comparative Psychology

1.   Discuss inter-species and intra-species communication strategies (e.g. visual,
     auditory, olfactory).                                                          [20 marks]

     Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

     There are a substantial number of examples that could be relevant in response to this
     question. For example, the use of senses (e.g. visual, auditory and olfactory) could be
     prioritized in terms of the environment in which animals operate. The question calls for
     a discussion so that responses should also comment on the possible reasons for such
     modes of communication. For intra-species communication, examples such as the
     peacock’s visual display could be explained by female selection of the greatest
     handicapped, yet apparently fittest male. Numerous bird species use different
     communication modes. Inter-species communication is exemplified by the stotting
     behaviour of Thompson’s gazelle, or other signs of fitness demonstrated by prey
     animals towards their predators. Responses may also discuss possible reasons for such
     communication and their place in evolution. Inter-species communication is often less
     subtle than intra-species since the messages exchanged are often a matter of life and
     death.

     Discussion could take various forms, including, for example, comparison of uses of
     various sensory modalities e.g. visual, auditory, olfactory as mentioned in the syllabus.
     These examples could be discussed in relation to specific environments such as oceans,
     sky, forests or open plains and deserts.

     Award [14 to 20 marks] for balanced discussion of relevant examples of both types of
     communication strategies.

     Award [8 to 13 marks] for overly descriptive responses with some attempt at
     discussion, although this is not sustained or well developed. Imbalanced discussions,
     where one type of communication strategy is discussed in detail but the other only
     superficially addressed, should also be awarded marks in this range.

     Award [1 to 7 marks] for responses that are purely descriptive or offer overly simplistic
     accounts of relevant material.

     Both inter- and intra- species communication should be considered. If only one of these
     is present, then a maximum of [10 marks] should be awarded.
                                                  –5–              M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



2.   Using examples from research studies and/or findings, explain how ethical
     considerations may affect research in comparative psychology.            [20 marks]

     Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

     Supporting material may be selected from human and non-human animal studies or a
     combination of these and their application to humans. With non-human animal studies
     the focus is likely to be on the laboratory animals as these animals are often maintained
     in a protected environment; the research findings may not necessarily reflect those of
     animals raised in the wild.

     Responses should show that research is affected by ethical considerations, e.g. the
     behaviour of animals in the lab is unlikely to reflect that of animals in the wild because
     of the environmental and possibly unethical conditions in which animals are kept.
     However, if the use of animals is a necessary prerequisite prior to testing a new drug on
     humans to relieve some psychological disorder, then some people would argue that this
     process is a necessary evil.

     Award [14 to 20 marks] for a clear explanation of the effect of relevant ethical
     considerations on comparative psychology research. Relevant empirical examples are
     applied in a coherent manner.

     Award [8 to 13 marks] for responses which are overly descriptive of relevant ethical
     considerations with some attempt at explanation of their effect on research, although not
     well developed or sustained.

     Award low marks [1 to 7 marks] for responses that are purely descriptive or offer
     overly simplistic accounts of relevant research with some mention of ethics. Responses
     offering only general ethical considerations, with no reference to comparative
     psychology, should be awarded marks in this band.
                                                   –6–               M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



3.   To what extent do courtship and parenting strategies of non-human animals
     impact on their survival?                                                 [20 marks]

     Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

     The question is worded in such a way that allows for responses to focus on several
     species in general or one species in depth. As an example of the latter, in general most
     birds behave monogamously, but a changing and favourable environment may well lead
     to polygyny and/or polyandry. Monogamy usually arises when the renewable resource
     for nesting sites or food are rare. The females of a species need to choose males that
     have proven ability as potential mates. Males should demonstrate their ability to collect
     food and nesting material, and to use effective defence strategies against enemies.
     Males need to show inclusive fitness in order to be chosen by females. The courtship
     period provides each bird with several occasions to test the inclusive fitness of the other.
     If such behaviour is demonstrated then mating will occur. Upon successful shared
     incubation and hatching of the eggs, the consequent parenting behaviour should show
     appropriate behaviour to ensure that offspring are able to fend for themselves. Both
     males and females are known to indulge in extra pair mating, particularly when the
     environmental conditions mean that another clutch of eggs can be produced with
     another mate.

     Award [14 to 20 marks] for responses that address both courtship and parenting
     strategies and the extent to which these impact upon survival of the species.

     Award [8 to 13 marks] for overly descriptive responses that address both courtship and
     parenting strategies with some attempt at addressing the extent of impact on survival,
     although this is not sustained or well developed. Unbalanced responses, where either
     courtship or parenting is addressed in detail but the other only superficially addressed,
     should also be awarded marks in this range.

     Award [1 to 7 marks] for responses that are purely descriptive or offer overly simplistic
     accounts of relevant material.

     Responses that only address either courtship or parenting strategies, should receive up
     to a maximum of [10 marks].

     Anecdotal comments should not be awarded credit.
                                                  –7–              M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Cultural Psychology

4.   (a)   Define the term “culture”.                                                            [4 marks]

           Definitions of the term “culture” vary widely, however popular responses may be
           based on Matsumoto’s definition of culture as a “dynamic system of rules, explicit
           and implicit, established by groups in order to ensure their survival, involving
           attitudes, values, beliefs, norms and behaviours, shared by a group but harboured
           differently by each specific unit within the group, communicated across
           generations, relatively stable but with the potential to change across time”.
           Herskovits’s view of culture as the part of the environment that humans create is
           also relevant. Most definitions include mention of shared attitudes, behaviours
           and symbols that pass from one generation to the next.

           Award [3 to 4 marks] for a clearly constructed and accurate definition of the term.

           Award [1 to 2 marks] for a definition that partially addresses the main
           components of a definition of culture or where responses merely identify certain
           aspects of a culture without giving a proper definition.

           No marks should be awarded for anecdotal responses.
                                            –8–               M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



(b)   Discuss how findings from research studies in cultural psychology have been
      applied.                                                                    [16 marks]

      Refer to the scaled paper 2 markbands below when marking this part of the
      question.

      Findings from research studies in cultural psychology have been applied in a great
      number of settings in order to help explain, understand, alter or improve human
      behaviour. Applications may come from a variety of areas, such as dysfunctional
      behaviour within immigrant populations, cultural differences in visual search
      patterns on the impact of website design, or development of culture assimilators to
      ease the transition process for migrants or sojourners. Responses may refer to a
      relatively small number of applications in greater depth or a variety of
      applications to demonstrate breadth of understanding.

      Award [11 to 16 marks] for a well developed discussion of how the findings of
      two or more relevant studies have been applied.

      Award [7 to 10 marks] for responses that describe how the findings of two or
      more relevant studies have been applied, but where discussion is limited.

      Award [1 to 6 marks] for responses that focus predominantly on two or more
      relevant studies/findings with either no reference to their application or where
      only a rudimentary knowledge of the application is demonstrated.

      Responses making reference to application of only one research study from
      cultural psychology should be awarded up to [10 marks].
                                                 –9–              M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Scaled paper 2 markbands out of 16

14 to 16   The demands of the question are addressed effectively in a focused and logical structure.
           Arguments are supported by appropriate knowledge and understanding and in-depth analysis.
           Evaluation is balanced and well-developed. Cultural, ethical, gender or methodological
           considerations form an integral part of the response.

11 to 13   The demands of the question are addressed effectively within a structured framework. The
           argument is supported by appropriate knowledge and understanding from the options. The
           answer contains appropriate analysis but there may be minor omissions. Evaluation is clear
           and applied appropriately. Cultural, ethical, gender or methodological considerations are
           present and appropriate to the question.

9 to 10    The demands of the question are addressed mainly within a structured framework. The
           answer contains accurate knowledge and understanding. Some limited analysis is offered.
           Evaluation is limited or may not be well developed. Cultural, ethical, gender or
           methodological considerations are present and appropriate to the question.

7 to 8     There is a basic structure to the answer. The question is addressed. The answer contains
           accurate knowledge and understanding but is mainly descriptive. There may be minimal
           reference to cultural, ethical, gender or methodological considerations appropriate to the
           question.

5 to 6     There is an attempt to structure the answer but it is not sustained throughout the answer. The
           question is partially addressed, with limited accurate, relevant and factual knowledge and
           understanding. There may be minimal reference to cultural, ethical, gender or methodological
           considerations appropriate to the question.

3 to 4     There is little sense of structure in the answer. Although there is an attempt to answer the
           question, knowledge and understanding of the options is limited, often inaccurate and of
           marginal relevance to the question. There is no reference to cultural, ethical, gender or
           methodological considerations.

1 to 2     There is almost no organizational structure. There is very little or no understanding of the
           question, nor evidence of knowledge of the options. The answer consists of no more than a
           few relevant facts.

0          If the answer does not achieve the standard described in markband 1 to 3, a mark of 0 should
           be recorded.
                                                 – 10 –            M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



5.   Describe and evaluate two empirical studies from cultural psychology.                        [20 marks]

     Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

     Numerous areas of cultural psychology have been researched and therefore there are a
     wide number of empirical studies that are relevant in response to this question. The
     guide identifies topics such as communication, cultural dimensions, identity, etc.
     Hofstede’s studies of cultural dimensions are likely to feature in responses. Evaluation
     may be approached by comparison, discussion of strengths and weaknesses, or
     methodological concerns, etc.

     Award [14 to 20 marks] for a clear description of two relevant studies accompanied by
     a well developed evaluation.

     Award [8 to 13 marks] for two clearly presented and relevant studies where the
     description is rather thorough, yet the evaluation is not well developed.

     Award [1 to 7 marks] for limited descriptive accounts of two relevant studies, with little
     or no attempt at evaluation. Anecdotal commentary should not earn marks.

     Award up to a maximum of [10 marks] where only one relevant study is described and
     evaluated.
                                                 – 11 –            M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



6.   Discuss cultural variations in identity.                                                  [20 marks]

     Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

     Concepts of identity vary not only between cultures but also within them. There are
     relatively strong correlations between certain cultural dimensions, such as
     individualism/collectivism, and the concepts of self and identity within each.
     Responses may go on to consider the implications or impact of variations in identity on
     individual behaviour, family and social structures, and communication, etc.

     Award [14 to 20 marks] where variations in identity are discussed in detail.

     Award [8 to 13 marks] for generally descriptive accounts of variations in identity with
     some implicit discussion. This discussion may not be well developed, but the
     description is appropriate and relevant.

     Award [1 to 7 marks] for broad generalizations or where variations in identity are not
     clearly described.

     Anecdotal commentary should not earn marks.
                                                 – 12 –            M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



The Psychology of Dysfunctional Behaviour

7.   Discuss two models or theories of one dysfunctional behaviour.                               [20 marks]

     Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

     The answer should contain clear discussion of two models/theories that have been used to
     explain one dysfunctional behaviour. Discussion of models/theories could include strengths
     and limitations of the models/theories, similarities and differences between the
     models/theories, evaluation of empirical support, effectiveness of the explanations; other
     approaches to discussion may also be appropriate. If responses address treatments or
     therapies this should be done within the context of the explanatory model/theory. Examples
     of appropriate models/theories may include broad explanations, such as biological model,
     diathesis-stress model, psychodynamic model, cognitive-behavioural model. More specific
     theories such as dopamine hypothesis, cognitive triad or learned helplessness may also be
     used to explain dysfunctional behaviour and are equally acceptable.

     Award [14 to 20 marks] for detailed discussion of two models/theories of one dysfunctional
     behaviour. The dysfunctional behaviour is clearly identified and the models/theories are
     relevant.

     Award [8 to 13 marks] for an accurate description of models/theories accompanied by an
     attempt at discussion that is not well developed.

     Award [1 to 7 marks] for superficial accounts of relevant models/theories with no attempt
     at discussion or where no dysfunctional behaviour is addressed. The links between the
     models/theories and the dysfunctional behaviour are not made. For responses that
     predominantly focus on describing a dysfunctional behaviour with little or no reference to
     models or theories, award marks in this band.

     Award up to a maximum of [10 marks] for responses providing a discussion of two models
     or theories in general (with no link to one specific dysfunctional behaviour)

     When responses provide a purely descriptive account of one model/theory of one
     dysfunctional behaviour, no matter how detailed, up to a maximum of [5 marks] may be
     awarded.
                                                   – 13 –             M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



8.   To what extent is the use of classificatory systems for dysfunctional behaviour
     justified?                                                                      [20 marks]

     Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

     Many psychologists claim that the use of classificatory systems is essential as it provides a
     common language with which mental health professionals can discuss similar patients,
     regardless of their own geographical/cultural background. It also allows the history of a
     particular disorder to be studied. Classification is also crucial for administrative and legal
     documentation, research purposes, and helps guide decisions about treatment.

     Still, the use of classificatory systems has come under increasing scrutiny. Responses may
     discuss, for example, classificatory reductionism, biased diagnostic information, self-
     fulfilling prophecy, problems of validity and reliability of various classificatory systems
     used in different countries – e.g. ICD-10, DSM-IV or CCMD-3 (Chinese Classification of
     Mental Disorders Version 3), GC-3 (Third Cuban Glossary of Psychiatry), or GLADP
     (Latin American Guide for Psychiatric Diagnosis). Relevant empirical studies may include:
     Rosenhan (1976); Phillips & Draguns (1971); Cooper et al. (1972); Kendell (1975);
     Di Nardo (1993).

     Award [14 to 20 marks] where responses focus on providing a conclusion supported by
     arguments of the extent to which the use of classificatory systems is justified in the
     psychology of dysfunctional behaviour. Views should be presented clearly and
     supported with empirical evidence and sound argument.

     Award [8 to 13 marks] for responses that provide an overly descriptive account of a
     classificatory system with some limited attempt at addressing the extent of justification that
     has not been sustained well or developed. Responses limited to discussion of etiologies of
     specific or general dysfunctional behaviour should be awarded marks in this range.

     Award [1 to 7 marks] for answers that purely describe a classificatory system no matter
     how detailed.
                                                 – 14 –            M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



9.   (a)   Outline two etiologies of one dysfunctional behaviour.                                 [8 marks]

           Responses may refer to general categories of disorders, such as anxiety disorders,
           schizophrenia and affective disorders, or to specific disorders such as
           agoraphobia, bipolar disorder, anorexia. “Outline” requires a brief summary of
           etiology and elaboration is not required.

           Award [7 to 8 marks] where responses provide a clear and accurate outline of two
           etiologies for one dysfunctional behaviour.

           Award [4 to 6 marks] where responses provide an outline of two etiologies for one
           dysfunctional behaviour with omissions or lack of precision or where responses offer
           a clear outline of one etiology with a minimal focus on the second etiology.

           Award [1 to 3 marks] where responses provide superficial outlines of etiologies of
           one dysfunctional behaviour.

           Award up to [4 marks] for an outline of only one etiology regardless of how
           detailed.

           Award [0 marks] for responses providing a superficial outline of a dysfunctional
           behaviour.
                                           – 15 –           M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



(b)   Evaluate one treatment or therapy for one dysfunctional behaviour.                  [12 marks]

      Refer to the scaled paper 2 markbands below when marking this part of the
      question.

      The approach evaluated in part (b) does not necessarily need to be related to one
      of the etiologies outlined in part (a) or even the dysfunctional behaviour in
      part (a). Responses do not need to distinguish between treatments or therapy.
      The likely approach to responses will be to focus on an individual, specific
      treatment, however, evaluation of a broader approach (e.g. psychodynamic
      approach) is equally acceptable. Specific therapies/treatments which could be
      chosen for part (b) may include modelling, systematic desensitization, client-
      centred therapy, RET, ECT, etc. Responses could evaluate one treatment/therapy
      in relation to aims, appropriateness of therapy/treatment for a selected disorder
      and effectiveness of treatment. In addition, responses may include reference to
      underlying assumptions of the selected treatment or therapy or discuss
      supporting/challenging empirical research and findings.

      Award [9 to 12 marks] where responses provide a well developed evaluation of
      one type of therapy/treatment for a specified dysfunctional behaviour.

      Award [5 to 8 marks] where responses provide a description of one
      treatment/therapy with limited evaluation.

      Award [1 to 4 marks] where responses provide a description of a
      treatment/therapy without evaluation.
                                                – 16 –           M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Scaled paper 2 markbands out of 12

11 to 12   The demands of the question are addressed effectively in a focused and logical structure.
           Arguments are supported by appropriate knowledge and understanding and in-depth analysis.
           Evaluation is balanced and well developed.

9 to 10    The demands of the question are addressed effectively within a structured framework. The
           argument is supported by appropriate knowledge and understanding from the options. The
           answer contains appropriate analysis, but there may be minor omissions. Evaluation is clear
           and applied appropriately.

7 to 8     The demands of the question are addressed mainly within a structured framework. The
           answer contains accurate knowledge and understanding. Some limited analysis is offered.
           Evaluation is limited or may not be well developed.

5 to 6     There is a basic structure to the answer. The question is addressed. The answer contains
           accurate knowledge and understanding but is mainly descriptive.

3 to 4     There is an attempt to structure the answer but it is not sustained throughout the answer.
           Although there is an attempt to answer the question, knowledge and understanding of the
           options is limited, often inaccurate and of marginal relevance to the question.

1 to 2     There is almost no organizational structure. There is very little or no understanding of the
           question, nor evidence of knowledge of the options. The answer consists of no more than a
           few relevant facts.

0          If the answer does not achieve the standard described in markband 1 to 2, a mark of 0 should
           be recorded.
                                                  – 17 –            M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Health Psychology

10.   Explain how gender considerations may affect the interpretation of behaviour
      related to health psychology.                                                [20 marks]

      Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

      Gender considerations may be interpreted as gender bias or gender differences.
      Gender considerations in health behaviour form the focus of this question but these
      are to be related to the interpretation of behaviour. Such interpretation may come
      from patients themselves or from experts in the field such as doctors, or others
      concerned with diagnosis or therapy. Examiners should be fairly generous in their
      own interpretation of what constitutes health psychology. There is a fairly wide
      range of examples to choose from that could include a male doctor’s mistaken
      interpretation of the medical condition of a woman patient complaining of stomach
      pains; or the stress exhibited by a male patient who is in denial over a potentially
      embarrassing condition that he does not want to admit to his female doctor.
      Interpretation of feelings needs a very sensitive and experienced approach that is not
      necessarily adopted by all health professionals. Responses may also refer to topics
      within Health Psychology where gender differences are not seen as significantly
      important.

      Responses may refer to a relatively small number of gender considerations in greater
      depth or a variety of gender considerations to demonstrate breadth of understanding.

      Award [14 to 20 marks] for the use of relevant examples that are applied in a
      manner related to the interpretation of health related behaviour. These need to be
      described clearly and various consequences of interpretation should be explained.

      Award [8 to 13 marks] for limited explanation of relevant gender considerations.
      Responses are rather descriptive with little explanation of effects on the
      interpretation of behaviour.

      Award [1 to 7 marks] for responses that are entirely descriptive and lack
      explanation. Knowledge of gender considerations may be superficial and not
      explicitly related to health psychology.
                                                 – 18 –           M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



11.   Using empirical studies, describe and evaluate two different research methods
      (e.g. experiments, interviews, case studies) that are used in health psychology. [20 marks]

      Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

      Responses need to focus on the research methods, rather than the studies themselves.
      The studies mentioned should illustrate the use of the methods. Great detail of the
      studies is not necessary to earn high marks.

      External pressures, including finance, often cause researchers to employ experimental
      methods supported by quantitative data. It may be that qualitative methods or narrative
      methods could provide more informative material on which to base a better
      understanding of human behavior in health psychology.

      A very popular choice of research methods is the experimental method. The issue of
      ecological validity is very likely to be addressed.

      Award [14 to 20 marks] where two relevant research methods are effectively addressed,
      where there is in-depth knowledge and understanding, description is informed and
      evaluation is clear and reasonably balanced and the answer is well structured.

      Award [8 to 13 marks] where two relevant methods are described but the evaluation is
      not well developed.

      Award [1 to 7 marks] for superficial description of two relevant research methods, with
      little or no evaluation.

      Responses predominantly focusing on describing and evaluating empirical studies as
      opposed to research methods, should be awarded up to [7 marks].

      If only one research method is addressed, then up to a maximum of [10 marks] may be
      awarded.
                                                 – 19 –            M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



12.   Discuss how research findings about psychological aspects of stress have been
      applied.                                                                      [20 marks]

      Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

      Although it can be difficult to differentiate between psychological and physiological
      aspects of stress, examiners need to be fairly confident that relevant work is mainly
      psychological in its focus. There are many studies to choose from, and it will not be
      surprising if psychoanalytical studies feature largely, although there will be many
      others. It is equally relevant to include non-human animal studies concerning stress.

      The focus of the question is on application of research findings and responses providing
      in depth understanding of an application of one research finding can be awarded a full
      range of marks.

      Award [14 to 20 marks] for responses that offer detailed discussion of how research
      findings about psychological aspects of stress have been applied.

      Award [8 to 13 marks] for responses that offer description of applications of research
      findings about psychological aspects of stress but in which the discussion is not well
      developed.

      Award [1 to 7 marks] for responses that offer description of relevant research findings
      without addressing how these have been applied. Superficial descriptions of
      applications of research findings about psychological aspects of stress should also be
      awarded marks in this range.

      For responses discussing how only one research finding has been applied, award up to a
      maximum of [10 marks].
                                                  – 20 –            M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Lifespan Psychology

13.   Discuss how two or more theories of adolescence explain changes in identity that
      occur during this phase of life.                                                 [20 marks]

      Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

      A variety of theories may be chosen for discussion. Whichever theories are selected the
      focus should be on how forming a sense of identity is an important developmental task
      of adolescence.

      Erikson believed that adolescents experiment with numerous roles and identities they
      draw from the surrounding culture. Youths who successfully cope with these
      conflicting identities during adolescence emerge with a new sense of self. Adolescents
      who do not successfully resolve this identity crisis are confused, suffering what he calls
      “identity confusion”. Marcia proposes that four identity statuses or modes of resolution
      exist, based on a combination of conflict and commitment: identity diffusion, identity
      foreclosure, identity moratorium, and identity achievement. Cooper and her colleagues
      have shown that both individuation and connectedness in family relations make
      important contributions to adolescent identity development. Coleman suggests that
      identity formation in adolescence does not always involve crisis and “storm and stress”.
      Gilligan argues that relationships and emotional bonds are more central to the identity
      development of females than males, and that female identity development today is more
      complex than male identity development.

      Examiners should expect a depth versus breadth tradeoff in response to this question. In
      all cases two or more theories should be addressed in the response.

      Award [14 to 20 marks] for responses that offer a well-developed discussion of theories
      explaining the process of identity development during adolescence.

      Award [8 to 13 marks] where responses present an appropriate review of at least two
      theoretical explanations of changes in identity during adolescence in a mainly
      descriptive way.

      Award [1 to 7 marks] where responses offer a superficial description of theories of
      adolescence without relating them to changes in identity or where responses present a
      general description of changes in identity during adolescence without reference to
      theories of adolescence.

      For responses that refer to only one theory up to a maximum of [10 marks] may be
      awarded.
                                                 – 21 –            M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



14.   Discuss effects of early attachment on emotional and social development across the
      lifespan.                                                                          [20 marks]

      Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

      Responses should offer a considered review of the effects of infant–primary caregiver
      attachment on psychosocial development throughout the lifespan. The relationship
      between infant and primary caregiver has considerable effects on individual
      development in both the short and the long term. Relevant responses may discuss short-
      term influences through theories such as Spitz’s psychodynamic theory, Schaffer’s
      cognitive theory or Ainsworth’s and Bowlby’s attachment theories. They may refer to
      long-term effects by examining studies such as Hazan & Shaver’s (1987) or
      Bartholomew’s (1991) investigations into the area of adult attachment styles in romantic
      love and into the relationship between attachment style and orientation towards work. It
      would also be appropriate to present Hamilton’s longitudinal study (2000) examining
      the extent to which attachment security is stable and continuous throughout childhood
      and adolescence.

      Candidates are not required to differentiate between emotional and social development,
      therefore the discussion does not need to be balanced in relation to these developments.
      Responses that fail to address the impact of early attachment on emotional and social
      development across the lifespan and focus on either short term or long term effects
      should be awarded up to a maximum of [10 marks].

      Award [14 to 20 marks] where responses offer a well-developed discussion of short
      term and/or long term effects of early attachment on emotional and social development.

      Award [8 to 13 marks] where responses present an appropriate but limited discussion of
      short term and/or long term effects of early attachment on emotional and social
      development.

      Award [1 to 7 marks] where responses demonstrate a superficial knowledge and
      understanding. Responses in this category may describe theories or studies without
      relating them to the effects of early attachment on psychosocial development.
                                                  – 22 –            M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



15.   Describe and evaluate two empirical studies related to socialization in lifespan
      psychology.                                                                      [20 marks]

      Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

      A variety of studies that describe or explain the processes involved in socialization may
      be chosen. For instance, answers may discuss research that shows the roles of family,
      television, peer relations, or school in socialization. Also, empirical studies addressing
      attachment and its link to the socialization process can be considered relevant and
      appropriate.

      Many studies have shown that socialization between parents and children is not a one-
      way process. Children socialize parents just as parents socialize children: this is what
      Cohn & Tronick or Stern & others called reciprocal socialization. Television can have a
      negative influence on children’s development; with most studies concluding that
      television violence can induce aggression and antisocial behaviour in children.
      However, television can also have a positive influence by presenting motivating
      educational programmes, increasing children’s information about the world beyond
      their immediate environment, and providing models of pro-social behaviour. Good peer
      relations may be necessary for normal social development. Anna Freud studied six
      children from different families who banded together after their parents were killed in
      the second world war. The children formed a tightly knit group, dependent on one
      another and aloof with outsiders. Even though deprived of parental care, they neither
      became delinquent nor developed serious mental disorders.

      Award [14 to 20 marks] where responses offer a clear description accompanied with
      relevant evaluation of two empirical studies related to socialization.

      Award [8 to 13 marks] for responses that offer appropriate description but limited
      evaluation of two relevant studies.

      Award [1 to 7 marks] where responses show a limited and superficial knowledge of the
      phenomenon of socialization without referring to empirical studies or where responses
      present a limited description of two empirical studies.

      For responses that refer to only one empirical study, up to a maximum of [10 marks]
      may be awarded.
                                                 – 23 –            M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Psychodynamic Psychology

16.   Referring to two theories, explain how gender considerations may affect the
      interpretation of behaviour in psychodynamic psychology.                    [20 marks]

      Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

      Gender considerations may be interpreted as gender bias or gender differences.

      Many responses may select Freud’s and Horney’s theories but those from other
      psychodynamic researchers, such as Chodorow and Lou Andreas-Salome, are equally
      appropriate. It would be appropriate to draw attention to Freud’s bias towards the male
      perspective, underplaying the particular significance of women. Relevant content may
      include reference to the Oedipus complex that is, according to Freud, a simpler process
      for a girl than for a boy. It would also be appropriate to refer to Andreas-Salome’s
      assumption that female passivity does not represent a condition of “resignation” but an
      inner strength; the “passive instinct” of women represents an integration of mind and
      sensuality, which men can rarely achieve. Other feminist psychodynamic theorists such
      as Chodorow may be relevant. For instance, she argues that girls and boys establish
      identity in relation to their mothers in different ways simply due to their gender. This
      leads to divergent developmental pathways for women and men respectively.

      Award [14 to 20 marks] where responses clearly demonstrate how gender
      considerations affect the interpretation of behaviour offered by two psychodynamic
      theories.

      Award [8 to 13 marks] where responses describe two psychodynamic theories with
      limited explicit regard to how gender may affect the interpretation of behaviour.

      Award [1 to 7 marks] where responses offer a superficial description of two
      psychodynamic theories without referring to gender considerations or where responses
      present a general overview of gender differences without relating them to
      psychodynamic theories.

      For responses that focus on one theory, up to a maximum of [10 marks] should be
      awarded.
                                                  – 24 –            M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



17.   Discuss one application of a psychodynamic explanation of human behaviour.                  [20 marks]

      Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

      Many responses will refer to the application of psychodynamic theory to psychotherapy.

      Psychodynamic theories have had a profound influence on the way we live and an
      enormous effect on our ideas. Relevant content may refer to the fact that some concepts
      from psychodynamic theories have found their way into everyday language and life.
      For instance, references to the concepts of libido, the unconscious, the ego and Freudian
      slips have become part of our daily life. Different child rearing practices have made use
      of Freud’s notion of sexuality in children. Psychodynamic theory has formed the basis
      of much contemporary literary and film criticism.               People working in the
      psychodynamic tradition have generalized their theories to explain such diverse issues
      as religion, incest taboo, and structure of society. In general, psychoanalysis has had a
      strong impact on psychotherapy and academic psychology. The application of
      psychodynamic work can also be seen in academic disciplines such as philosophy,
      theology, history and sociology. Both psychodynamic theory and practice have
      penetrated deeply into our culture.

      Award [14 to 20 marks] where responses present a critical and detailed discussion of a
      relevant application of psychodynamic explanations.

      Award [8 to 13 marks] where responses are mainly descriptive and offer an appropriate
      but limited discussion of the application.

      Award [1 to 7 marks] where responses offer a minimal description of an application
      with minimal or no discussion or present a description of psychodynamic theories
      without reference to how they have been applied.
                                                  – 25 –            M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



18.   Consider how one psychodynamic theory addresses the role of both the
      unconscious and conscious mind in human behaviour.                   [20 marks]

      Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

      Answers may explain Freudian psychoanalytic theory or any neo-Freudian theory.
      If Freud’s theory is selected, it would be appropriate to present his topographical model
      of human functioning: the conscious, preconscious and unconscious regions of the
      mind. It would also be relevant to highlight the notion that, according to him, the
      unconscious mind plays an important part in determining an individual’s behaviour.
      Freud thought of the unconscious as the source of the mental energy, which is the
      driving force of behaviour; he viewed the unconscious as a dynamic force. Candidates
      may refer to Jung’s theory that underscores the significance of a collective unconscious.
      They may recall that he described an unconscious that is present in the newborn and is
      independent of his life experience and that he emphasized the importance of
      individuation and the enhancing of awareness as a motive for development. It would
      also be appropriate to discuss Adler’s individual psychology. In contrast to Freud,
      Adler focused on conscious rather than unconscious determinants of behaviour.
      Whereas Freud stressed that human behaviour is determined by past experiences, Adler
      believed we are more strongly affected by what we think the future holds; striving for
      goals or anticipating future events can influence our present behaviour. Whichever
      theory is selected, the focus of the answer should be on the role of conscious and
      unconscious on behaviour. However, examiners should not necessarily expect equal
      treatment of each.

      Award [14 to 20 marks] where responses offer a well-developed discussion of the role
      of both the unconscious and conscious mind in human behaviour as assumed by the
      selected theory.

      Award [8 to 13 marks] where responses offer an appropriate but limited discussion of
      the theory or where responses focus either on the role of the unconscious or conscious,
      but not both.

      Award [1 to 7 marks] where responses describe a psychodynamic theory in general
      without referring to the role of the unconscious and conscious mind in human
      behaviour, or responses providing a superficial description of the role of the
      unconscious and conscious mind in human behaviour.
                                                    – 26 –             M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Social Psychology

19.   Using examples from empirical studies, describe and evaluate one research method
      (e.g. experiment, observation) used in social psychology.                        [20 marks]

      Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

      Responses may address any research method, such as field or laboratory experiments,
      participant observations, interviews, self-report questionnaires, correlational studies, etc.
      However, responses should indicate how the selected research method is used in the
      area of social psychology referring to appropriate examples. Milgram’s experimental
      study of obedience, Anderson’s correlational study of physical attractiveness and
      culture, and Zimbardo’s prison simulation are some examples that might be cited.

      Evaluation points may include discussion of cultural or ecological validity, ethical or
      gender considerations, measurement problems (e.g. social desirability bias, implicit
      attitudes). Evaluation must focus on the research method rather than the example
      studies and/or their findings. For example, responses should discuss strengths and
      limitations of the experimental method rather than evaluate the findings of Asch’s
      experiments on conformity.

      Award [14 to 20 marks] where responses provide a comprehensive description of a
      relevant research method, referring to appropriate examples, and a well developed
      evaluation.

      Award [8 to 13 marks] where responses offer detailed description of a relevant research
      method, with some reference to empirical studies, but a limited evaluation.

      Award [1 to 7 marks] for responses that provide a superficial description of a research
      method without linking it to social psychology. Responses that describe only the
      example studies without highlighting the research method used should be awarded
      marks in this range.

      Where an appropriate method is described but the example study is evaluated rather
      than its research method, up to a maximum of [10 marks] may be awarded.
                                                  – 27 –            M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



20.   Describe and evaluate one study that has examined the reduction of prejudice
      and/or discrimination.                                                       [20 marks]

      Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

      Responses should give an appropriate example of research on the reduction of
      prejudice, e.g. Elliot’s work on “blue eyes and brown eyes” and the jigsaw puzzle
      approach. A wide variety of studies may be chosen but the candidate needs to clearly
      illustrate the reduction of prejudice. Evaluation may refer to the findings as well as the
      research method used, as well as the implications/limitations of the study. There may
      be reference to biological arguments regarding the nature of prejudice, in-group/out-
      group favouritism as well as long-term effects of desegregation.

      Award [14 to 20 marks] for responses offering a detailed description and a thorough
      evaluation of a relevant study.

      Award [8 to 13 marks] for responses offering an appropriate description and a limited
      evaluation of a relevant study.

      Award [1 to 7 marks] for responses offering a superficial description of a relevant study
      with minimal evaluation. Responses providing description or evaluation of one study on
      prejudice that do not address reduction of prejudice should be awarded marks in this
      band.
                                                  – 28 –            M10/3/PSYCH/BP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



21.   Using psychological research, discuss cultural considerations in social psychology. [20 marks]

      Refer to the paper 2 markbands when awarding marks.

      As social psychology is concerned with behaviour within social situations, there are
      many times where culture has been considered as a variable or influence on the
      behaviour of groups or individuals within them. Responses may address cultural
      considerations by tackling issues such as cultural bias in theory development, researcher
      bias in conducting research studies, or cross-cultural comparison and validation.

      Psychologists have investigated the role culture may play in the behaviour across many
      topics common in social psychology, such as obedience, deindividuation, and prejudice.
      Differential rates of conformity were found when attempting to cross-culturally validate
      Asch’s research. Perrin and Spencer (1980) found very different rates of conformity
      between the United States and England, even though both are considered individualistic
      cultures.

      Award [14 to 20 marks] for a well-developed discussion of relevant cultural
      considerations in social psychology.

      Award [8 to 13 marks] where responses are overly descriptive of relevant cultural
      considerations with only limited discussion.

      Award [1 to 7 marks] for oversimplified or rudimentary accounts of culture’s influence
      on topics within social psychology. Responses simply addressing theories or concepts
      in social psychology without reference to cultural considerations should be awarded
      marks in this range.

      For responses where only one cultural consideration is referenced award a maximum of
      [10 marks].
