M10/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M+




                   MARKSCHEME


                           May 2010



              SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
                ANTHROPOLOGY



                        Higher Level



                            Paper 1




5 pages
                              –2–          M10/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M+




This markscheme is confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

It is the property of the International Baccalaureate and must not
be reproduced or distributed to any other person without the
authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                                  –3–            M10/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M+


1.   Explain how religion and gender affect the experience of salsa dancers.                    [6 marks]

     This primarily descriptive question requires candidates to draw on the ethnographic materials
     present in the text itself. The text provides examples of how salsa dancing cannot be entirely
     separated from the social and cultural context in which the dancing takes place.

     So, for example, in Belfast, the religion of the dancers is a limit on where individuals may choose to
     dance because in some places they may not be entirely certain of the religious background of their
     dance partner. While salsa dancing does to some extent break down religious sectarian barriers it
     cannot entirely overcome the barriers that continue to divide Catholic from Protestant.

     However, the German salsa dancers find it difficult to entirely give up elements of their German
     culture and in particular, to accept that in salsa dancing women follow the lead of the male dancer,
     such has been the case in Hamburg. This runs counter to the German understanding of equality for
     both genders and is difficult for the German salsa dancers to accept and adapt to.

     Better candidates will be able to select relevant examples from the text to produce a reasoned and
     coherent answer which compares the different religious and gendered elements revealed in the
     anthropological study of salsa dancing in different parts of the world.

     Candidates do not need to cover all the possible points raised above or in the text to obtain
     full marks. However, they do need to demonstrate a clear understanding of the contextual nature of
     all social encounters and how individual identity is a social product which is shaped by
     pre-existing religious, political, geographical and gendered understandings located in culture
     and society.


            Marks                           Level descriptor
                  0 The work does not reach a standard described by the
                    descriptors below.
               1–2 There is an attempt to organize the response and identify
                   relevant points but the response relies too heavily on
                   quotations from the text and/or limited generalizations
                   are offered.
               3–4 The response is organized, identifies and explains relevant
                   points, and offers generalizations.
               5–6 The response is organized, identifies and explains relevant
                   points and links them to generalizations, demonstrating good
                   anthropological understanding.
                                                   –4–             M10/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M+


2.   Incorporating theoretical perspectives in your answer, explain the relationship
     between globalization and group identity with reference to salsa dancing.                    [6 marks]

     Salsa dancing began in New York and has now become a global product. In each location the
     dancers make something distinct and unique of this global product. Salsa dancing becomes what
     those with time and money to spare need it to be to fulfil their desires and satisfy their imaginations.

     For Latin Americans living far from their homelands the globalization of salsa allows them
     to return, for the duration of a dance class, to their imagined roots and to help them create and
     preserve their self-identities abroad. The potential irony of the situation in which Latin Americans
     can truly become Latin American in Belfast or Hamburg while dancing salsa when they never did
     this while living in Latin America itself will not be lost on the stronger candidates.
     Globalization necessitates a discovery or affirmation of identity on the part of Latin Americans
     which is unproblematic while they reside in Latin America.

     For those who have not left their country of origin, but who seek to escape it momentarily,
     salsa dancing provides the fantasy they seek. This applies to the German salsa dancers.
     However, they have difficulty in putting aside their notions of gender equality on the dance floor in
     following the male-led dance. This is not so apparent among the Latin American migrants who
     have a different relationship with the music and the dance. In Belfast, the dance is more about
     integration between Protestant and Catholic communities as well as escapism.

     Globalization in this text does two things: it is about fashioning distinctive group identities through
     a new worldwide product; and it is reinvented in local cultural contexts in that the various groups
     have different relationships to the same dance and music.

     Candidates will be expected to draw on their pre-existing knowledge of globalization to engage
     with these points.

     This knowledge should clearly refer to relevant theoretical works or perspectives.


           Marks                            Level descriptor
                 0 The work does not reach a standard described by the
                   descriptors below.
              1–2 The response is mainly descriptive and relies on quotations,
                  but may demonstrate limited understanding of anthropological
                  issues and concepts.
              3–4 The response demonstrates some understanding of
                  anthropological issues and concepts or theory, or the response
                  recognizes the viewpoint of the anthropologist, but not all
                  of these.
              5–6 The response demonstrates a critical understanding of
                  anthropological issues, concepts and theory, and recognizes
                  the viewpoint of the anthropologist.
                                                  –5–            M10/3/SOCAN/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M+


3.   Compare and contrast the identities of salsa dancers with the identities of one
     other group.                                                                    [8 marks]

     Candidates may – but do not need to – select societies or groups that directly compare or contrast
     with the identities of the salsa dancers mentioned in the text. Their answers, for instance,
     need not revolve around dance or performance so long as they are about the nature of identity and
     how – and perhaps why – identity is formed and sustained, possibly negotiated and challenged,
     or even collapsed and changed completely. In other words, the measure of this answer lies in the
     manner of comparison and contrast, in harnessing ethnographic knowledge, rather than it being
     a test of knowledge of a similar case study.

     Candidates must situate the comparative case in terms of group, place, author and ethnographic
     context to gain more than [4 marks].

     Better candidates will draw attention to the changeable nature of identity in at least the case of the
     identities of the salsa dancers, if not in their own material as well.

     In order to obtain full marks, answers must be organized in a clear manner, highlighting similarities,
     differences and generalizations. It is entirely possible to get full marks by comparing and
     contrasting a markedly different case with the example here of different identities of salsa dancers.
     Such answers will address a number of points of comparison and contrast.


            Marks                           Level descriptor
                  0 The work does not reach a standard described by the
                    descriptors below.
               1–2 Comparative ethnography is presented in limited detail and its
                   relevance is only partly established. It is not identified in
                   terms of place, author or historical context. The response may
                   not be structured as a comparison.
               3–4 Comparative ethnography is presented in limited detail but its
                   relevance is established. The comparative ethnography is
                   identified in terms of place, author and historical context,
                   or the response is clearly structured as a comparison.
               5–6 Comparative ethnography is presented and its relevance is
                   successfully established. The comparative ethnography is
                   identified in terms of place, author and historical context,
                   and the response is clearly structured as a comparison.
                   Either similarities or differences are discussed in detail,
                   but not both.
               7–8 Comparative ethnography is presented and its relevance is
                   successfully established. The comparative ethnography is
                   identified in terms of place, author and historical context,
                   and the response is clearly structured as a comparison.
                   Similarities and differences are discussed in detail. The
                   response demonstrates good anthropological understanding.
