N17/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

  November / Novembre / Noviembre 2017


         English / Anglais / Inglés ab initio


                         Standard level
                         Niveau moyen
                          Nivel medio


                   Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2




14 pages/páginas
                              –2–           N17/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are the property of the International
Baccalaureate and must not be reproduced or distributed to
any other person without the authorization of the IB Global
Centre, Cardiff.

Ces remarques pour la notation sont la propriété du
Baccalauréat International. Toute reproduction ou distribution à
de tierces personnes sans l’autorisation préalable du centre
mondial de l’IB à Cardiff est interdite.

Estas notas para la corrección son propiedad del Bachillerato
Internacional y no deben reproducirse ni distribuirse a ninguna
otra persona sin la autorización del centro global del IB en
Cardiff.
                                                 –3–              N17/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                             Section A
Criterion A: Language

• Does the student demonstrate an ability to use the language effectively and accurately?
• Does the student use spelling, calligraphy (see “Glossary of terms”), vocabulary and
  grammatical structures correctly and accurately?

 Marks    Level descriptor
   0      Language inaccuracies completely obscure communication.
   1      Language inaccuracies often obscure communication.
   2      Language is generally accurate and does not obscure communication.
   3      Language is mostly accurate and communication is clear.


Clarification

Word count
At ab initio level, students are required to write a minimum of 50 words in section A (with equivalents
in non-Roman script languages). There is no penalty for not writing the minimal word target in
section A.

Language
Not all errors have the same importance, and examiners should bear this in mind. Some errors
affect the communication of meaning significantly, and others do not. Also, some errors indicate a
fundamental lack of command of the language, while others may simply indicate a moment of
forgetfulness.

SLIPS – mistakes at all levels of difficulty, but erratic and occasional – eg the candidate normally
forms past tenses well, but occasionally forgets “-ed”.

FLAWS – errors occur more regularly, particularly in certain structures – eg past tenses are formed
correctly quite often, but are not really reliable, and there may be basic confusions (eg past simple
versus present perfect).

GAPS – some structures are rarely correct, or simply don’t appear – eg the past tenses are
needed, but do not appear.
                                                 –4–             N17/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B: Message

• Is all the relevant information conveyed?

    Marks   Level descriptor
      0     No relevant information has been conveyed.
      1     Some relevant information has been conveyed.
      2     More than half (at least three pieces of information) has been conveyed.
      3     All relevant information has been conveyed effectively.


Question 1:
There have been changes in the school restaurant. As class representative you have been asked
to post a message on the school web site telling students about these changes. In the message
you give the following information:
• the time school lunch is served
• the type of food served
• the cost of school lunch
• two reasons why students should have lunch at school.

Question 1: Criterion B: Message – 3 marks

Is the information understandable to an English speaker?
For 3 marks the message must be clear.
Information to be given:
• the time lunch at school is served
• the type of food served
• the cost of school lunch
• two reasons why students should have lunch at school.

Notes on the message:

The time lunch at school is served:

•    accept words or numerals
•    accept the 12 hour or 24 hour clock.
•    accept: lunch is served after the second period; lunch is served before break…
•    Accept the time for lunch: 11:00 to 15:00 pm.

The type of food served:

•    Accept categories or specific examples (fast food, healthy food, local products, fish and
     chips, vegan…)

The cost of school lunch:

•    Accept any currency; accept words or numerals
•    Accept cheap, expensive…
                                                –5–             N17/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Two reasons why students should have lunch at school:

•    Do not accept the same words as those in the answer to the type of food served or the
     cost: i.e. the words healthy food or cheap, for example, are not accepted twice but if
     replaced with nutritious or inexpensive, this is acceptable.
•    Accept all plausible answers: good diet, nutrition, socialising, doing homework, time
     saving, safety…


Question 2:
Next week there is going to be a swimming competition for all the schools in your region. You are
the captain of your school swimming team. Send the members of the team an e-mail explaining
how the day is going to be organized. Remind the team members about:
• the date of the competition
• where they must meet to leave for the competition
• how they are going to travel to the competition
• what they should bring to wear and to eat.

Question 2: Criterion B: Message – 3 marks

Is the information understandable to an English speaker?
For 3 marks the message must be clear.
Information to be given:
• the date of the competition
• where they must meet to leave for the competition
• how they are going to travel to the competition
• what they should bring to wear and to eat.

Notes on the message:

The date of the competition:
• Accept - day OR day and date OR day, date and month. For example: Next Tuesday; Tuesday
  9th; Tuesday 9th May; on Tuesday

What they should bring to wear and to eat.

• Do not accept: “bring something to eat”. To receive a mark, candidates must elaborate: “bring
  something light to eat” or 'bring something to eat for after the competition' or 'bring some
  sandwiches'…




Criterion C: Format

• Does the format correspond to the task?

    Marks   Level descriptor
      0     The format is not appropriate.
      1     The format is appropriate.
                                                –6–              N17/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                            Section B
Criterion A: Language

• To what extent does the student demonstrate an ability to use the language effectively and
  accurately?
• Does the student use a range of vocabulary and grammatical structures?
• Does the student show an awareness of the appropriate register for the task?

 Marks    Level descriptor
   0      The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
          The response and communication are of limited effectiveness.
          The range of vocabulary used is limited.
  1–2     Some basic grammatical structures are used accurately. These are isolated and limited
          in range.
          Register is inappropriate.
          The response and communication are partially effective.
          The range of vocabulary used is sometimes varied.
  3–4
          Most basic grammatical structures are used accurately.
          Register is partially appropriate.
          The response is generally accurate and communication is generally effective.
          The range of vocabulary used is varied.
  5–6     Basic grammatical structures and a limited range of more complex grammatical
          structures are used accurately.
          Register is generally appropriate.
          The response is accurate and communication is effective.
          The range of vocabulary used is varied and effective.
  7–8
          Basic and some more complex grammatical structures are used accurately.
          Register is appropriate.


Clarification

Word count
At ab initio level, students are required to write a minimum of 100 words in section B (with
equivalents in non-Roman script languages). There is no penalty for not writing the minimal
word target in section B.

Language
Not all errors have the same importance, and examiners should bear this in mind. Some errors
affect the communication of meaning significantly, and others do not. Also, some errors indicate a
fundamental lack of command of the language, while others may simply indicate a moment of
forgetfulness.

SLIPS – mistakes at all levels of difficulty, but erratic and occasional – eg the candidate normally
forms past tenses well, but occasionally forgets “-ed”.

FLAWS – errors occur more regularly, particularly in certain structures – eg past tenses are formed
correctly quite often, but are not really reliable, and there may be basic confusions (eg past simple
versus present perfect).

GAPS – some structures are rarely correct, or simply don’t appear – eg the past tenses are
needed, but do not appear.
                                                –7–              N17/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B: Message

•    To what extent does the student fulfil the task?
•    Are the ideas well-developed?
•    Is there evidence of a logical structure (paragraphing and sequencing)?
•    Are cohesive devices used effectively?

    Marks   Level descriptor
      0     The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
            The task has been partially fulfilled.
            One or more ideas have been identified and have been partially developed.
     1–2
            There is limited evidence of a logical structure.
            There is a partially successful use of a limited range of simple cohesive devices.
            The task has been generally fulfilled.
            One or more ideas have been identified and have been developed.
     3–4
            There is evidence of a logical structure.
            There is a generally successful use of a range of simple cohesive devices.
            The task has been fulfilled.
            All ideas have been identified and some have been developed well.
     5–6
            There is a logical structure.
            There is successful use of a range of simple cohesive devices.
            The task has been fulfilled effectively.
            All ideas have been developed well.
     7–8
            There is an effective, logical structure.
            There is successful use of a range of simple and some complex cohesive devices.

Criterion B: message –general notes, all 3 tasks

•    To what extent does the student fulfil the task?
•    Are the ideas well-developed?
•    Is there evidence of a logical structure (paragraphing and sequencing)?
•    Are cohesive devices used effectively?

a) A relevant answer shows that the candidate has understood the information to be given.

b) A developed answer is one where the candidate adds one supporting detail / an additional
   detail, development or example to the relevant answer.

c) A well-developed answer is one where the candidate has given a relevant statement and at
   least 2 supporting / additional pieces of information (example, development of first idea
   etc.)

1. Assessment
   First, identify the appropriate mark-band by assessing the task based on content of message
   (relevance, details and clarity). Then use logical structure and cohesive devices to attribute a
   mark within the mark band.

2. Simple Cohesive devices: these include: and, but, also... More complex cohesive devices
   include: however, afterwards, first, secondly, on the other hand…

3. Clarity: the message is clear when understood by an English speaker (not only a teacher of
   English!)
                                                –8–               N17/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




Question 3:
Last weekend you had a reunion with your primary-school friends. You were very happy because
there were many friends whom you had not seen for a long time. In your diary you describe the
reunion, the topics you spoke about with your friends and what your friends are doing now.


Message: Information to be given:

• description of the reunion
• topic(s) of conversation
• what your friends are doing now.

Notes on the message:

Description of the reunion
Accept all details: time, place, activities, food, who was there, physical description of people,
Accept feelings: “It was great, amazing…” but do not accept “I was happy” (quote from the
question itself)

Topic(s) of conversation
Accept: we talked about what we are doing now




Criterion B: Message

(First,) Message                         (Then) Structure and cohesive
                                         devices
The response does not reach a                                                     0
standard described by the
descriptors below.


The task has been partially                  • limited evidence of a logical      1- 2
fulfilled.                                       structure.
    • One detail is given and may be         • a partially successful use of a
         developed                               limited range of simple
                                                 cohesive
                                                 devices.


The task has been generally                  • evidence of a logical              3-4
fulfilled:                                       structure.
2 details are given and 1 of these           • a generally successful use of
details is developed or well-                    a range of simple cohesive
developed                                        devices

OR
3 details are given and not
developed
                                           –9–               N17/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The task has been fulfilled:                                                 5-6
                                        • a logical structure.
3 details are given and                 • successful use of a range of
1 or 2 of the 3 details is/ are well        simple cohesive devices.
developed
OR
2 of the 3 details are given and both
are well developed

The task has been fulfilled                                                  7-8
effectively.                            • an effective, logical structure.
                                        • successful use of a range of
All 3 details are well developed           simple and some complex
                                           cohesive devices.
                                               – 10 –           N17/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Question 4:
A famous author is coming to your school. For your school magazine, you interview the author
about the subjects and the characters of his/her books. You also ask the author about his/her
most recent work. Write the text of the interview.

Message: Information to be given:

•       the subjects of the books
•       the characters of the books
•       the latest book

Notes on the message:

Accept rephrased interview questions which refer to the same topics as those in the
question. Example: Instead of “Tell me about the characters of the book”, the
candidate writes “Which of the characters would you like as your best friend?”

Subject: if the candidate misunderstands the question and writes about the subjects
and the characters of the latest book only, mark the script as normal (awarding marks
for these 3 details), but the highest mark possible is in the 5-6 band for message.

Both the question and answer should be taken into account when deciding if a detail
is mentioned, developed or well-developed.




    Question 4:

    A famous author is coming to your school. For your school magazine, you interview the
    author about the subjects and the characters of his/her books. You also ask the author
    about his/her most recent work. Write the text of the interview.




    Information to be given :

    •    the subjects of the books
    •    the characters of the books
    •    the latest book


    Notes on the message:

    Accept rephrased interview questions which refer to the same topics as those in the
    question. Example: Instead of “Tell me about the characters of the book “, the
    candidate writes “Which of the characters would you like as your best friend?”
                                               – 11 –          N17/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



 Subject: if the candidate misunderstands the question and writes about the subjects
 and the characters of the latest book only, mark the script as normal (awarding marks
 for these 3 details), but the highest mark possible is in the 5-6 band for message.

 Both the question and answer should be taken into account when deciding if a detail
 is mentioned, developed or well-developed.




Criterion B: Message

 (First) MESSAGE                               (then) Structure and
                                               cohesive devices
 The response does not reach a standard                                          0
 described by the descriptors below.


 The task has been partially fulfilled.           • limited evidence of a        1- 2
                                                      logical structure.
      • One detail is given and may be            • a partially successful use
         developed                                    of a limited range of
                                                      simple cohesive
                                                      devices.

 The task has been generally fulfilled.                                          3-4
                                                  • evidence of a logical
 2 details are given & 1 of these details is          structure.
                                                  • a generally successful
 developed or well-developed                          use of a range of simple
                                                      cohesive devices.
 OR

 3 details are given and not developed


 The task has been fulfilled.                     • a logical structure.         5-6
 3 details are given and                          • successful use of a range
 1 or 2 of the 3 details are well developed           of simple cohesive
 OR                                                   devices.
 2 of the 3 details are given and both are
 well developed

 The task has been fulfilled effectively.         • an effective, logical        7-8
 All 3 details are well-developed                    structure.
                                                  • successful use of a range
                                                     of simple and some
                                                     complex cohesive
                                                     devices.
                                              – 12 –           N17/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



 Question 5:

 You spent part of your summer holiday working in a natural reserve looking after animals
 and the environment. At the end of the project, you write a report for the project
 manager, explaining what you did to look after the animals and the environment and why
 this experience was important for you.




 Information to be given :

      • What you did to look after the animals
      • What you did to look after the environment
      • Why this experience was important for you

 Notes on the message:
 To reach the 7-8 band, there should be a clear reference to both animals and the
 environment. One of these aspects may, however, be more developed than the other.

 Why this experience was important for you :
 Accept personal reasons, the good of the planet…


Criterion B: Message


 (First) Message                          (Then) Structure and cohesive        0
                                          devices
 The task has been partially                 • some evidence of a logical      1- 2
 fulfilled.                                      structure.
                                             • a partially successful use of
 One detail is given and may be                  a limited range of simple
 developed                                       cohesive devices.

 The task has been generally                                                   3-4
 fulfilled.                                  • evidence of a logical
                                                 structure.
 2 details are given & 1 of these            • a generally successful use
 details is developed or well                    of a range of simple
 developed                                       cohesive devices.

 OR

 3 details are given and not
 developed

 The task has been fulfilled.                • a logical structure.            5-6
                                             • successful use of a range of
 3 details are given and                         simple cohesive devices
 1 or 2 of the 3 details are well
 developed
 OR
                                        – 13 –           N17/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2 of the 3 details are given and both
are well developed.
The task has been fulfilled             • effective, logical structure.   7-8
effectively.                            • successful use of a range of
All 3 details are well developed            simple and some complex
                                            cohesive devices.
                                                 – 14 –       N17/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion C: Format

• To what extent does the student succeed in using the correct text type?
• Does the student use the appropriate format?

 Marks    Level descriptor
   0      The format is not appropriate.
   1      The format is partially appropriate.
   2      The format is appropriate.

To gain maximum marks [2] all of the bulleted conventions must be applied.

Expected conventions of the text type are as follows:

Question 3: Diary
• opening greeting
• date
• first person


Question 4: Interview
• title
• questions and answers


Question 5: report
• reference/title
• brief introduction, conclusion
• date
