N19/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

November / Novembre / Noviembre de 2019


         English / Anglais / Inglés ab initio


                         Standard level
                         Niveau moyen
                          Nivel medio


                   Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2




10 pages/páginas
                                           –2–              N19/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
http://www.ibo.org/contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-
publishers-and-providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat
ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur,
des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des
gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs
d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit préalable de
l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre
pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse http://www.ibo.org/fr/contact-the-
ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-providers/how-
to-apply-for-a-license.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de
apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de
aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan
recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido y estará
sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este enlace
encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia: http://www.ibo.org/es/
contact-the-ib/media-inquiries/for-publishers/guidance-for-third-party-publishers-and-
providers/how-to-apply-for-a-license.
                                                 –3–              N19/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                              Section A
Criterion A: Language
• Does the student demonstrate an ability to use the language effectively and accurately?
• Does the student use spelling, calligraphy (see “Glossary of terms”), vocabulary and
  grammatical structures correctly and accurately?

 Marks    Level descriptor
   0      Language inaccuracies completely obscure communication.
   1      Language inaccuracies often obscure communication.
   2      Language is generally accurate and does not obscure communication.
   3      Language is mostly accurate and communication is clear.

Clarification
Word count
At ab initio level, students are required to write a minimum of 50 words in section A (with equivalents
in non-Roman script languages). There is no penalty for not writing the minimal word target in
section A.
Language
Not all errors have the same importance, and examiners should bear this in mind. Some errors
affect the communication of meaning significantly, and others do not. Also, some errors indicate a
fundamental lack of command of the language, while others may simply indicate a moment of
forgetfulness.
SLIPS – mistakes at all levels of difficulty, but erratic and occasional – eg the candidate normally
forms past tenses well, but occasionally forgets “-ed”.
FLAWS – errors occur more regularly, particularly in certain structures – eg past tenses are formed
correctly quite often, but are not really reliable, and there may be basic confusions (eg past simple
versus present perfect).
GAPS – some structures are rarely correct, or simply don’t appear – eg the past tenses are needed,
but do not appear.


Criterion B: Message
• Is all the relevant information conveyed?
 Marks    Level descriptor
   0      No relevant information has been conveyed.
   1      Some relevant information has been conveyed.
   2      More than half (at least three pieces of information) has been conveyed.
   3      All relevant information has been conveyed effectively.


Criterion C: Format
• Does the format correspond to the task?
 Marks    Level descriptor
   0      The format is not appropriate.
   1      The format is appropriate.
                                                –4–              N19/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Question 1:
You love playing computer games. Write a post on your social network site about your favourite
game. You give the following information:
• the title of the game
• the aim of the game
• two details of the game
• the reason it is your favourite game.


 Criterion B: Message
 Information to be given:
    • the title of the game: accept a title of one word or of several.
       If the title of the text and of the game is the same, award zero marks for the title under
       Format C and award one mark for the name of the game in criterion B, message.
    • the aim: accept an aim specific to the game (the aim is to beat the aliens) or a general one
      (you must win the most points; the aim is to have fun …)
    • two details: these can refer to any 2 aspects of the game - graphics; a game for
      adolescents; plot / storyline; gameplay (open-world or sandbox); genre (shooting,
      racing…)
       Do not give a mark for information already given.
    • the reason it is your favourite game: accept any relevant reason.
       Do not give a mark for information already given.



 Criterion C: Format – Post on your social network site
 The format is not appropriate          No characteristics of a social network site          0
 The format is appropriate              Title or general greeting                            1
                                                  –5–              N19/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Question 2:
You are absent from school because of an injury. Write an email to your friend. In the email you
explain:
• what part of the body you injured
• how it happened
• how you feel now
• when you will come back to school
• what you look forward to doing in school on your return.


 Criterion B: Message
 Information to be given:
 • what part of the body you injured: (I injured my arm…)
    Do not accept an illness which is not an injury: (I have a cold / flu, a cough…)
 • how it happened: (I fell / (off my bike) …)
    One detail is sufficient for a mark.
 • how you feel: (I feel tired / I feel better; my leg hurts…)
 • when you will be back to school: (accept: next week/ tomorrow/ on the 3rd/on Tuesday, when I
   feel confident walking by myself…)
 • what you look forward to: (seeing my friends; being in English class; participating in the
   school concert …) Accept any action in the future in school (do my homework; talk with
   teachers...)
    Do not accept an activity which cannot be done in a school context.



 Criterion C: Format – email
 The format is not appropriate             No characteristics of an email                  0
 The format is appropriate                 Greeting to a specific person or signature      1
                                                –6–              N19/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                                Section B
Criterion A: Language
• To what extent does the student demonstrate an ability to use the language effectively and
  accurately?
• Does the student use a range of vocabulary and grammatical structures?
• Does the student show an awareness of the appropriate register for the task?

 Marks    Level descriptor
   0      The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
          The response and communication are of limited effectiveness.
          The range of vocabulary used is limited.
  1–2     Some basic grammatical structures are used accurately. These are isolated and limited
          in range.
          Register is inappropriate.
          The response and communication are partially effective.
          The range of vocabulary used is sometimes varied.
  3–4
          Most basic grammatical structures are used accurately.
          Register is partially appropriate.
          The response is generally accurate and communication is generally effective.
          The range of vocabulary used is varied.
  5–6     Basic grammatical structures and a limited range of more complex grammatical
          structures are used accurately.
          Register is generally appropriate.
          The response is accurate and communication is effective.
          The range of vocabulary used is varied and effective.
  7–8
          Basic and some more complex grammatical structures are used accurately.
          Register is appropriate.


Clarification

Word count
At ab initio level, students are required to write a minimum of 100 words in section B (with
equivalents in non-Roman script languages). There is no penalty for not writing the minimal word
target in section B.

Language
Not all errors have the same importance, and examiners should bear this in mind. Some errors
affect the communication of meaning significantly, and others do not. Also, some errors indicate a
fundamental lack of command of the language, while others may simply indicate a moment of
forgetfulness.
SLIPS – mistakes at all levels of difficulty, but erratic and occasional – eg the candidate normally
forms past tenses well, but occasionally forgets “-ed”.
FLAWS – errors occur more regularly, particularly in certain structures – eg past tenses are formed
correctly quite often, but are not really reliable, and there may be basic confusions (eg past simple
versus present perfect).
GAPS – some structures are rarely correct, or simply don’t appear – eg the past tenses are needed,
but do not appear.

COMPLEX GRAMMAR STRUCTURES – these include modals, conditionals, perfect tenses,
passives…
                                                –7–              N19/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion B: Message

•    To what extent does the student fulfil the task?
•    Are the ideas well-developed?
•    Is there evidence of a logical structure (paragraphing and sequencing)?
•    Are cohesive devices used effectively?

    Marks   Level descriptor
      0     The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
            The task has been partially fulfilled.
            One or more ideas have been identified and have been partially developed.
     1–2
            There is limited evidence of a logical structure.
            There is a partially successful use of a limited range of simple cohesive devices.
            The task has been generally fulfilled.
            One or more ideas have been identified and have been developed.
     3–4
            There is evidence of a logical structure.
            There is a generally successful use of a range of simple cohesive devices.
            The task has been fulfilled.
            All ideas have been identified and some have been developed well.
     5–6
            There is a logical structure.
            There is successful use of a range of simple cohesive devices.
            The task has been fulfilled effectively.
            All ideas have been developed well.
     7–8
            There is an effective, logical structure.
            There is successful use of a range of simple and some complex cohesive devices.

Criterion B general information
• Each question is composed of 3 parts.
• Each part is worth 2 marks. (1 detail / example / information = 1 mark).

     1. FIRST assess the task based on the message and the number of relevant details.
        Total marks: 6 [3X2].
     2. THEN assess the structure and use of cohesive devices.
           - 1 mark for a logical structure
           - 1 mark for the successful use of cohesive devices: first, second; then, next,
               because, also, but, if, or, however; and, for example, furthermore, likewise, besides,
               nevertheless, in addition, for instance, consequently, despite, in spite of, in
               conclusion, to sum up… There should be at least 3 cohesive devices for 1 mark.
        (Total marks: 2)
   3. THEN add together the mark for the message and the marks for logical structure and use of
      cohesive devices.
      (Total marks: 6 + 2 = 8)
Note:
   • It is possible to have 2 marks for logical structure and use of cohesive devices even if the
      message is only partially fulfilled.
   • Do not penalize if there are fewer than 100 words.
   • The message must be clear to be awarded a mark.
                                                      –8–           N19/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion C: Format

•     To what extent does the student succeed in using the correct text type?
•     Does the student use the appropriate format?

    Marks    Level descriptor
      0      The format is not appropriate.
      1      The format is partially appropriate.
      2      The format is appropriate.


Question 3:
For the school newspaper you interviewed a teacher in your school who won the best teacher of
the year award in the region. You asked him/her why he/she became a teacher, what advice
he/she would give to young people who want to become teachers and what his/her own hopes are
for the future. Write the text of the interview.

    Criterion B: Message
    Three questions: each answer has two pieces of information. Award one mark for each piece of
    information. (Total 6 marks)
        • Why he/she became a teacher: love of the subject; help young people…
       •    What advice he/she would give young people: study hard; volunteer in a school…
            Do not give a mark for information already given.
       •    What his/her hopes are for the future: travel; inspire young people…

    Add 1 mark for logical structure and 1 mark for use of cohesive devices (because, but, like…) or
    for a text which flows naturally. (Total 2 marks)


    Criterion C: Format – Interview

    The format is not appropriate         No characteristic of an interview                     0

    The format is partially appropriate   One of the following characteristics:                 1
                                          •   question and answer format or reported
                                              speech
                                          •    title
                                          •   introductory and concluding remarks (These
                                              may be quite detailed or limited to: Good
                                              morning… Thank you for the interview)
    The format is appropriate             Two of the following characteristics:                 2
                                          •   question and answer format or reported
                                              speech
                                          •   title
                                          •   introductory and concluding remarks (These
                                              may be quite detailed or limited to: Good
                                              morning… Thank you for the interview)
                                                –9–                N19/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Question 4:
There is a competition on television for young people with musical talent. The first prize is a trip to
New York to attend a series of concerts. You decide to enter. To support your entry, you write a
letter in which you give details about yourself (for example, name, nationality, studies, hobbies…),
you explain why you believe you have musical talent and why you want to take part in the
competition. Write your supporting letter.

 Criterion B: Message
 Three topics to support the entry: each topic has two pieces of information. Award one mark for
 each piece of information. (Total 6 marks)
     •   Details about yourself: the details mentioned in the question are not exhaustive.
         At least 2 details are required for 2 marks.
     •   Why you believe you have musical talent: you have played a musical instrument for
         many years; you have won music competitions; people tell you that you are talented; you
         compose your own music…
     •   Why you want to take part: you have always wanted to visit New York / attending
         concerts in New York would be a dream; it is the first step on your career…
         Do not award a mark for repeated information.


 Add 1 mark for logical structure and 1 mark for the use of cohesive devices. (Total 2 marks)



 Criterion C: Format – Letter

 The format is not appropriate         No characteristic of a letter                              0

 The format is partially appropriate   One of the following characteristics:                      1
                                           •   formal salutation
                                               Dear Sir/ Madame; Dear + name; Dear +
                                               position (ex. member of the jury); to whom it
                                               may concern…
                                               Do not accept “HI’
                                           •   formal ending
                                           •   date
                                           •   signature
 The format is appropriate             Two of the following characteristics:                      2
                                           •   formal salutation (Dear Sir/ Madame ; Dear
                                               + name; Dear + position / member of the
                                               jury; to whom it may concern…)
                                               Do not accept “HI’
                                           •   formal ending
                                           •   date
                                           •   signature
                                                – 10 –            N19/2/ANENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Question 5:
You must give a presentation to your class on the topic: would you like to live in the city or in the
country? In the presentation you say where you would prefer to live and describe in detail three
advantages of living in the city or in the country. Write the text of your presentation.

 Criterion B: Message
 Two pieces of information about each of three advantages of either living in the city or the
 country. (Total 6 marks)
 Note: if the candidate does not give a preference but gives advantages and disadvantages of
 living in the country and / or in the city, award one mark per detail to a maximum of 6 marks.

 Add 1 mark for logical structure and 1 mark for the use of cohesive devices. (Total 2 marks)



 Criterion C: Format – Presentation

 The format is not appropriate         No characteristic of a presentation                        0


 The format is partially appropriate   One of the following characteristics:                      1
                                           •   form of address to audience / opening
                                               greeting
                                           •   reference to the topic of the presentation
                                           •   concluding remarks
 The format is appropriate             Two of the following characteristics:                      2
                                           •   form of address to audience / opening
                                               greeting
                                           •   reference to the topic of the presentation
                                           •   concluding remarks
