8823 – 5013M




                 Markscheme


                  November 2023


               Business management


                  Standard level


                     Paper 1




14 pages
                                            –2–                                         8823 – 5013M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                            –3–                                    8823 – 5013M


The markbands and assessment criteria on pages 3–4 should be used
where indicated in the markscheme.

  Section A                               Level descriptor

Q1     Q2     Q3
(b)    (b)    (b)

      Marks

        0           The work does not reach a standard described by the
                    descriptors below.

       1–2          • Little knowledge and understanding of relevant issues and
                        business management tools (where applicable),
                        techniques and theories.
                    •   Little use of business management terminology.
                    •   Little reference to the stimulus material.

       3–4          • A description or partial analysis of some relevant issues
                        with some use of business management tools (where
                        applicable), techniques and theories.
                    •   Some use of appropriate terminology.
                    •   Some reference to the stimulus material that goes beyond
                        the name of a person(s) and/or the name of the
                        organization.
                    •   At the lower end of the markband, responses are mainly
                        theoretical.

       5–6          • An analysis of the relevant issues with good use of
                        business management tools (where applicable),
                        techniques and theories.
                    •   Use of appropriate terminology throughout the response.
                    •   Effective use of the stimulus material.
                                      –4–                                 8823 – 5013M



Section B                         Level descriptor
 Q4 (d)

 Marks

   0        The work does not reach a standard described by the
            descriptors below.

  1–2       •   Little understanding of the demands of the question.
            •   Few business management tools (where applicable),
                techniques and theory are explained or applied and
                business management terminology is lacking.
            •   Little reference to the stimulus material.

  3–4       •   Some understanding of the demands of the question.
            •   Some relevant business management tools (where
                applicable), techniques and theories are explained or
                applied, and some appropriate terminology is used.
            •   Some reference to the stimulus material but often not
                going beyond the name of a person(s) and/or the name of
                the organization.

  5–6       • Understanding of most of the demands of the question.
            • Relevant business management tools (where applicable),
              techniques and theories are explained and applied, and
              appropriate terminology is used most of the time.
            • Some reference to the stimulus material that goes beyond
              the name of a person(s) and/or the name of the
              organization.
            • Some evidence of a balanced response.
            • Some judgments are relevant but not substantiated.

  7–8       • Good understanding of the demands of the question.
            • Relevant business management tools (where applicable),
              techniques and theories are explained and applied well,
              and appropriate terminology is used.
            • Good reference to the stimulus material.
            • Good evidence of a balanced response.
            • The judgments are relevant but not always well
              substantiated.

  9–10      • Good understanding of the demands of the question,
              including implications, where relevant.
            • Relevant business management tools (where applicable),
              techniques and theories are explained clearly and applied
              purposefully, and appropriate terminology is used
              throughout the response.
            • Effective use of the stimulus material in a way that
              significantly strengthens the response.
            • Evidence of balance is consistent throughout the
              response.
            • The judgments are relevant and well substantiated.
                                            –5–                                      8823 – 5013M


                                         Section A

1. (a) Outline one advantage and one disadvantage for BRD of converting to a public
   limited company (lines 27–28). [4]
 Advantages include:
 • BRD can raise additional finance, such as the sale of shares, to achieve the acquisitions of
    Matchfix PLC and Enam Ltd. and to broaden BRD’s product range;
 • higher interest rates made the sale of shares more attractive;
 • BRD can place a market value on the business;
 • it would increase the profile of the business leading to it being better known and possibly
    leading to increased sales and profits;
 • BRD can widen the shareholder base. Public shareholders can buy and sell shares. This
    may be better for BRD than having a small number of larger shareholders (like Geoff and
    Arnold);
 • access to other finance opportunities taking into account that BRD’s bank refused to
    extend its overdraft, which now stood at £8 million.
 Disadvantages include:
 • BRD can face more regulatory requirements e.g. they must have an Annual General
     Meeting;
 • BRD´s management and operations will require higher levels of transparency;
 • BRD could become vulnerable to takeovers. As they increase the level of acquisitions, they
     may face a challenge to their ownership. The situation with 4Change is an example of this
     (35% ownership by 4Change). Arnold and Geoff will lose control;
 • BRD’s share price may fluctuate with their fortunes. It can rise and fall quickly leading to a
     lack of stability (share price fell by more than 50% in 2021);
 • changes in board of directors and strategy.


  Accept any other relevant advantage and disadvantage.

  Mark as 2 + 2

  Award [1] for each appropriate advantage/disadvantage identified and an additional [1]
  for a description of how it impacts on BRD.

  Award a maximum of [2] per advantage/disadvantage.

  Award a maximum of [4] in total.
                                             –6–                                       8823 – 5013M


(b) Explain the leadership styles used by Arnold with the different departments in BRD’s
Liverpool factory (lines 58–62 and lines 73–75). [6]

Several leadership styles could be employed by Arnold. These include autocratic; paternalistic;
democratic; laissez-faire and situational.

It could be argued that the style used by Arnold is mixed. In the factory he is keen to learn what
he can about each of his production employees. The definition of paternalistic leadership
suggests that a dominant authority figure treats employees as if they are members of a large
extended family.

In the design department, the allowance of the ‘Design Team Freedom Month’ suggests that
designers are trusted to develop products and ideas with minimal supervision. This would
assume a sort of laissez-faire or at least democratic approach to leadership.
From the employees' perspective, it is likely that the employees in different departments will feel
differently about the effectiveness of Arnold as a leader.

Accept any other relevant style and explanation.

Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.

Award a maximum of [3] for a theoretical answer or for limiting answer to only one
style.

For [5-6] at least two leadership styles are named and developed correctly in context.

Award a maximum of [5] if the explanation is mainly descriptive, but in context.

Award a maximum of [6] for a developed answer in context.
                                             –7–                                      8823 – 5013M


2. (a) Outline one advantage and one disadvantage for BRD of having low labour turnover
   (lines 63–64).                                                                    [4]

 Advantages include:
 • good quality staff remain. The staff at BRD’s Liverpool factory work effectively and want to
    stay. Employees in the Liverpool factory have worked there for over 20 years;
 • BRD do not have to continually recruit and train new staff;
 • long serving members of staff are often easier to motivate. BRD’s management have built
    strong relations with employees. Arnold Brondy, is proud of his relationship with the Liverpool
    factory employees. He speaks at least once every two weeks to each of the 107 production
    employees, knows them all by name and prides himself on knowing their family situations. He
    also keeps a record in his office of staff birthdays and makes a point of giving a card and small
    gift on an employee’s birthday. This is likely to lead to them offering greater commitment in
    times of need.
  Disadvantages include:
  • salary costs are high for longer serving employees who receive an automatic 3% salary
     increase every three years;
  • with low labour turnover there are fewer opportunities for staff development and
     promotion;
  • employees could lack drive and ambition. BRD staff work well but the lack of desire can lead
     to lower quality output;
  • managers can get lazy with a staff who have stagnated;
  • less recruitment means fewer outside influences. A lack of new ideas can be an issue.
     Designers may lack inspiration after long periods in the same role. Outside recruitment can
     import new ideas and approaches. A change of culture may be good for BRD.


 Accept any other relevant advantage and disadvantage.

 Mark as 2 + 2.

 Award [1] for each appropriate advantage/disadvantage identified and an additional [1] for
 a description of how it impacts on BRD.

 Award a maximum of [2] per advantage/disadvantage.

 Award a maximum of [4] in total.
                                             –8–                                         8823 – 5013M


(b) Using the Ansoff matrix, explain what alternatives to diversification BRD could have
considered (lines 24–25). [6]

Ansoff matrix is a strategic planning tool to assist with future growth option planning.
Diversification, in Ansoff matrix terms refers to the selling of new products in new markets.

Alternative strategies include:
• Market penetration refers to a business selling more of its existing products to its existing
   customers (selling more of its existing products in the same market). Arnold felt that BRD
   could have focused on one product but realized the need to change if the business was to
   prosper. BRD has a loyal customer base, but this base is getting progressively older, and sales
   fell year after year from 2010;
• market development refers to a business trying to enter new markets (or new market
   segments in the existing market) with its existing product range. BRD was already selling in
   several countries worldwide like UK, Australia, New Zealand, USA and Canada. However, sales
   in the USA and Canada were very low. Was there an opportunity to expand this still further?;
• product development refers to a business trying to sell new products to your existing
   customer base (market). Consumers now wanted more sophisticated toys. BRD could have
   widened their product base utilizing new design ideas (plastic models, new train, slot car
   designs, 2-rail system), etc. to target their current customers. Every year, each member of the
   design department is given responsibility for the design of one new model train, slot car or
   plastic model kit (This is known within the company as “Design Team Freedom Month”).


Accept any other relevant alternative strategy and explanation.

Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.

Award [1] if a strategy or strategies is/are named but the explanation is incorrect or
omitted.

Award a maximum of [3] for a theoretical answer or for limiting answer to only one
alternative.

Award a maximum of [4] if one strategy is named and correctly developed but the
second strategy is named correctly but developed incorrectly.

For [5-6] at least two strategies are named and developed correctly in context.

Award a maximum of [5] if the explanation is mainly descriptive, but in context.

Award a maximum of [6] for a developed answer in context.
                                            –9–                                       8823 – 5013M


3. (a) Outline one advantage and one disadvantage that could arise from BRD’s decision to
   make its model train sets from plastic rather than metal from 2024 (lines 108–110). [4]

 Advantages include:
 • the trains will be more price-competitive. In recent times BRD has seen quite a price
   difference between their products and the competition. “Prices charged for BRD’s train sets
   were uncompetitive”;
 • new technology (3D printers etc) allows for a very similar product in terms of detail to be
   produced;
 • production is faster than using metal further improving costs. “This took less time than it would
   have taken to produce just one in metal, and it was less expensive”;
 • plastic is cheaper so BRD could lower prices which may result in an increase in sales;
 • plastic is cheaper than metal resulting in increased profits.
 Disadvantages include:
 • customers may view the changed product in a negative way. Customers have valued the
    trains being made with metal (accurately made and well-designed models). This might impact
    on BRD’s sales;
 • it can have a negative impact on the whole BRD brand;
 • plastic cannot be recycled so BRD could get a poor reputation on sustainability. Some
    directors had misgivings as the plastic used is not yet recyclable.
 N.B. do not accept only “changing from metal to plastic” without further expansion on how
 this affects BRD.

 Accept any other relevant advantage and disadvantage.

 Mark as 2 + 2

 Award [1] for each appropriate advantage/disadvantage identified and an additional [1] for
 a description of how it impacts on BRD.

 Award a maximum of [2] per advantage/disadvantage.

 Award a maximum of [4] in total.
                                            – 10 –                                  8823 – 5013M


(b) Explain strategies, other than the issuing of additional shares to the existing
shareholders, that BRD could have used to improve its liquidity in 2022 (lines
124–138). [6]

Strategies include:
• controlling the overheads (this could include: finding less expensive ways to produce like 3D
   printing, reducing fringe benefits, etc);
• selling off unnecessary assets (older machinery or factories) considering that sales fell year
   after year from 2010. BRD's share of the UK market had fallen from a peak of 60% in 2001 to
   20%, while sales to consumer in New Zealand and Australia followed similar pattern. BRD is
   likely to have idle production capacity
• increase sales by reassessing pricing strategies. Prices are uncompetitive for the train sets
   (line 112). BRD could shift to increase production of slot cars;
• improve the quality of the Matchfix PLC plastic model kits to improve sales and customer
   satisfaction, taking into account that customer complaints about quality issues with Matchfix
   PLC plastic model kits have increased;
• increase payment times for supplies. This may only help short term. Suppliers were
   beginning to panic. One key supplier had already cancelled BRD’s 30-day trade credit period.
   Will BRD be able to renegotiate?
• reduce its level of unsold stock in its Liverpool factory valued at £6 million, by offering
   discounts or promotions to its customers;
• reduce production of train sets to lower expenses;
• replace overdrafts by a medium/long term debt taking into account that BRD’s bank refused
   to extend its overdraft, which now stood at £8 million. BRD may renegotiate new terms with the
   bank;
• debt factoring, BRD can maintain the same credit period, but the factoring will advance the
   receivables for a fee (no context);
• decrease payment times for customers (no context).
Accept any other relevant strategy and explanation.
N.B. do not accept business angels, grants as BRD has liquidity issues and these are long-term
strategies. Accept any other relevant strategy and explanation.

Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.

Award a maximum of [3] for a theoretical answer for limiting answer to only one
strategy.

For [5-6] at least two strategies are named and developed correctly in context.

Award a maximum of [5] if the explanation is mainly descriptive, but in context.

Award a maximum of [6] for a developed answer in context.
                                                  – 11 –                                    8823 – 5013M


                                               Section B


4.   (a)   Define the term market segment. [2]

           It is the division of consumers into distinct groups who share common characteristics, tastes
           and requirements.

           Beware of circular definitions which cannot be rewarded.

           N.B. no application required. Do not credit examples.

           Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

           Award [1] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and understanding.

           Award [2] for a full definition that conveys knowledge and understanding similar to the
           answer above.

     (b)   Explain one advantage and one disadvantage for BRD of using a cost-plus (mark-up) pricing
           strategy for its Matchfix plastic model kits. [4]

           Cost-plus (mark-up) pricing refers to adding a mark-up to the average cost of producing a
           product.

           Advantages could include:

           • Should ensure costs are covered (and makes profit) even with the cost of plastic
              increase of 20%, with a further increase in 2022 of 25%;
           • simple, easy and quick to administer;
           • prices are increasingly important to consumers. Cost plus may be cheaper than market
              prices in a cost/price rising market.

           Disadvantages:

           • Costs are increasing, likely to be behind the trend as the cost of plastic increased by
              20%, with a further increase in 2022 of 25%;
           • competitive market, market prices might be more appropriate as Matchfix kit sales fell
             in 2021 and further in 2022. Possibly due to raising prices as costs increased;
           • needs regular review, better to respond more quickly to the market.

           Accept any other relevant advantage/disadvantage.

           Mark as 2+2

           Award [1] for each advantage and additional [1] for an explanation of how it relates to BRD.

           Award [1] for each disadvantage and additional [1] for an explanation of how it relates to
           BRD.

           [2] can not be awarded per advantage/disadvantage if the response lacks either explanation
           and / or application.

           For example:
                                             – 12 –                                      8823 – 5013M


      For an identification or a description of an advantage/disadvantage with or without
      application [1].

      For explanation of an advantage/disadvantage with no application [1].

      For explanation of an advantage/disadvantage and application [2].

      Maximum award overall: [4].

(c)   Calculate:

      (i)   the number of paying café visitors needed for the café to make a profit of £200 000
            (show all your working); [2]

            Let x = number of paying café users

            Contribution per adult is £15 – £10 = £5. So, the total contribution is £5

            Profit = contribution – fixed costs

            So £200 000 = £5x - £25 000

            £225 000 = £5x

            X=£225 000/£5 = 45 000 paying café users

            There are alternative ways of calculating this

            £200 000 = (£15 – £10)x - £25 000

            £225 000 = £5x

            X = £225 000/£5 = 45 000 paying café users

            Award [2] for the correct answer that shows the working and includes the unit.

            Award [1] for an attempt to apply the formula.
                                              – 13 –                                   8823 – 5013M


      (ii)   the profit that BRD would make in year 3 from operating the café (show all your
             working). [2]

             BRD has forecasted 55,000 visitors for year 3,

             Simpson predicts that 80% of visitors will visit the café

             So, 55 000 x 0.8 go to the café = 44 000

             Contribution = 44 000 x £5 = £220 000

             Fixed costs of £25 000

             Profit = total contribution – total fixed costs = £220 000 – £25 000 = £195 000

             N.B. allow BOD for the use of the $ or € sign instead of £.

             Award [2] for the correct answer which shows the working and includes the unit (£).

             Award [1] for an attempt to apply the formula.

(d)   Recommend whether BRD should choose Option 1 (the science and imagination centre) or
      Option 2 (the railway museum). [10]

      Option 1

      Arguments for could include:
      • Setup £500k rather than £800k;
      • businesses often have visitor centres;
      • sort of attraction liked by parents;
      • higher visitor numbers in long term (see Table 2);
      • unusual if not unique experience?.

      Arguments against could include:
      • Higher running costs especially for trained employees. Higher annual total fixed costs
      (£360k);
      • recruiting a problem?;
      • no experience;
      • lower estimated growth of visitor numbers in the beginning. Is this data reliable?.

      Option 2

      Arguments for could include:
      • Higher visitor numbers at the beginning;
      • fewer employees, lower skills required;
      • production of trains is what BRD is about. So, maybe Synergy?.

      Arguments against could include:
      • Lower visitor numbers in long term;
      • high capital costs.

      Evaluation of the options may consider their view of what is important to BRD—profit, short-
      term vs long-term issues; aspects of risk. Candidates may make reference to business tools,
      such as Ansoff; FFA etc.
                                       – 14 –                                   8823 – 5013M


Accept any other relevant argument and evaluation.

N.B. Candidates can recommend either. Marks come from the strengths of the arguments.

Marks should be allocated according to the mark bands on page 4 with further guidance
below.

Theoretical answer or context limited to naming the business or lack of development max
[4].

Discussion of only one option marks limited to [5].

Discussion but no clear balance [6].

Options considered, good use of evidence, particularly from section B, but no effective
conclusion award a maximum of [8].

For [10] the answer needs to be a fully supported conclusion/evaluation, clearly relevant to
BRD with good use of context.
