© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Business management
Case study: Brondy’s PLC


For use in November 2023




Instructions to candidates
y Case study booklet required for higher level paper 1 and standard level paper 1 business
  management examinations.




                                                                                             8823 – 5001
     5 pages                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
                                                      –2–                                            8823 – 5001


                                                 Brondy’s PLC

        Brondy’s PLC (BRD) began manufacturing wind-up clockwork toys in 1930. BRD was initially
        founded as a private limited company by Geoff Brondy, a skilled engineer and entrepreneur, in
        Liverpool, United Kingdom (UK). BRD’s product range included clockwork cars, lorries, motorbikes,
        trains, animals, and novelty items – one of its biggest sellers in the 1930s was a toy monkey
    5   playing a drum kit.

        During the Second World War, toy production at BRD was suspended and the factory was used
        to make rifles for the army. Once the war was over, however, Geoff discovered that the toy market
        had changed. Consumers now wanted more sophisticated toys, and the era of the clockwork toy
        was ending. In 1954, Geoff visited a toy fair in New York, United States (USA), and saw the interest
10      that electric slot cars1 and electric model train sets generated among the other visitors.

        Geoff returned to Liverpool to begin designing new products that would take BRD forward, and his
        first two designs went into production in 1955:
        y A slot car racing set, consisting of a track and two sports cars. He chose the brand name
            BRD Slotcars. Sales of BRD Slotcars rose quickly in the UK and other countries in the
15          Commonwealth of Nations.
        y A model train set, consisting of an engine and four carriages. This set had a three-rail system,
            rather than the two rails Geoff had seen in the USA. In Geoff’s design, the middle rail supplied the
            electrical power to the model trains, and this feature became part of the product’s brand name,
            the BRD Three-Rail Model Railway. This brand sold well in the UK, Australia, and New Zealand.
20          Sales in the USA and Canada, however, were very low, as the product was not compatible with
            the model train sets produced in those countries, where the two-rail system was used.

        Geoff retired in 1985 and became a minority shareholder, passing on most of his share capital to
        his son, Arnold Brondy. Arnold became the chief executive officer (CEO). Arnold shared his father’s
        passion for toys. Ideally, he would have preferred BRD to focus on one product only – model trains –
25      but realized that if BRD was to prosper, diversification was needed. An issue, however, was that
        interest rates at that time were very high.

        Arnold persuaded BRD’s board of directors to agree to a conversion of BRD to a public limited
        company. He also aimed to broaden BRD’s product range through acquisitions. The sale of share
        capital in BRD helped finance these acquisitions.

30      In 1990, BRD took over two companies:
        y Matchfix PLC, a manufacturer of plastic model kits of aircraft and military vehicles, with sales
           across the world. This business’ factory was in Wales, UK.
        y Enam Ltd., a paint manufacturer whose paint was used by modellers across the world. This
           business’ factory was in France.

35      Arnold valued efficiency and productivity. In 2001, BRD closed Matchfix’s factory in Wales and
        moved production to the BRD factory in Liverpool. At the same time, BRD merged the Matchfix
        and BRD design departments. A single Design Department, based in the Liverpool factory, became
        responsible for the design of model train sets, slot car racing sets, and plastic model kits. The
        Matchfix brand name was retained.



1
     electric slot cars: powered miniature cars and other vehicles that are guided by a
     groove or slot in the track on which they run
                                                  –3–                                            8823 – 5001


40   Production methods in BRD’s Liverpool factory in 2023

     BRD model train sets are currently manufactured using batch production. Each train set consists
     of three components: a train engine, coaches, and a set of tracks. Co-ordination is proving difficult,
     however, and production targets for each component are not always met for a variety of reasons,
     including employee absence, machinery problems, and communication issues. As a result, the
45   daily dispatch of train sets to retailers had to be postponed approximately three times a month
     in 2022, as complete train sets could not be assembled. BRD is considering changing to cellular
     production for its model train sets. This would require production to be halted for two weeks,
     and additional employee training would need to be provided to make employees multiskilled.
     Employees would also be split into teams, called cells. The workday would be changed to
50   incorporate daily 30-minute cell meetings, timetabled during normal working hours. Each cell would
     be responsible for producing one train set component, and the team of employees in a cell would
     work at a single workstation using parts delivered to that station by automated delivery vehicles.

     The Matchfix plastic model kits are manufactured in a separate part of the Liverpool factory and
     also use a batch production method. Cellular production for the model kits is not being considered,
55   as production targets are consistently met and the production process makes greater use of
     specialized machinery than the production of the BRD model train sets.

     Human resources at BRD’s Liverpool factory in 2023

     BRD’s CEO, Arnold, is proud of his relationship with the Liverpool factory employees. He tours
     the factory floor for an hour every morning. Arnold can guarantee that he speaks to each of the
60   107 production employees at least once every two weeks. He knows them all by name and prides
     himself on knowing their family situations. He also keeps a record in his office of staff birthdays and
     makes a point of giving a card and small gift on an employee’s birthday. Many of the production
     employees in the Liverpool factory have worked there for over 20 years. Absenteeism and labour
     turnover are very low by industry standards. BRD’s employees have never taken industrial
65   strike action. However, Arnold has been slow at updating the factory employees’ contracts of
     employment. These contracts only provide the statutory minimum benefits for employees who
     are absent due to illness or those who need to take parental leave following the birth or adoption
     of a child. The salaries of all employees rise automatically by 3 % after every three years of
     employment. Employees in the Production Department do not receive any fringe benefits. In
70   contrast, employees in the Design Department have a range of fringe benefits, including a car
     allowance, subsidized meals, and private health care. They also have flexible working practices
     and can choose to work from home two days a week.

     Although employees in the Design Department have set tasks to complete, for one month each
     year they can pursue individual design projects that interest them and that may be useful to BRD.
75   This month is known within the company as Design Team Freedom Month. Every year, each
     member of the Design Department is given responsibility for the design of one new model train set,
     slot car set, or plastic model kit. Their role is to manage a design from its initial concept, through
     the design stage, and into production, solving any design and production issues in collaboration
     with the production director. Arnold also meets with the employees in the Design Department every
80   two weeks to hear their views on progress in the company and listen to their ideas for the future.




                                                                                                 Turn over
                                                    –4–                                            8823 – 5001


      The BRD Three-Rail Model Railway, 1955–present

      BRD’s model train sets are made from metal. The tracks, on which the model trains run, have three
      rails, with the centre rail carrying the electrical current. Competitors in the USA and Europe use
      a two-rail system. This has protected BRD from foreign competition in the UK market, as model
 85   railway engines made abroad are not compatible with BRD’s three-rail system. However, it has
      also limited BRD’s market reach, as its model trains cannot run on the two-rail systems made by
      their rivals in the USA and Europe.

      BRD’s customer base initially included railway modellers, who were usually male and who valued
      accurately made and well-designed models. Targeting this niche market enabled BRD to charge
 90   higher prices than foreign manufacturers for its model train sets. BRD also sold its train sets to
      parents who wanted toys for their children, but the high prices restricted sales to wealthy families.

      In the final quarter of the 20th century, most model train manufacturers across the world replaced
      metal with plastic where possible, but BRD did not. BRD’s board of directors were convinced that
      quality and realism were more important than price, so they continued using metal as the primary
 95   material. BRD’s products became significantly more expensive than similar two-rail train sets made
      by rival manufacturers. BRD had a loyal customer base, but this base was getting progressively
      older, and sales fell year after year from 2010. By 2020, BRD’s share of the UK market had fallen
      from a peak of 60 % in 2001 to 20 %. Sales to consumers in New Zealand and Australia followed a
      similar pattern.

100   During the last Design Team Freedom Month, Julia Dentes, a member of BRD’s Design
      Department, used a three-dimensional (3D) printer to produce working prototypes of five different
      versions of one model train set in plastic. This took less time than it would have taken to produce
      just one model train set in metal, and it was less expensive. Julia also showed that it was possible
      to achieve the same level of detail and realism using plastic as by using metal. Julia’s department
105   head was so impressed with her work that he arranged for Julia to make a presentation to BRD’s
      board of directors.

      The directors were equally impressed. However, some directors had misgivings because the
      plastic used was not yet recyclable. Despite these misgivings, the board agreed to make a
      fundamental change to BRD’s model trains: from 2024, they would be made from plastic rather
110   than metal.

      Financial performance

      By 2022, BRD’s finances were in a critical situation. Sales of plastic model kits and model train
      sets began to fall at the start of the century, and the pace of the decline in sales increased every
      year from 2015. BRD’s own primary and secondary market research suggested there were four
115   reasons for the falling sales:
      y A decline in the customer base for BRD’s metal trains and plastic model kits; BRD’s customer
         base was ageing, and they were not being replaced sufficiently by younger ones.
      y A general lack of interest in modelling as a hobby due to the advancement of the online
         games industry.
120   y The prices charged for BRD’s train sets were uncompetitive.
      y An increase in customer complaints about quality issues with Matchfix plastic model kits.
                                                     –5–                                            8823 – 5001


        BRD’s shareholder confidence fell, and its share price dropped by more than 50 % in 2021.
        Following this fall, 4Change, a private equity business2, purchased 20 % of BRD’s shares.

        In 2022, BRD suffered a liquidity crisis caused by the falling sales of its model train sets and
125     plastic model kits. BRD had not reduced production, resulting in unsold stock in its Liverpool
        factory valued at £6 million. This led BRD to seek a financial rescue package. However, BRD’s
        bank refused to extend its overdraft, which now stood at £8 million. Suppliers were beginning to
        panic, and one key supplier of materials cancelled BRD’s 30-day trade credit facility, insisting on
        immediate payment for each order.

130     BRD’s board decided to offer existing shareholders the right to buy an extra share for every five
        shares owned. This offer was intended to raise £15 million from shareholders to stabilize the
        business. Many of BRD’s shareholders turned down this offer, however, and BRD only raised
        £3 million. 4Change stepped in and offered to buy the £12 million of unsold shares at a 25 %
        discount. 4Change also insisted that it be given three positions on the board of directors. 4Change
135     was determined to exert more influence over BRD’s strategic decision making. As CEO, Arnold
        was reluctant to accept this offer, as he feared the direction that 4Change might want BRD to
        take. However, the board of directors voted to accept this offer. 4Change now owned 35 % of
        BRD’s shares.

        2023 will be a crucial year for BRD. The £12 million raised from the sale of share capital gave BRD
140     sufficient liquidity to continue trading, but further strategic changes will be needed if BRD is to
        avoid more difficulties in the near future.



2
      private equity business: an investment management business that provides financial
      backing and makes investments in operating companies


Companies, products, or individuals named in this case study are fictitious and any similarities with
actual entities are purely coincidental.




