8823 – 5013M




                 Markscheme


                  November 2023


               Business management


                  Standard level


                     Paper 1




13 pages
                                            –2–                                         8823 – 5013M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                            –3–                                    8823 – 5013M


The markbands and assessment criteria on pages 3–4 should be used where
indicated in the markscheme.

  Section A                               Level descriptor

Q1     Q2     Q3
(b)    (b)    (b)

      Marks

        0           The work does not reach a standard described by the
                    descriptors below.

       1–2          • Little knowledge and understanding of relevant issues and
                        business management tools (where applicable),
                        techniques and theories.
                    •   Little use of business management terminology.
                    •   Little reference to the stimulus material.

       3–4          • A description or partial analysis of some relevant issues
                        with some use of business management tools (where
                        applicable), techniques and theories.
                    •   Some use of appropriate terminology.
                    •   Some reference to the stimulus material that goes beyond
                        the name of a person(s) and/or the name of the
                        organization.
                    •   At the lower end of the markband, responses are mainly
                        theoretical.

       5–6          • An analysis of the relevant issues with good use of
                        business management tools (where applicable),
                        techniques and theories.
                    •   Use of appropriate terminology throughout the response.
                    •   Effective use of the stimulus material.
                                      –4–                                 8823 – 5013M



Section B                         Level descriptor
 Q4 (d)

 Marks

   0        The work does not reach a standard described by the
            descriptors below.

  1–2       •   Little understanding of the demands of the question.
            •   Few business management tools (where applicable),
                techniques and theory are explained or applied and
                business management terminology is lacking.
            •   Little reference to the stimulus material.

  3–4       •   Some understanding of the demands of the question.
            •   Some relevant business management tools (where
                applicable), techniques and theories are explained or
                applied, and some appropriate terminology is used.
            •   Some reference to the stimulus material but often not
                going beyond the name of a person(s) and/or the name of
                the organization.

  5–6       • Understanding of most of the demands of the question.
            • Relevant business management tools (where applicable),
              techniques and theories are explained and applied, and
              appropriate terminology is used most of the time.
            • Some reference to the stimulus material that goes beyond
              the name of a person(s) and/or the name of the
              organization.
            • Some evidence of a balanced response.
            • Some judgments are relevant but not substantiated.

  7–8       • Good understanding of the demands of the question.
            • Relevant business management tools (where applicable),
              techniques and theories are explained and applied well,
              and appropriate terminology is used.
            • Good reference to the stimulus material.
            • Good evidence of a balanced response.
            • The judgments are relevant but not always well
              substantiated.

  9–10      • Good understanding of the demands of the question,
              including implications, where relevant.
            • Relevant business management tools (where applicable),
              techniques and theories are explained clearly and applied
              purposefully, and appropriate terminology is used
              throughout the response.
            • Effective use of the stimulus material in a way that
              significantly strengthens the response.
            • Evidence of balance is consistent throughout the
              response.
            • The judgments are relevant and well substantiated.
                                              –5–                                       8823 – 5013M


                                          Section A

1. (a) Outline two reasons why BRD may have chosen external growth rather than internal growth
   for its expansion (lines 27–28).                                                          [4]

     Reasons for not choosing internal growth are equally as valid as reasons for external growth.

     •   Convenient way to have influence over the supply chain. E.g. Enam Ltd. BRD wouldn’t
         have the knowledge, expertise or facilities to easily develop their own paint facilities;
     •   extend their own product range into similar products. E.g. Matchfix PLC. Saves BRD the
         costs of their own Research and Development, buys ready-made production facilities;
     •   other reasons could include costs, convenience, speed of growth, synergy but there is
         little context for any of these;
     •   expertise, knowledge of markets, trained/specialized employees at Enam Ltd. or Matchfix
         PLC. Both companies have “sales across the world”.

     Accept any other relevant reason.

     N.B. allow reasons that discuss competition. I.e. eliminating competition by taking over
     Matchfix PLC as a method of external growth. Matchfix PLC and BDR are in the same
     industry.

     Mark as 2+2.

     Award [1] for each appropriate reason identified and an additional [1] for a description of how
     each reason relates to BRD. Award a maximum of [2] for each reason. Award a maximum of
     [4] in total.

     N.B. do not accept answers that outline sources of finance as external growth. I.e: “the sale of
     shares”, “conversion to a public limited company”. This does not answer the question.
                                               –6–                                        8823 – 5013M


(b) Explain how Arnold’s relationship with BRD’s employees may have affected productivity at BRD
    (lines 58–72).                                                                             [6]

There is a great deal of context here to link Arnold with factors affecting morale and motivation. The
key is how these factors might relate to productivity.

Positive factors:

•   Personal relationship he has with his workers, remembering birthdays, knowing their family
    situations, giving a card and small gift on an employee’s birthday, etc.. While these may not have
    a direct effect on productivity they do seem to have led, through a sense of belonging and
    having a caring employer to a high level of loyalty, low turnover and low absenteeism which
    could all have a positive effect on productivity. Arnold has a positive leadership style, given his
    keenness to listen to his staff. This positive relationship may improve productivity.

Mixed/Negative factors:

•   Out of date contracts of employment, conditions of service. Could demotivate but there’s no
    evidence. In addition, this factor contrasts with the design team who have perks, health care etc.
    It could motivate the design teams but demotivate the factory workers. Would this increase
    motivation for the design team (probably not as self-actualisation might be appropriate to them)
    more likely to demotivate the factory workers (hygiene factors) and possible loss of productivity?
    but again, there is no evidence.
•   Team meetings, could be time-consuming, lost time could, possibly, be lost productivity.
•   Difference in treatment could improve productivity of design teams but reduce productivity of
    production teams. Possible conflicts between departments.
•   His style clearly works, employees have never taken industrial strike action, which is positive
    impact on productivity.
Accept any other relevant affect/impact/explanation.

N.B. candidates can solely look at positive or negative factors. Balance is not expected for “explain”.

Candidates can assume that Arnold’s leadership style is paternalistic, but the answer must be about
“How Arnold’s relationship with BRD’s employees may have affected productivity”.

Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.

Award a maximum of [3] for a theoretical answer or for limiting answer to only one factor.

Award a maximum of [3] if there is no explicit reference to productivity in the answer.

Award a maximum of [5] if the answer is mainly descriptive but in context.

Award a maximum of [6] for a developed answer in context.
                                              –7–                                       8823 – 5013M


2. (a) Outline two ways in which BRD could change its marketing mix when it switches to making
   model trains with plastic rather than metal in 2024 (lines 108–110).                       [4]

   •   Product: will have to reassure potential customers that the products still look realistic.
       May need to address issues related to durability and quality. Could outline the product
       being lighter and maybe more energy efficient in terms of electricity. Customers may have
       concerns that plastics are not recyclable whereas metals are;
   •   Price: product is now more like competitors´, so BRD is unlikely to be able to charge
       premium price as in the past;
   •   Promotion: BRD is now in a much more competitive market. It may have to increase
       promotion, rely less on loyalty, word of mouth;
   •   People: expertise, training or other considerations applied to the switch;
   •   Process: sustainable practices;
   •   Physical evidence? Not much context.

   Accept any other relevant way including the 7Ps - this is not expected as it is HL content.

   N.B. the two ways do not need to relate to two different Ps. Answers MUST have explicit
   reference to the P’s of the marketing mix.

   Mark as 2+2.

   Award [1] for an appropriate marketing mix P and [1] for a description of how that marketing mix
   P relates to BRD. Award a maximum of [4] in total.
                                             –8–                                       8823 – 5013M


(b) Explain the likely impact on BRD of changing from batch production to cellular manufacturing
(lines 41–56).                                                                                   [6]

  Changing a production method would have implications for all the business functions:
  • some employees may have to be redeployed, retrained or even let go;
  • requires careful planning (refining roles and responsibilities);
  • may lead to differing response times;
  • changes in costs of production could change price;
  • could have an impact on stock control (affects costs).

  Issues related to the two methods:

  Batch production:
  • having different types of trains lends itself to batch production;
  • however, coordination is difficult;
  • absenteeism suggests lack of motivation. Is batch production boring?;
  • affecting productivity, which is important. Despatches being postponed.

  Cellular manufacturing:
  • loses two weeks’ production, it won’t help productivity in the short term;
  • will meetings take up productive time, hence impact on productivity?;
  • first step to automation: it could be good for productivity but what about employees?;
  • separate cells will empower teams, it is easier to organize and maybe it will motivate
    employees;
  • possible resistance to change?
  • should lead to less wastage and lower rejection rates.

Accept any other reasonable impact/explanation.

Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.

Award a maximum of [3] for a theoretical answer or for limiting the answer either to batch production
or cellular production.

Award a maximum of [5] if the answer is mainly descriptive but in context.

Award a maximum of [6] for a developed answer in context.
                                                –9–                                         8823 – 5013M


3. (a) Outline two types of secondary market research that BRD could have used to identify the
   reasons for the decline in sales of model train sets and plastic model kits (lines 114–115). [4]

•   Market analysis: competitor information; but how many train makers are there? Would they
    cover the same markets?;
•   Market analysis: it’s a fairly specialized market so would market research reports be
    available?;
•   Market analysis: BRD’s own sales data would be helpful. Also, information about their
    customers (needs, wants, age, etc.);
•   Government publications: statistics but more likely to be at a macro level such as toys,
    population age, Census data etc.;
•   Government publications: may need to look at separate statistics from UK, Australia, Canada.

Other sources could include media articles, newspapers, academic journals but there is no context
for these.

Accept any other relevant types.

Mark as 2+2.

Award [1] for an appropriate type and [1] for outlining the type of secondary market research with
application to BRD. Award a maximum of [4] in total.


(b) Explain the likely impact on BRD of selling additional share capital to solve its liquidity problem
(lines 124–141).                                                                                        [6]

Additional shares to existing shareholders. They might be more interested in shares for
expansion rather than reducing a liquidity crisis. Hence poor take up by existing shareholders.

•   Dilution of ownership – finished up in hands of 4Change;
•   greater possibility of takeover. What is 4Change’s overall objective?;
•   because of lack of initial success may have finished up as a more expensive option than other
    sources of finance;
•   will it solve liquidity problem? Will the funds generated cover the issues with liquidity?;
•   shares sold at a discount (25%). So $15m rather than $12m raised but some loss of control.
    Might have been better with a loan.

Accept any other relevant impact/explanation.

Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.

Award a maximum of [3] for a theoretical answer or for limiting answer to only one impact.

Award a maximum of [5] if the answer is mainly descriptive but in context.

Award a maximum of [6] for a developed answer in context.
                                                  – 10 –                                    8823 – 5013M


                                               Section B


4.   (a)   Define the term market segment. [2]

           It is the division of consumers into distinct groups who share common characteristics, tastes
           and requirements.

           Beware of circular definitions which cannot be rewarded.

           N.B. no application required. Do not credit examples.

           Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

           Award [1] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and understanding.

           Award [2] for a full definition that conveys knowledge and understanding similar to the
           answer above.

     (b)   Explain one advantage and one disadvantage for BRD of using a cost-plus (mark-up) pricing
           strategy for its Matchfix plastic model kits. [4]

           Cost-plus (mark-up) pricing refers to adding a mark-up to the average cost of producing a
           product.

           Advantages could include:

           • Should ensure costs are covered (and makes profit) even with the cost of plastic
              increase of 20%, with a further increase in 2022 of 25%;
           • simple, easy and quick to administer;
           • prices are increasingly important to consumers. Cost plus may be cheaper than market
              prices in a cost/price rising market.

           Disadvantages:

           • Costs are increasing, likely to be behind the trend as the cost of plastic increased by
              20%, with a further increase in 2022 of 25%;
           • competitive market, market prices might be more appropriate as Matchfix kit sales fell
             in 2021 and further in 2022. Possibly due to raising prices as costs increased;
           • needs regular review, better to respond more quickly to the market.

           Accept any other relevant advantage/disadvantage.

           Mark as 2+2

           Award [1] for each advantage and additional [1] for an explanation of how it relates to BRD.

           Award [1] for each disadvantage and additional [1] for an explanation of how it relates to
           BRD.

           [2] can not be awarded per advantage/disadvantage if the response lacks either explanation
           and / or application.

           For example:
                                             – 11 –                                      8823 – 5013M


      For an identification or a description of an advantage/disadvantage with or without
      application [1].

      For explanation of an advantage/disadvantage with no application [1].

      For explanation of an advantage/disadvantage and application [2].

      Maximum award overall: [4].

(c)   Calculate:

      (i)   the number of paying café visitors needed for the café to make a profit of £200 000
            (show all your working); [2]

            Let x = number of paying café users

            Contribution per adult is £15 – £10 = £5. So, the total contribution is £5

            Profit = contribution – fixed costs

            So £200 000 = £5x - £25 000

            £225 000 = £5x

            X=£225 000/£5 = 45 000 paying café users

            There are alternative ways of calculating this

            £200 000 = (£15 – £10)x - £25 000

            £225 000 = £5x

            X = £225 000/£5 = 45 000 paying café users

            Award [2] for the correct answer that shows the working and includes the unit.

            Award [1] for an attempt to apply the formula.
                                              – 12 –                                   8823 – 5013M


      (ii)   the profit that BRD would make in year 3 from operating the café (show all your
             working). [2]

             BRD has forecasted 55,000 visitors for year 3,

             Simpson predicts that 80% of visitors will visit the café

             So, 55 000 x 0.8 go to the café = 44 000

             Contribution = 44 000 x £5 = £220 000

             Fixed costs of £25 000

             Profit = total contribution – total fixed costs = £220 000 – £25 000 = £195 000

             N.B. allow BOD for the use of the $ or € sign instead of £.

             Award [2] for the correct answer which shows the working and includes the unit (£).

             Award [1] for an attempt to apply the formula.

(d)   Recommend whether BRD should choose Option 1 (the science and imagination centre) or
      Option 2 (the railway museum). [10]

      Option 1

      Arguments for could include:
      • Setup £500k rather than £800k;
      • businesses often have visitor centres;
      • sort of attraction liked by parents;
      • higher visitor numbers in long term (see Table 2);
      • unusual if not unique experience?.

      Arguments against could include:
      • Higher running costs especially for trained employees. Higher annual total fixed costs
      (£360k);
      • recruiting a problem?;
      • no experience;
      • lower estimated growth of visitor numbers in the beginning. Is this data reliable?.

      Option 2

      Arguments for could include:
      • Higher visitor numbers at the beginning;
      • fewer employees, lower skills required;
      • production of trains is what BRD is about. So, maybe Synergy?.

      Arguments against could include:
      • Lower visitor numbers in long term;
      • high capital costs.

      Evaluation of the options may consider their view of what is important to BRD—profit, short-
      term vs long-term issues; aspects of risk. Candidates may make reference to business tools,
      such as Ansoff; FFA etc.
                                       – 13 –                                   8823 – 5013M


Accept any other relevant argument and evaluation.

N.B. Candidates can recommend either. Marks come from the strengths of the arguments.

Marks should be allocated according to the mark bands on page 4 with further guidance
below.

Theoretical answer or context limited to naming the business or lack of development max
[4].

Discussion of only one option marks limited to [5].

Discussion but no clear balance [6].

Options considered, good use of evidence, particularly from section B, but no effective
conclusion award a maximum of [8].

For [10] the answer needs to be a fully supported conclusion/evaluation, clearly relevant to
BRD with good use of context.
