8823 – 5011M




                 Markscheme


                  November 2023


               Business management


                   Higher level


                     Paper 1




17 pages
                                            –2–                                         8823 – 5011M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                              –3–                                    8823 – 5011M


The markbands and assessment criteria on pages 3–4 should be used where indicated
in the markscheme.

    Section A         Level descriptor

    Q1    Q2    Q3
    (b)   (b)   (b)

    Marks

    0                 The work does not reach a standard described by the
                      descriptors below.

    1–2               • Little knowledge and understanding of relevant issues and
                          business management tools (where applicable),
                          techniques and theories.
                      •   Little use of business management terminology.
                      •   Little reference to the stimulus material.

    3–4               • A description or partial analysis of some relevant issues
                          with some use of business management tools (where
                          applicable), techniques and theories.
                      •   Some use of appropriate terminology.
                      •   Some reference to the stimulus material that goes beyond
                          the name of a person(s) and/or the name of the
                          organization.
                      •   At the lower end of the markband, responses are mainly
                          theoretical.

    5–6               • An analysis of the relevant issues with good use of
                          business management tools (where applicable),
                          techniques and theories.
                      •   Use of appropriate terminology throughout the response.
                      •   Effective use of the stimulus material.
                                      –4–                                 8823 – 5011M



Section B   Level descriptor
Q4 (d)

Marks

0           The work does not reach a standard described by the
            descriptors below.

1–2         •   Little understanding of the demands of the question.
            •   Few business management tools (where applicable),
                techniques and theory are explained or applied and
                business management terminology is lacking.
            •   Little reference to the stimulus material.

3–4         •   Some understanding of the demands of the question.
            •   Some relevant business management tools (where
                applicable), techniques and theories are explained or
                applied, and some appropriate terminology is used.
            •   Some reference to the stimulus material but often not
                going beyond the name of a person(s) and/or the name of
                the organization.

5–6         • Understanding of most of the demands of the question.
            • Relevant business management tools (where applicable),
              techniques and theories are explained and applied, and
              appropriate terminology is used most of the time.
            • Some reference to the stimulus material that goes beyond
              the name of a person(s) and/or the name of the
              organization.
            • Some evidence of a balanced response.
            • Some judgments are relevant but not substantiated.

7–8         • Good understanding of the demands of the question.
            • Relevant business management tools (where applicable),
              techniques and theories are explained and applied well,
              and appropriate terminology is used.
            • Good reference to the stimulus material.
            • Good evidence of a balanced response.
            • The judgments are relevant but not always well
              substantiated.

9–10        • Good understanding of the demands of the question,
              including implications, where relevant.
            • Relevant business management tools (where applicable),
              techniques and theories are explained clearly and applied
              purposefully, and appropriate terminology is used
              throughout the response.
            • Effective use of the stimulus material in a way that
              significantly strengthens the response.
            • Evidence of balance is consistent throughout the
              response.
            • The judgments are relevant and well substantiated.
                                                  –5–                                       8823 – 5011M


Section C, question 5

Criterion A: Knowledge and understanding of tools, techniques and theories
This criterion addresses the extent to which the candidate demonstrates knowledge and understanding
of relevant business management tools, techniques and theories, as stated and/or implied by the
question. This includes using appropriate business management terminology.

 Marks    Level descriptor
   0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
   1      Superficial knowledge of relevant tools, techniques and theory is demonstrated.
   2      Satisfactory knowledge and understanding of relevant tools, techniques and
          theories is demonstrated.
    3     Good knowledge and understanding of relevant tools, techniques and theories is
          generally demonstrated, though the explanation may lack some depth or breadth.
    4     Good knowledge and understanding of relevant tools, techniques and theories is
          demonstrated.


Criterion B: Application
This criterion addresses the extent to which the candidate is able to apply the relevant business
management tools, techniques and theories to the case study organization.

 Marks    Level descriptor
   0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
   1      The relevant business management tools, techniques and theories are connected
          to the case study organization, but this connection is inappropriate or superficial.
    2     The relevant business management tools, techniques and theories are
          appropriately connected to the case study organization, but this connection is not
          developed.
    3     The relevant business management tools, techniques and theories are generally
          well applied to explain the situation and issues of the case study organization,
          though the explanation may lack some depth or breadth. Examples are provided.
    4     The relevant business management tools, techniques and theories are well
          applied to explain the situation and issues of the case study organization.
          Examples are appropriate and illustrative.


Criterion C: Reasoned arguments
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate makes reasoned arguments. This includes
making relevant and balanced arguments by, for example, exploring different practices, weighing up their
strengths and weaknesses, comparing and contrasting them or considering their implications, depending
on the requirements of the question. It also includes justifying the arguments by presenting evidence for
the claims made.

 Marks    Level descriptor
   0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
   1      Statements are made but these are superficial.
   2      Relevant arguments are made but these are mostly unjustified.
   3      Relevant arguments are made and these are mostly justified.
   4      Relevant, balanced arguments are made and these are well justified.
                                                   –6–                                       8823 – 5011M


Criterion D: Structure
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate organizes his or her ideas with clarity, and
presents a structured piece of writing comprised of:

   • an introduction
   • a body
   • a conclusion
   • fit-for-purpose paragraphs.
   •
 Marks       Level descriptor
    0        The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
    1        Two or fewer of the structural elements are present, and few ideas are clearly
             organized.
    2        Three of the structural elements are present, or most ideas are clearly organized.
    3        Three or four of the structural elements are present, and most ideas are clearly
             organized.
    4        All of the structural elements are present, and ideas are clearly organized.


Criterion E: Individual and societies
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate is able to give balanced consideration to the
perspectives of a range of relevant stakeholders, including individuals and groups internal and external
to the organization.

 Marks     Level descriptor
   0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
   1       One individual or group perspective is considered superficially or inappropriately.
   2       One relevant individual or group perspective is considered appropriately, or two
           relevant individual or group perspectives are considered superficially or
           inappropriately.
    3      At least two relevant individual or group perspectives are considered
           appropriately.
    4      Balanced consideration is given to relevant individual and group perspectives.
                                              –7–                                       8823 – 5011M


                                          Section A

1. (a) Outline two reasons why BRD may have chosen external growth rather than internal growth
   for its expansion (lines 27–28).                                                          [4]

     Reasons for not choosing internal growth are equally as valid as reasons for external growth.

     •   Convenient way to have influence over the supply chain. E.g. Enam Ltd. BRD wouldn’t
         have the knowledge, expertise or facilities to easily develop their own paint facilities;
     •   extend their own product range into similar products. E.g. Matchfix PLC. Saves BRD the
         costs of their own Research and Development, buys ready-made production facilities;
     •   other reasons could include costs, convenience, speed of growth, synergy but there is
         little context for any of these;
     •   expertise, knowledge of markets, trained/specialized employees at Enam Ltd. or Matchfix
         PLC. Both companies have “sales across the world”.

     Accept any other relevant reason.

     N.B. allow reasons that discuss competition. I.e. eliminating competition by taking over
     Matchfix PLC as a method of external growth. Matchfix PLC and BDR are in the same
     industry.

     Mark as 2+2.

     Award [1] for each appropriate reason identified and an additional [1] for a description of how
     each reason relates to BRD. Award a maximum of [2] for each reason. Award a maximum of
     [4] in total.

     N.B. do not accept answers that outline sources of finance as external growth. I.e: “the sale of
     shares”, “conversion to a public limited company”. This does not answer the question.
                                              –8–                                         8823 – 5011M


(b) Explain how Arnold’s relationship with BRD’s employees may have affected productivity at BRD
    (lines 58–72).                                                                             [6]

There is a great deal of context here to link Arnold with factors affecting morale and motivation. The
key is how these factors might relate to productivity.

Positive factors:

•   Personal relationship he has with his workers, remembering birthdays, knowing their family
    situations, giving a card and small gift on an employee’s birthday, etc.. While these may not have
    a direct effect on productivity they do seem to have led, through a sense of belonging and
    having a caring employer to a high level of loyalty, low turnover and low absenteeism which
    could all have a positive effect on productivity. Arnold has a positive leadership style, given his
    keenness to listen to his staff. This positive relationship may improve productivity.

Mixed/Negative factors:

•   Out of date contracts of employment, conditions of service. Could demotivate but there’s no
    evidence. In addition, this factor contrasts with the design team who have perks, health care etc.
    It could motivate the design teams but demotivate the factory workers. Would this increase
    motivation for the design team (probably not as self-actualisation might be appropriate to them)
    more likely to demotivate the factory workers (hygiene factors) and possible loss of productivity?
    but again, there is no evidence.
•   Team meetings, could be time-consuming, lost time could, possibly, be lost productivity.
•   Difference in treatment could improve productivity of design teams but reduce productivity of
    production teams. Possible conflicts between departments.
•   His style clearly works, employees have never taken industrial strike action, which is positive
    impact on productivity.
Accept any other relevant affect/impact/explanation.

N.B. candidates can solely look at positive or negative factors. Balance is not expected for “explain”.

Candidates can assume that Arnold’s leadership style is paternalistic, but the answer must be about
“How Arnold’s relationship with BRD’s employees may have affected productivity”.

Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.

Award a maximum of [3] for a theoretical answer or for limiting answer to only one factor.

Award a maximum of [3] if there is no explicit reference to productivity in the answer.

Award a maximum of [5] if the answer is mainly descriptive but in context.

Award a maximum of [6] for a developed answer in context.
                                             –9–                                      8823 – 5011M


2. (a) Outline two ways in which BRD could change its marketing mix when it switches to making
   model trains with plastic rather than metal in 2024 (lines 108–110).                       [4]

   •   Product: will have to reassure potential customers that the products still look realistic.
       May need to address issues related to durability and quality. Could outline the product
       being lighter and maybe more energy efficient in terms of electricity. Customers may have
       concerns that plastics are not recyclable whereas metals are;
   •   Price: product is now more like competitors´, so BRD is unlikely to be able to charge
       premium price as in the past;
   •   Promotion: BRD is now in a much more competitive market. It may have to increase
       promotion, rely less on loyalty, word of mouth;
   •   People: expertise, training or other considerations applied to the switch;
   •   Process: sustainable practices;
   •   Physical evidence? Not much context.

   Accept any other relevant way including the 7Ps.

   N.B. the two ways do not need to relate to two different Ps. Answers MUST have explicit
   reference to the P’s of the marketing mix.

   Mark as 2+2.

   Award [1] for an appropriate marketing mix P and [1] for a description of how that marketing mix
   P relates to BRD. Award a maximum of [4] in total.
                                             – 10 –                                    8823 – 5011M


(b) Explain the likely impact on BRD of changing from batch production to cellular manufacturing
(lines 41–56).                                                                                   [6]

  Changing a production method would have implications for all the business functions:
  • some employees may have to be redeployed, retrained or even let go;
  • requires careful planning (refining roles and responsibilities);
  • may lead to differing response times;
  • changes in costs of production could change price;
  • could have an impact on stock control (affects costs).

  Issues related to the two methods:

  Batch production:
  • having different types of trains lends itself to batch production;
  • however, coordination is difficult;
  • absenteeism suggests lack of motivation. Is batch production boring?;
  • affecting productivity, which is important. Despatches being postponed.

  Cellular manufacturing:
  • loses two weeks’ production, it won’t help productivity in the short term;
  • will meetings take up productive time, hence impact on productivity?;
  • first step to automation: it could be good for productivity but what about employees?;
  • separate cells will empower teams, it is easier to organize and maybe it will motivate
    employees;
  • possible resistance to change?
  • should lead to less wastage and lower rejection rates.

Accept any other reasonable impact/explanation.

Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.

Award a maximum of [3] for a theoretical answer or for limiting the answer either to batch production
or cellular production.

Award a maximum of [5] if the answer is mainly descriptive but in context.

Award a maximum of [6] for a developed answer in context.
                                                – 11 –                                      8823 – 5011M


3. (a) Outline two types of secondary market research that BRD could have used to identify the
   reasons for the decline in sales of model train sets and plastic model kits (lines 114–115). [4]

•   Market analysis: competitor information; but how many train makers are there? Would they
    cover the same markets?;
•   Market analysis: it’s a fairly specialized market so would market research reports be
    available?;
•   Market analysis: BRD’s own sales data would be helpful. Also, information about their
    customers (needs, wants, age, etc.);
•   Government publications: statistics but more likely to be at a macro level such as toys,
    population age, Census data etc.;
•   Government publications: may need to look at separate statistics from UK, Australia, Canada.

Other sources could include media articles, newspapers, academic journals but there is no context
for these.

Accept any other relevant types.

Mark as 2+2.

Award [1] for an appropriate type and [1] for outlining the type of secondary market research with
application to BRD. Award a maximum of [4] in total.


(b) Explain the likely impact on BRD of selling additional share capital to solve its liquidity problem
(lines 124–141).                                                                                        [6]

Additional shares to existing shareholders. They might be more interested in shares for
expansion rather than reducing a liquidity crisis. Hence poor take up by existing shareholders.

•   Dilution of ownership – finished up in hands of 4Change;
•   greater possibility of takeover. What is 4Change’s overall objective?;
•   because of lack of initial success may have finished up as a more expensive option than other
    sources of finance;
•   will it solve liquidity problem? Will the funds generated cover the issues with liquidity?;
•   shares sold at a discount (25%). So $15m rather than $12m raised but some loss of control.
    Might have been better with a loan.

Accept any other relevant impact/explanation.

Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.

Award a maximum of [3] for a theoretical answer or for limiting answer to only one impact.

Award a maximum of [5] if the answer is mainly descriptive but in context.

Award a maximum of [6] for a developed answer in context.
                                                  – 12 –                                    8823 – 5011M



                                               Section B

4. (a) Define the term cost-plus (mark-up) pricing.                                                   [2]

   Adding a fixed mark-up for profit to the unit cost of making a product.

   Alternative definition: adding a fixed percentage or a fixed amount to the cost of production.

   Alternative definition: Cost-plus (mark-up) pricing refers to adding a mark-up to the average unit
   cost of producing a product.

   [1] cannot be awarded for saying cost-plus pricing is a “mark-up” only.

   The definition has to be developed as above. Candidates need to refer to unit/production/full cost for
   [2].

   Beware of circular definitions which cannot be rewarded.

   N.B. no application required. Do not credit examples.
   Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.
   Award [1] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and understanding.
   Award [2] for a full definition that conveys knowledge and understanding similar to the answer above.


(b) Explain one advantage and one disadvantage for BRD of using just-in-case (JIC) stock control for
    the manufacture of its model train sets.                                                       [4]

   Advantages:

   •   Should help planning for peak sales in December;
   •   can plan for steady production throughout the year as no need for overtime or hiring additional
       staff during peak demand periods e.g. Usually in December, train set sales equal three month’s
       production.

   Disadvantages:

   •   System is not working, some stock left unsold e.g. BRD has 300 limited-edition train sets,
       made in 1999 to mark the Millennium, in stock. Increases stock holding costs;
   •   capital is tied up in stocks;
   •   financial implications, for example the cash-flow problems BRD have experienced in the past;
   •   unsold stock may decline in value as no longer seen as relevant BRD has 300 limited-edition
       train sets, made in 1999 to mark the Millennium, in stock.

   Accept any other relevant advantage/disadvantage.

   N.B. award [0] if candidates explain the advantages and disadvantages of just-in-time (JIT) stock
   control.

   Mark as 2+2.
   Award [1] for each advantage and additional [1] for an explanation of how it relates to BRD.
   Award [1] for each disadvantage and additional [1] for an explanation of how it relates to BRD.
   [2] can not be awarded per advantage/disadvantage if the response lacks either
                                              – 13 –                                     8823 – 5011M


explanation and / or application.
For example:
For an identification or a description of an advantage/disadvantage with or without
application [1].
For explanation of an advantage/disadvantage with no application [1].
For explanation of an advantage/disadvantage and application [2]. Maximum award overall: [4].


(c) (i) Calculate the difference between the cost for BRD to make its own packaging and the cost to
buy the packaging from GXG (show all your working).                                               [3]

CTM = 100 000 X £0.55 + £5 000 = £60 000
CTB = 100 000 X £0.56 = £56 000
Difference = £60 000 - £56 000 = £ 4000

OR in terms of cost per unit
CTM = £60 000/100 000 = £0.60
CTB = £56 000/100 000 = £0.56
Difference = £ 0.04

Alternative method: volume-based pricing

CTM = 100 000 X £0.55 + £5 000 = £60 000
CTB = (75 000 x 0.70) + (15 000 x 0.66) + (10 000 x 0.56)
 = 52 500 + 9900 + 5600 = £68 000
Difference = 68 000 – 60 000 = £8000

OR in terms of cost per unit
CTM = £60 000/100 000 = £0.60
CTB = £68 000/100 000 = £0.68
Difference = £ 0.08

N.B. allow BOD for the use of the $ or € sign instead of £.

Award [3] for all correct calculations and the correct answer which must include the correct sign (£).

Award [2] for a reasonable attempt with two correct calculations with or without the sign, where the
difference is not calculated. Or the correct answer without the correct sign (£).

Award [1] for an attempt to use the data, for example one correct calculation with or without the
correct sign (£).

Do not reward formula only.
                                                  – 14 –                                  8823 – 5011M


     (ii) Suggest one factor, other than cost, that BRD should consider before deciding whether to make
its own packaging or buy packaging from GXG.                        [1]

   Factors could include:

    •   Germany a long way away – could be delays;
    •   quality – High quality packaging is a feature of BRD train sets;
    •   human resource considerations;
    •   production facilities creating the packaging;
    •   trust (infers quality);
    •   coordination;
    •   exchange rate;
    •   political and legal aspects to be considered.

   Accept any other relevant factor.

   Award [1] for an appropriate and relevant factor related to BRD. No development or context is
   needed as the question is only worth [1].

   (d) Using information from the case study and the additional information above, recommend whether
   BRD should choose Option 1 (install solar panels) or Option 2 (outsource production).         [10]

   Option 1:
   • Cost £2,572,763, total electricity savings 75% per year;
   • Business has finance issues – can it afford capital costs?;
   • Electricity costs fall by over £1.2m in first year of operation but only a small proportion of
      overall costs;
   • Electricity costs will increase 10% per annum so further saving;
   • Environmentally sound – could be used in marketing;
   • Assumes 10% increase each year – maybe pessimistic;
   • Electricity only accounts for 10 % of variable costs so impact on overall unit costs not that
      significant;
   • Payback period is quite short – 2 years and 2 months approx. (£1 113 750 + £1 225 125 + £233
      888)
   Option 2:
   • Chinese production. How about reliability issues? Distance? Delivery issues? Quality?;
   • no capital costs;
   • impact on labour relations, redundancy costs;
   • BRD train sets will now have to account for all factory fixed costs – raises BRD train total
      costs.
   N.B. Candidates may suggest that it doesn't have to be either Option 1 or Option 2.

   Accept any other relevant evaluation.

   Marks should be allocated according to the mark bands on page 4 with further guidance below.
   Theoretical answer or context limited to naming the business or lack of development max [4].
   Discussion of only one option marks limited to [5].
   Discussion of Option 1 and 2 with limited reference to the business or no clear balance max [6].
   Options considered, good use of evidence, particularly from section B, but no effective conclusion
   award a maximum of [8].
   For [10] the answer needs to be a fully supported conclusion/evaluation, clearly relevant to BRD with
   good use of context.
                                                   – 15 –                                      8823 – 5011M


                                                Section C

5. Using the case study and the additional information on pages 5 and 6, recommend whether BRD
should choose Option 1 (location and product change) or Option 2 (repurpose unused factory space).

   Strategy 1

   Arguments for:

   •   Highly valuable piece of land, £28 million release of that value would open up many
       opportunities;
   •   suitable factory nearby, reasonable rent, low set up cost;
   •   opportunity to develop a new modern product;
   •   market for unused stock (India);
   •   realizes brand value;
   •   keeps head office and design functions local;
   •   there should be benefits from outsourcing;

   Arguments against:

   •   Contrary to what BRD has always done. Big impact on BRD brand?;
   •   loss of jobs, redundancy costs, impact on Liverpool;
   •   ignores other stakeholders;
   •   is there demand for new product? What happens to support for existing products?;
   •   it’s a bit extreme. Could there be a more moderate, similar development?
   •   Indian retailer offered £3m to purchase BRD’s stocks of train sets valued at £10m (70% off);
   •   restraining forces are slightly higher than driving forces (FFA), but how reliable are the
       weights? Have all factors been considered? How about bias?

   Strategy 2

   Arguments for:

  • Could be synergy with existing operations;
  • with total setup costs of £900 000 and net incomes starting at £350 000 per year for entry there will
    be a short payback period;
  • seems a bigger relative advantage from FFA but this seems rather a weak analysis.
  • It might attract younger customers

   Arguments against:

  • How reliable is the financial data? The income from the shop/café seems very high;
  • although the existing business remains, this is a new venture. Lack of experience?
  • Might need highly trained staff

   Accept any other relevant discussion.

   N.B. if a candidate responds to this question without any reference to the additional stimulus material
   (the additional material that comes with question 5 in the examination paper), the maximum mark
   that the candidate can receive under criteria A, B, C, and E (all the criteria except structure) is [2] per
   criterion. Award a maximum of [12] overall.
                                                   – 16 –                                    8823 – 5011M


    Marks should be allocated according to the assessment criteria on pages 5–6 with further guidance
    below.

    Criterion A: possible theories, management tools and techniques include: Accounting
    techniques and ratios, interpreting data, Ansoff, force field, importance of assumptions, also,
    possibly, Fishbone, Boston Consulting Group matrix, marketing issues, HRM/management issues,
    SWOT/force field/decision trees (if used with a sense of purpose).

    For [4]: Tools, techniques and theory understood and developed well with some relevance to the
    additional stimulus material.

    For [2]: some understanding of at least two tools, techniques or theories, but not
    developed.

    Criterion B: Is about the use of tools, techniques, theories and stimulus applied to
    the decision. Application will be judged by the use of the stimulus material in particular
    the extra material.
    Remember, understanding has been rewarded in Criterion A. So B is about USE.

    For [4]: relevant tools, techniques and theories are applied well to the case study context and
    additional stimulus material, the application is convincing and relevant.
    For [4]: Financial data from page 5 (Tables 3 and / or 4) plus information from the force
    field analysis (Table 5) is used.

    No use of financial data from page 5 (Tables 3 and / or 4), or information from the force
    field analysis (Table 5), award a maximum of [3].

    If only one option considered, award a maximum of [3].
    For [2]: some limited context/application but not developed. Use of tools limits candidate’s
    ability to make reasoned arguments.

    Criterion C: Is about the process of making a decision and the strength of the
    recommendation. Options discussed in a balanced way, conclusions drawn as to whether
    they work. Remember, ‘do nothing’ can be a recommendation.

    For [4]: There needs to be a clear recommendation supported by the data.
    For [2]: Some limited arguments but not justified. Or limited analysis (e.g. one-sided argument) but
    candidate arrives/draws a reasoned conclusion.

    Criterion D: Structure: This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate organizes his or
    her ideas with clarity, and presents a structured piece of writing comprised of:
•   an introduction
•   a concluding paragraph. Please note this can be different from the concept of a
    conclusion/recommendation in Criterion C. D can be rewarded without a recommendation.
•   fit-for-purpose paragraphs. This means: not too long, each focused on distinct issues,
•   logical structure. This means whether there is a clear flow to guide the reader through the discussion,
    how the paragraphs are sequenced.

    For [4]: all four elements present, clearly organized.
    For [2]: no logical structure but other elements present or logical structure with other elements
    missing.

   Criterion E: Is about the extent to which stakeholders (both groups and individuals) are
   considered.
• individuals: Arnold Brondy, an Indian retailer,
• groups: The various stakeholders especially board members –Board of directors (4change
                                              – 17 –                                     8823 – 5011M


and others), employees, customers/visitors.

N.B. to award a mark there must be reference to the stakeholder(s)’ perspective(s). Naming the
stakeholder(s) is not enough.

For [4] individual(s) and group(s) perspectives are considered in a balanced way. i.e.
needs 1 or more of both individuals’ and groups’ perspectives developed.

For [2]: one individual or one group perspective considered appropriately, or several individuals’
and/or groups’ perspectives considered superficially.
