8823 – 5012M




                 Markscheme


                  November 2023


               Business management


                   Higher level


                     Paper 2




22 pages
                                            –2–                                         8823 – 5012M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                   –3–                                            8823 – 5012M

The markbands and assessment criteria on page 3 should be used where indicated in the
markscheme.

         Marks      Level descriptor

            0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

          1–2       Little understanding of the demands of the question.
                    Few business management tools (where applicable), techniques and theories are
                    explained or applied, and business management terminology is lacking.
                    Little reference to the stimulus material.

          3–4       Some understanding of the demands of the question.
                    Some relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques and
                    theories are explained or applied, and some appropriate terminology is used.
                    Some reference to the stimulus material but often not going beyond the name of
                    a person(s) and/or the name of the organization.

          5–6       Understanding of most of the demands of the question.
                    Relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques and
                    theories are explained and applied, and appropriate terminology is used most of
                    the time.
                    Some reference to the stimulus material that goes beyond the name of a
                    person(s) and/or the name of the organization.
                    Some evidence of a balanced response.
                    Some judgments are relevant but not substantiated.

          7–8       Good understanding of the demands of the question.
                    Relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques and
                    theories are explained and applied well, and appropriate terminology is used.
                    Good reference to the stimulus material.
                    Good evidence of a balanced response.
                    The judgments are relevant but not always well substantiated.

          9–10      Good understanding of the demands of the question, including implications,
                    where relevant.
                    Relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques and
                    theories are explained clearly and applied purposefully, and appropriate
                    terminology is used throughout the response.
                    Effective use of the stimulus material in a way that significantly strengthens the
                    response.
                    Evidence of balance is consistent throughout the response.
                    The judgments are relevant and well substantiated.
                                                   –4–                                       8823 – 5012M

Assessment criteria for Section C

Criterion A: Knowledge and conceptual understanding
This criterion addresses the extent to which the candidate demonstrates knowledge and
understanding of the given concepts and relevant business management content (theories,
techniques or tools, depending on the requirements of the question).

 Marks    Level descriptor
   0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
   1      Superficial knowledge of the given concepts is demonstrated. Business
          management content is not selected or the content selected is irrelevant.
    2     Satisfactory understanding of one or both of the given concepts is demonstrated.
          Some business management content selected is relevant. The relevant content is
          satisfactorily explained.
    3     Good understanding of one or both of the given concepts is demonstrated.
          The business management content selected is relevant, though it may not be
          sufficient. The relevant content is generally well explained, though the explanation
          may lack some depth or breadth.
    4     Good understanding of both of the given concepts is demonstrated. The business
          management content selected is relevant, sufficient and well explained.


Criterion B: Application
This criterion addresses the extent to which the candidate is able to apply the given concepts
and the relevant business management content (theories, techniques or tools, depending on
the requirements of the question) to his or her chosen real-world organization(s). The real-
world organization(s) must not be the organization featured in the prescribed case
study for paper 1.

 Marks     Level descriptor
   0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
   1       The given concepts and/or any relevant business management content are
           connected to the real-world organization(s), but this connection is inappropriate or
           superficial.
    2      The given concepts and/or relevant business management content are connected
           appropriately to the real-world organization(s), but this connection is not developed.
    3      The given concepts and relevant business management content are generally well
           applied to explain the situation and issues of the real-world organization(s), though
           the explanation may lack some depth or breadth. Examples are provided.
    4      The given concepts and relevant business management content are well applied to
           explain the situation and issues of the real-world organization(s). Examples are
           appropriate and illustrative.
                                                    –5–                                        8823 – 5012M

Criterion C: Reasoned arguments
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate makes reasoned arguments. This
includes making relevant and balanced arguments by, for example, exploring different
practices, weighing up their strengths and weaknesses, comparing and contrasting them or
considering their implications, depending on the requirements of the question. It also
includes justifying the arguments by presenting reasonable evidence or other support for the
claims made.

    Marks   Level descriptor
      0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
      1     Statements are made but these are superficial.
      2     Relevant arguments are made but these are mostly unjustified.
      3     Relevant arguments are made and these are mostly justified.
      4     Relevant, balanced arguments are made and these are well justified.


Criterion D: Structure
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate organizes his or her ideas with
clarity, and presents a structured piece of writing comprised of:

•    an introduction
•    a body
•    a conclusion
•    fit-for-purpose paragraphs.

    Marks   Level descriptor
      0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
      1     Two or fewer of the structural elements are present, and few ideas are clearly
            organized.
      2     Three of the structural elements are present, or most ideas are clearly organized.
      3     Three or four of the structural elements are present, and most ideas are clearly
            organized.
      4     All of the structural elements are present, and ideas are clearly organized.


Criterion E: Individuals and societies
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate is able to give balanced
consideration to the perspectives of a range of relevant stakeholders, including individuals
and groups internal and external to the organization.

    Marks   Level descriptor
      0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
      1     One individual or group perspective is considered superficially or inappropriately.
      2     One relevant individual or group perspective is considered appropriately, or two
            relevant individual or group perspectives are considered superficially or
            inappropriately.
      3     At least two relevant individual or group perspectives are considered appropriately.
      4     Balanced consideration is given to relevant individual and group perspectives.
                                                    –6–                                       8823 – 5012M

                                                Section A

1.      (a) Define the term economies of scale.                                                       [2]

     Economies of scale are defined as a cost saving which a business experiences when the long-run
     unit costs or average unit costs of production fall as businesses increase operation. N.B. No
     application required. Do not credit an example.

     Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

     Award [1] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and understanding.

     Award [2] for a full, clear definition that conveys understanding similar to the answer above.

     For [2], candidates must reference average cost or cost per unit is decreasing and that
     production or output is increasing and/or output is very large.

     (b) Using Table 1, construct a fully labelled decision tree and identify the best option for BCS (show
     all your working).    [6]




     Calculations:

     Option 1: New Store = (£500,000*0.45) + (£200,000*0.25) + ((£100,000)*0.3)
     = £245,000 - £200,000 = + £45,000


     Option 2: Buy Stores = (£1,300,000*0.45) + (£800,000*0.25) + ((£150,000)*0.3)
     = £740,000 - £700,000 = + £40,000
                                               –7–                                          8823 – 5012M

Option 3: More Research = (£120,000*0.45) + (£80,000*0.25) + ((£50,000)*0.3) = + £59,000

The best option based on the decision tree is for BCS, Option 3, to continue research for a
year.

Mark as 2+3+1

Award up to [2] for an accurately constructed decision tree. Award a maximum of [1] for missing /
inaccurate / mislabelled / unidentified nodes.

Award up to [3] for three correct EV (option) calculations plus stated best option. Award [1] if
incorrect calculations result in OFR best option. Award a maximum of [2] if the best option is not
identified in the written response.

Award [1] for correct working, rejected option and key.

Award a maximum of [6] for a decision tree that is accurately constructed. The calculations of each
option are correct and well presented. A key is provided. As well as the rejected options and full
workings. Full marks can be awarded even if the headings of expected return/forecast revenue and
probabilities are not explicitly written.

Award a maximum of [5] if £ sign missing. Accept if present in either the tree, workings or final
answer. Allow BOD if $ or € sign used in error.

Do not penalize the omission of $000s.

Apply candidate own figure rule (OFR) throughout this response.

(c) Explain one possible disadvantage for BCS of taking out a long-term bank loan to fund either
Option 1 or Option 2.
     [2]

   • He will need to pay interest on the loan. They obviously have other loans still to pay due to
     the relatively high gearing ratio. If interest rates increase this could mean BCS struggles to
     make repayments. There is a danger of the business closing if the repayments cannot be
     made;
   • as a small business, with high gearing, BCS might incur a high interest rate;
   • if the economy worsens (30% chance) and revenue falls the business will still have to
     make repayments.

Accept any other relevant disadvantage and explanation.

Award [1] for a relevant and correct disadvantage identified and award an additional [1] for a relevant
and correct explanation with application to BCS. Award a maximum of [2].

[2] can not be awarded if the response lacks either explanation and / or application.
For example:
For an identification or a description of a disadvantage with or without application [1].
For explanation of a disadvantage with no application [1].
For explanation of a disadvantage and application [2].
                                                    –8–                                       8823 – 5012M

2.      (a) State two advantages of leasing.          [2]

        Advantages include:
        • the person / organization that leases machinery / vehicles does not have to bear the full
            costs of the asset;
        •   the person / organization does not need to have a high initial capital outlay to purchase the
            asset;
        •   organizations that lease assets are likely to provide professional technical support and
            maintenance. The lessor takes on the responsibility of repair and maintenance, insurance
            of the asset;
        •   lessors can change the assets more frequently which can be useful to lessees if technology
            is improving frequently;
        •   it is useful when particular assets are required only for short periods of time or
            occasionally;
        •   certain types of leases can have tax advantages to the lessee;
        •   removes concerns about loss of value (depreciation) and disposal of an asset.

        Accept any other relevant advantage.

        N.B. no description is required.

        Award [1] for each relevant advantage stated. Award a maximum of [2].

     (b) Using the straight-line method of depreciation, calculate the book value of the new electric van on
     31 December 2025 (show all your working).               [2]

     All figures are in $
     Costs of the van – scrap/residual value     = $50 000 – $3900 = $46 100 = $9220 per year
             Useful life                                 5            5

     By the end of 2025 (31st December 2025), the electric van will have a book value of:
     $50 000 – ($9220 x 2 years) = $50 000 – $18 440 = $31 560

     N.B. Candidates do not have to present the formula in words provided that the figures used are
     correct.

     Award [2] Candidate provides the correct answer with workings.
     The book value at the end of 2025 is correct.

     Award a maximum of [1] if a candidate who has shown workings provides a correct procedure (thus,
     demonstrates an understanding of the underlying concepts) but has made an error in calculation.
     Award a maximum of [1] for a correct final figure of the book value but no working.
     Award a maximum of [1] if the candidate calculated the book value for the end of 2024.
     Award a maximum of [1] if $ sign missing. Accept if present in either the working or final answer. Do
     not double penalize for the same omission in another question part.

     N.B. do not reward simply the calculation of 1 year's depreciation.
                                                 –9–                                      8823 – 5012M

(c) Using the reducing/declining balance method of depreciation, calculate for the new
     electric van:

       (i)    the depreciation allowance for 2024 and its book value on 31 December 2024
              (show all your working);                                            [2]

              Original costs - accumulated depreciation

                     Year                    Depreciation                Net book value
                                             allowance

                     At the beginning of     0                           0
                     2024
                     At the end of 2024      $50 000 x 40= $20 000       $50 000 – $20 000
                                                100                      = $30 000

              Award [1] for a correct working method and a figure of the depreciation
              allowance, and [1] for the correct working and figure of the book value.
              Candidates can be awarded the marks even if the terms book value or
              depreciation allowance are not explicitly written as long as the calculations are clear.

              If correct figures are presented for both depreciation AND book value but without
              working award a maximum of [1].
              Award a maximum of [1] if $ sign missing. Accept if present in either the working or
              final answer. Do not double penalize for the same omission in another question part.

       (ii)   the depreciation allowance for 2025 and its book value on 31 December 2025
              (show all your working).                                            [2]

              Original costs - accumulated depreciation

              Year                   Depreciation       Net book value
                                     allowance

              At the beginning of    0                  0
              2024
              At the end of 2025     $30 000 x 40       $30 000 – $12 000
                                        100             = $18 000
                                     = $12 000

              Award [1] for a correct working method and a figure of the depreciation allowance
              and [1] for the correct working and figure of the book value. Candidates can be
              awarded the marks even if the terms book value or depreciation allowance are
              not explicitly written as long as the calculations are clear.

              If correct figures are presented for both depreciation AND book value but without
              working award a maximum of [1].

              If the book value is correct but there is no working/evidence of the calculation of the
              depreciation allowance award [1].

              Award a maximum of [1] if $ sign missing. Accept if present in either the working or
              final answer. Do not double penalize for the same omission in another question part.

              Allow OFR. However, if no workings are shown in either (i) or (ii) then OFR cannot be
              applied.
                                                  – 10 –                                   8823 – 5012M

(d) Explain the impact on DJD’s profit, for the year ending 31 December 2024, if the reducing/declining
balance method of depreciation is used instead of the straight-line method of depreciation.         [2]

   It is expected that the candidates show a clear understanding that the depreciation allowance is
   treated as an expense to arrive at Net Profit Before Interest and Tax.

   As figures are given / calculated for the depreciation allowance under both methods, candidates are
   expected to use these figures. As can be seen from the calculations in (b) and (c) for 2024, the
   depreciation allowance, using the reducing/declining balance methods resulted in higher
   amount – $20 000 compared with $9220. Therefore, DJD’s profit will be lower by $10,780 if Dan
   uses the reducing /declining method.

   N.B. allow reference to paying less tax under the reducing/declining method so long as there is
   reference to either Net or Retained Profit.

   Accept any other relevant impact and explanation.

   Award [1] for a relevant generic impact identified or described and award an additional [1] for any
   additional explanation in context e.g. the use of the exact figures.

   [2] cannot be awarded for the impact used if the response lacks either explanation
   and/or application.

   For example:

   For an identification or a description of one impact with or without application [1].

   For explanation of one impact with no application [1].

   For explanation of the impact and application [2], apply candidate own figure rule (OFR).
                                                  – 11 –                                   8823 – 5012M

                                               Section B

   3. (a) Define the term variable costs.                                                          [2]

   Variable costs are recurring costs that change with output or activity. When sales or production
   increases, variable costs increase as well.

   N.B. No application required. Do not credit examples.
   Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.
   If a candidate says "variable costs are costs that vary,” award [0]

   Award [1] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and understanding.
   Award [2] for a definition that conveys full understanding. To receive [2], the candidate must specify
   that variable costs change with output or activity.

(b) Using Table 3, construct a product position map/perception map of the three existing pet salons. [4]




   N.B. if a candidate uses the word “quality,” rather than “reputation,” accept.

   Award [1] for some understanding of a product position/perception map.

   Award [2] for a correctly drawn product position/perception map with axes properly labelled.

   Award [3] for a correctly drawn product position/perception map with axes properly labelled and has
   placed two of the three businesses in the correct place on the map.

   Award [4] for a correctly drawn product position/perception map with axes properly labelled and has
   placed the three businesses in the correct place on the map.

   N.B. The axes can be reversed (the Y axis could be price and the X axis could be reputation).

   Accept salon A if placed on or near to the reputation axis as this represents midway between high
   and low on the price axis.

   Accept abbreviations for labels so long as clear.
                                            – 12 –                                   8823 – 5012M

(c) Explain two problems that Anna may encounter when starting a new business.                     [4]

 Common problems that new business encounters include:
 • Difficulty recruiting suitable employees as hers is new with no track record;
 • lack of finance - again new with no track record;
 • lack of identity or reputation in the marketplace - Anna has limited resources for promotion;
 • limited initial customer base (the market is very competitive);
 • owners have many demands on their time - Anna is possibly a sole trader;
 • lack of experience of those opening the business Anna has no managerial experience;
 • poor market research - Annas lack of financial resources may suggest this is true.

 Accept any other relevant problem that a new business may encounter.

 N.B. if Anna opens as an independent business, she will have to establish an identity in the
 marketplace (which would be less of an issue if she opens as a PB franchise).

 Award marks as follows:

 Mark as 2+2.

 Award [1] for identification of a common problem that a business may encounter and an additional
 [1] for an explanation and application to the stimulus. Award a maximum of [2].
 [2] can not be awarded per problem if the response lacks either explanation and / or application.
 For example:
 For an identification or a description of a problem with or without application [1].
 For explanation of a problem with no application [1].
 For explanation of a problem and application [2].
 Maximum award overall: [4].

(d) Recommend whether Anna should open her pet salon as an independent business (Option 1) or
as a PB franchise (Option 2).                                      [10]

 Both options have advantages and disadvantages.

 Option 1: advantages
  • Anna is fully her own boss, which appeals to her;
  • Anna has full decision control over what she does;
  • she retains all revenue;
  • forecasts are favourable. Anna does not “need” to be a franchise.

   Option 1: disadvantages
   • Many new businesses face a range of problems. She will have no support from a
     franchiser. She will be all on her own;
   • she is entering a competitive market;
   • Anna has no managerial experience.

   Option 2: advantages
   • Anna will be able to get equipment and supplies cheaper, presumably because the
     franchiser enjoys purchasing economies of scale;
   • as a national chain, the PB brand is well known;
   • PB will pay for national and regional promotion;
   • franchisor offers support and guidance.

   Option 2: disadvantages
   • Anna wants to be her own boss. Operating a PB franchise, she will lose some control
     over her business;
   • she has to pay a one-time fee to buy a franchise fee and, ongoing, 5% of her revenue;
                                          – 13 –                                  8823 – 5012M

• the extant pet salon franchise in the market has a better reputation than PB, even though
  its prices are comparable;
• Anna will need to pay for local promotion – although not as much as Option 1.

    Accept any substantiated evaluation/judgment/recommendation.

    It is expected that candidates provide a conclusion with a substantiated
    judgment.


    Maximum          Should Anna OPT FOR 1 OR 2          Judgments/conclusion
    Mark award
                      Minimal attempt. Does not really understand the demands of the
    1-2
                      question. No application, theoretical answer
    3                One argument for or one argument n/a
                     against one option. Limited use of
                     stimulus
    4                One argument for and                 n/a
                     one argument against for one
                     option
                     Or, two or more arguments for one
                     side of
                     argument and none for the other
                     Some use of stimulus
    5                A balanced argument for one          n/a
                     option (at least one argument for
                     and one against) and an
                     unbalanced argument for the other
                     option (at least one argument for or
                     against) Some use of stimulus
    6                Balanced arguments (at least one No
                     argument for and one against) for judgments/conclusions
                     both options. Good use of stimulus
    7–8              Balanced arguments (at least one
                     argument for and one against) for Judgments/conclusions
                     both options plus a conclusion that based upon analysis and
                     is more than nominal –               explanation in the body
                     actually flows out of the analysis. of the response
                     Largely effective use of business
                     language and the stimulus
    9–10             Balanced arguments (at least one
                     argument for and one against) for Two arguments for, two
                     both options plus a conclusion that arguments against plus
                     is more than nominal –               a conclusion that is
                     actually flows out of the analysis. more than nominal –
                     Rich use of business language,       actually flows out of the
                     business theory and the stimulus analysis.

    Use the above table and mark according to the markbands found on page 3.
                                             – 14 –                                    8823 – 5012M

4. (a) Define the term objective.                                                               [2]

   Objectives are the long, medium and short term targets/goals that can give a sense of
   direction to managers, departments, or the whole organization. Objectives form the basis for the
   decisions made on strategy.

   N.B. No application required. Do not credit examples.
   Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.

   Award [1] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and understanding similar to the
   above answer.
   Award [2] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and understanding similar to the
   answer above.- For the 2nd mark, some mention that objectives are time-specific/measurable, or
   inform decision making, or form the basis for mission or vision statements – do not reward if a
   candidate specifies only a single time period e.g short-term.

   (b) With reference to VS, explain two elements of organizational culture.                          [4]

   Organizational culture are the shared values, attitudes and beliefs of the people working in
   an organization that control the way they interact with each other and external stakeholder
   groups.

   Aspects of the culture can be gained through the following:
   • Mission and vision statements: these help to position the business in terms of the overall
      aims. For VS, the vegan philosophy is key, hence as the majority of staff are vegan this
      impacts organizational culture in a major way
   • the record of senior staff: Michael is central to the way VS operates. It was his vision to
      establish VS and to promote veganism through it;
   • VS’s ethical code of conduct: nothing in the text but the implied notion of vegan lifestyles
      would suggest a positive ethical stance;
   • strategies on social and environmental issues: this will set the tone for how the business
      is perceived and judged in terms of their impact on social and environmental issues;
   • the example set by senior managers: this includes how they treat the staff; how they take
      decisions, etc.;
   • the industry that the business operates in: VS is a vegan food supplier, and this
      influences the culture that operates within VS.
   • the use of quality control method by VS might suggest a more traditional organizational
      structure i.e top down hierarchy, although there is no evidence to support this.
  Accept any other relevant element/explanation.

  Mark as 2+2

  Award [1] for each element identified and an additional [1] for development with application to VS.
  Award a maximum of [2] per element.
  [2] can not be awarded per element if the response lacks either explanation and/or application.
  For example:
  For an identification or a description of an element with or without application [1].
  For explanation of an element with no application [1].
  For explanation of an element and application [2].
  Maximum award overall: [4].
                                            – 15 –                                   8823 – 5012M

(c) Explain one advantage and one disadvantage for VS of using below-the-line promotion. [4]

  Below-the-line promotion is promotion that is not a directly paid-for means of communication
  but based on short term incentives to purchase e.g. sales promotion techniques.

  Advantages could include:
  • VS can work directly with their customers and suppliers to ensure that products are
     required and are sold in the best way;
  • communication is direct and highly targeted most probably by word of mouth as evidenced
     by use of trade exhibitions;
  • they can build customer loyalty more easily---VS has built a strong customer base with
     targeted communication;
  • it is easier to monitor spending and to evaluate the effectiveness of the promotion;
  • vegan supplies are likely a small market where Michael knows all the relevant players and can
     better deal directly.


   Disadvantages could include:
   • it may be more difficult to reach new customers—highly targeted promotion may not
       enhance their overall desire to increase sales;
   • Michael needs to ensure that he understands his customers really well;
   • the approach may not be effective if he is trying to expand his market;
   • customers may not like the need to communicate on a one-to-one basis;
   • whilst customers may like the products sold by VS, they may not like dealing with Michael
       and/or his team;
   • it can be time-consuming to come up with a targeted more personalized approach.


   Accept any other relevant advantage or disadvantage.

   Mark as 2+2

   Award [1] for one appropriate advantage and an additional [1] for a development with respect to
   VS. Award a maximum of [2].
   Award [1] for one appropriate disadvantage identified and an additional [1] for a development
   with respect to VS. Award a maximum of [2].

   [2] cannot be awarded per advantage/disadvantage if the response lacks either explanation and /
   or application.
   For example:
   For an identification or a description of an advantage/disadvantage with or without application
   [1].
   For explanation of an advantage/disadvantage with no application [1].
   For explanation of an advantage/disadvantage and application [2].
   Maximum award overall: [4].
                                              – 16 –                                 8823 – 5012M

(d) Recommend whether Michael should move from a system of quality control to a system of quality
assurance.                                                                                   [10]

  Michael has two options listed in the question.

   Continue to use a system of quality control (Option 1)
   Quality control is a system where products are sampled as they are completed to ensure
   that agreed standards have been reached. It assumes that workers are not able to monitor
   quality themselves and need staff at the end of the production line checking products.
   Advantages
   • Quality is in the hands of experts—VS employ staff whose role is mostly or fully to check
       production;
   • patterns of inconsistent production can be spotted—common ‘mistakes’ in production can
       be spotted;
   • defective products are spotted—the checking ensures that defective output discovered can
       be removed from sale. VS’s production staff are not always in control of their own output,
       including the quality of the finished product.
   Disadvantages
   • ‘Big Brother’—checking for defective products can be a negative way of monitoring
      performance. The inspection team is rewarded to ‘catch out’ the performance of others;
   • the workforce can become sloppy—the workers of VS could start relying on the
      inspection team to find the faulty output;
   • not every product is checked—the sampling process does not check every product.

   Change to a system of quality assurance (Option 2)
   Quality assurance involves instilling quality throughout the organization as part of the
   production process. Quality assurance places an emphasis on customer requirements.
   Workers are required to self-check every aspect of what they contribute to the production
   process. Aspects of lean production (kaizen, TQM, etc.) would be incorporated into the
   production process at VS.
   Advantages
   • workers take more care—giving the workforce a greater responsibility would encourage
      them to improve;
   • increased motivation of the workers—this is a process of job enrichment that can
      improve overall motivation. VS’s workers may respond in a positive way to the extra
      responsibility;
   • reduced costs—inspection staff do not need to be employed reducing overall costs. This will
      save VS money which can be reallocated to other areas of their operation;
   • VS’s workers are best placed to improve quality—the workforce directly involved in
      production are in the best position to improve quality.
   Disadvantages
   • the workforce may reject it—giving staff additional responsibilities may be unpopular. They
      may not want to have more to do;
   • increased demands on the workforce—this role may increase the stress on the workers
      leading to demotivation. VS’s staff may not want to do anything other than their ‘usual’ job
   • increased initial cost—transferring to quality assurance can be costly and disruptive due
      to training and implementation;
   • some products may not need it—in some markets and for some products there may be no
      need to have a complicated system.
   Evaluation:
   Michael will need to assess whether the change to quality assurance is worth the expense and
   disruption. There are cost implications and the staff will need to be accepting of the change.
                                            – 17 –                                    8823 – 5012M

 The wider issue of change management is key. Staff who share the vision of Michael are likely
 to adapt and respond to changes that he proposes.
 He will need to balance the disruption with any possible benefits from being able to improve
 quality. VS is shown as a high-quality producer which might mean that they are doing what
 they need to already. Michael may have the view that quality could be improved still further.
 The added impact of improving staff motivation and further enhancing the ethos and culture of
 veganism may appeal strongly to Michael.
 The switch may not work for both aspects of VS’s business. i.e., it may work for the wholesale
 aspect but not the production aspect.

It is expected that candidates provide a conclusion with a substantiated judgment.

Accept any substantiated evaluation/judgment/recommendation.

Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3 with further guidance below.

For one relevant issue that is one-sided, award up to [3].
For more than one relevant issue that is one-sided, award up to a maximum of [4].
If a candidate evaluates only one option, award a maximum of [5].
A balanced response is one that provides at least one argument for and one argument against
each option.
Candidates may contrast one option with another for a balance as long as at least two arguments
are given for each option.

Award a maximum of [6] if the answer is of a standard that shows balanced analysis
and understanding throughout the response with reference to the stimulus material
but there is no judgment/conclusion.

Candidates cannot reach the [7–8] markband if they give judgment/conclusions that
are not based on analysis/explanation already given in their answer.
Candidates cannot reach the top marks if there is no relevant reference/application to the stimulus.
                                              – 18 –                                     8823 – 5012M

5. (a) Define the term intrapreneur.                                                               [2]

Being an intrapreneur is the act of being an entrepreneur while working for a major
corporation. The intrapreneur is innovative, independent, proactive and generates new ideas for
the organization.

N.B. No application required. Do not credit examples.

Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.
Award [1] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and understanding.
Award [2] for a full, clear definition that conveys understanding similar to the answer above.

N.B. the use of the word entrepreneur is not mandatory but incorporating any of the features listed
while working for an employer are mandatory for [2]. Do not accept risk-taking since it is not his/her
risk it is the organization that takes the risk.

(b) With reference to UWG, explain two reasons why Ali’s crisis management response may have
been effective.                                                                              [4]

Crisis management refers to the response of a business to a crisis situation. It is how an
organization or individual (Ali) reacts to a crisis which has already happened and could cause
harm to the business. It is almost impossible to plan for a crisis situation and, as such, the
management of the issue is reactive.

Key reasons why it may have been effective:

Transparency/Accountability - Ali immediately reported the incident and did not try to cover it up.
He admitted it had happened and this may be better for the long-term reputation of UWG.
Communication - Ali used social media to try to contain the crisis and try to reassure all key
stakeholders he was taking action. This could then be widely shared and would get UWG’s message
out to the public.
Speed - The speed of UWG’s response could help to contain the situation. This could help UWG
to control the message and stop false information being shared.
Control - Ali took control of the situation and did not leave it to a lower manager. He would be
able to release funds to help with compensation. Ali leading the crisis management shows how
important UWG was taking the concerns.

N.B. responses are not required to use the exact highlighted headings as above but can convey the
general meaning.

Accept any other relevant reason that indicates the result of some action taken by Ali or UWG.

Mark as 2+2
Award [1] for one appropriate reason and an additional of [1] for a development with respect to
UWG. Award a maximum of [2]

[2] can not be awarded per reason if the response lacks either explanation and / or application.
For example:
For an identification or a description of a reason with or without application [1].
For explanation of a reason with no application [1].
For explanation of a reason and application [2].
Maximum award overall: [4].
                                             – 19 –                                   8823 – 5012M

(c) Explain one advantage and one disadvantage for UWG of using social media marketing.              [4]

Social media marketing refers to gaining interest in your business through the use of social
media websites.

Advantages include:
• they are able to communicate quickly with their customers such as when Ali released the
   video;
• the customers feel part of the business when they can strike up potential friendships with
   PTs and other customers;
• it is cheaper than above-the-line promotion. This could help UWG to keep their prices
   competitive;
• Disadvantages include:
• They can lose control of the message. UWG has little control over what people post on social
   media regarding the company. This has happened with the reaction to the accident;
• social media posted responses could harm the reputation of the company and may affect
   membership numbers.

Mark as 2+2

Award [1] for one appropriate advantage and an additional [1] for a development with respect to
UWG. Award a maximum of [2].
Award [1] for one appropriate disadvantage identified and an additional [1] for a development with
respect to UWG. Award a maximum of [2].

[2] can not be awarded per advantage/disadvantage if the response lacks either explanation and / or
application.
For example:
For an identification or a description of an advantage/disadvantage with or without application [1].
For explanation of an advantage/disadvantage with no application [1].
For explanation of an advantage/disadvantage and application [2].
Maximum award overall: [4].

(d) Evaluate two industrial/employee relations methods that UWG could use to get the PTs to accept
a new contract.                                                                                [10]

Potential industrial/employee relations methods UWG can use include:

Collective bargaining
In this case, UWG’s management and employee representatives would try to reach an agreement
through negotiation. This may mean UWG has to increase the wages of the PTs which could
affect their ability to offer competitive pricing.
Collective bargaining could mean UWG is able to retain the services of the majority of the PTs.
This could be important as the PTs are popular with the members and seem to enhance their
membership experience. UWG needs to be wary of seeming not to value its PTs in the eyes of its
membership. UWG has also found it difficult to recruit well qualified PTs, it is maybe in their best
interest to find a solution to the issue that satisfies both parties.
                                              – 20 –                                    8823 – 5012M

Threats of redundancies
This is a more serious threat by UWG where they would pressure or intimidate the PTs to accept the
new contract. If they do not accept the new contract then they would be made redundant. Once
again UWG needs to be wary of seeming not to value its PTs in the eyes of its membership if it
drives a hard bargain with the new contract.

UWG would need to check all their actions were legal within employment law. It might not be as
simple as to force the PTs to sign a new contract. A worry for UWG is that PTs actually take up their
offer of redundancy meaning UWG is left having to recruit a lot of new employees, this has already
proved difficult. It is also expensive to conduct a large-scale recruitment process, can UWG
afford this? If most of the members are sympathetic to the PTs then this could seriously damage
UWG’s reputation. Are their members brand loyal or will they look for another gym?
Alternatively, this threat could cause the PTs to drop their complaints and sign the new
contract. This would mean UWG could continue operating as normal.

Closure
This would mean UWG close the gyms which do not have enough employees to operate. This
means all employees from these gyms would receive no wages at all. This would pressurize the 30%
of PTs who are taking strike action to re-consider and perhaps sign the new contract. Obviously, this
would upset members of these gyms and this could seriously harm UWG’s reputation.
The threat of closure is effectively UWG employing a divide and rule strategy, which whilst possibly
successful in the short term could further sow seeds of discontent among the workforce for the
future.

Evaluation
It is in UWG’s interest to try to stop the strike action and open all their gyms as soon as possible.
This may mean they have to negotiate with the PTs and try to come to an agreement.

N.B. there is a fine distinction between Industrial relations and Conflict resolution. Since the aim
of UWG is to resolve the impending strike action reward conflict resolution methods such as
Arbitration / Conciliation if presented.

It is not expected that the candidate incorporates all of the above arguments.
Accept any other relevant industrial/employee relations method and any other relevant discussion.
A conclusion with judgment is expected.

Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3 with further guidance below.

For one relevant issue that is one-sided, award up to [3].
For more than one relevant issue that is one-sided, award up to a maximum of [4].
If a candidate evaluates only one option, award a maximum of [5].
A balanced response is one that covers at least one issue for and at least one argument against
each option.
Candidates may contrast one option with another for a balance as long as at least two arguments are
given for each option.
Award a maximum of [6] if the answer is of a standard that shows balanced analysis and
understanding throughout the response with reference to the stimulus material but there is no
judgment/conclusion.
Candidates cannot reach the [7–8] markband if they give judgment/conclusions that are not based
on analysis/explanation already given in their answer.
It is expected that the candidate goes beyond just providing some relevant arguments for or against
any suggested strategy and finish off with some conclusions and judgment.
Candidates cannot reach the top marks if there is no relevant reference/application to the stimulus.
                                                   – 21 –                                     8823 – 5012M

                                                Section C
Questions 6–8. Please mark the candidate response using the assessment criteria on pages 4 and 5.

6.    With reference to an organization of your choice, discuss the impact of ethics and
      globalization on human resource management.                                                       [20]

7.    With reference to an organization of your choice, discuss the impact of culture and
      innovation on operations management.                                                              [20]

8.    With reference to an organization of your choice, discuss the impact of change on
      marketing strategy.                                                                               [20]

N.B. Although the question asks for the application of one concept on another, it is still expected that
Business Management content will be aligned with the concepts especially the second concept (the one
being acted on).

Please note that candidates can conclude that there was a minimal impact, however it has to be based
on balanced arguments and evaluation.

Additional guidance in relation to the assessment criteria
For each criterion, the aim is to find the descriptor that conveys most accurately the level attained by the
candidate, using the best-fit model. It is not necessary for every single aspect of a level descriptor to be
met for that mark to be awarded.
• The highest level descriptors do not imply faultless performance and should be achievable by a
candidate.
• A candidate who attains a high level of achievement for one criterion will not necessarily reach high
levels of achievement for the other criteria and vice versa.

If only one concept is addressed:
• Criteria A, B, C and E: award up to a maximum [3].
• Criterion D: full marks can be awarded.

Where the question asks for impacts of two concepts on content, examiners must allow for
unbalanced treatment of the two concepts throughout a candidate’s response. One concept may be
more significant than the other.

Criterion B
For [2]: “…connection is not developed” should be treated the same as superficial.

Criterion C
1 + 1 arguments are expected per concepts.
• Question 8 requires consideration of the impact of one concept on a second concept – therefore accept
2 + 2 arguments for a balanced response.
• Justification is through logic or data.
• For [2] there is no balance as there are no counter arguments at all, or the arguments are all one-sided
then this would be unjustified.
• For [3] there are some balanced arguments – some of which are justified.

Criterion D
• Introductions need to be concise and related to the question.
• The candidate’s response does not to have explicit headings for each structural element.
• A body is the area in which the substance of arguments occurs. It is usually located between the
introduction and the conclusion.
• Fit-for-purpose paragraph means that ideas are presented in a clear academic way. For example, one
idea per paragraph.
                                                    – 22 –                                   8823 – 5012M

Criterion E
• One example of an “individual” could be an individual consumer or an individual manager. However,
this cannot be considered with a “group” of consumers or a management team.
• For [4], a balanced response: look at the perspectives of both individual and group(s).
• The chosen individual, group needs to be applicable and relevant to the question with specific
explanation.
• Candidates need to go beyond stating the stakeholder.
• Please do not use the adjective ‘inappropriate’ in the descriptor for [2]. If inappropriate award [1].

Candidates need not explicitly say “stakeholder”.

In section C, the question rubric explicitly states that “organizations featured in sections A and B and in
the paper 1 case study may not be used as a basis” to candidate’s answers to questions 6, 7 and 8.
When this happens please award marks as follows:
Criterion A: award a maximum of [1]. The business management content cannot be relevant if the
organization is fictitious.
Criterion B: 0 marks – there is no connection to a “real-world organization”
Criterion C: award a maximum of [1]. The arguments cannot be relevant if the organization is fictitious.
Criterion D: mark as normal.
Criterion E: award up to a maximum of [1]. The individual and/or group perspective(s) cannot be relevant
if the organization is fictitious.
