© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Business management
Higher level
Paper 2

24 October 2023

Zone A afternoon   Zone B afternoon   Zone C afternoon


2 hours 15 minutes

Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y A clean copy of the business management formulae sheet is required for this examination
  paper.
y Section A: a
              nswer one question.
y Section B: a
              nswer two questions.
y Section C: answer one question.
y A calculator is required for this examination paper.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [70 marks].




                                                                                             8823 – 5012
      8 pages                                            © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
                                                     –2–                                           8823 – 5012


                                                Section A

Answer one question from this section.

1.      Birchie’s Convenience Store Ltd. (BCS)

        Fraser Birch is the owner of Birchie’s Convenience Stores Ltd. (BCS). Currently, BCS
        operates two small convenience stores.

        BCS’s profits have increased each year for the past three years. Fraser wants to expand the
        business. Expansion should result in economies of scale.

        Fraser has identified three options for expansion:
        y Option 1: Open a new store in a nearby village that currently has no convenience store.
        y Option 2: Buy a small chain of three convenience stores that are for sale in the nearest city.
        y Option 3: Continue to research the market for a year before making a decision.

        Fraser would need to approach the bank for a long-term loan to help finance Option 1 or
        Option 2. BCS’s gearing ratio is 75 %.

        The probability that the economy improves over the next year is 0.45, the probability that the
        economy remains unchanged is 0.25, and the probability that the economy worsens is 0.3.

        The forecasted costs and expected revenue for all three options are given in Table 1.

          Table 1: Information related to the three options for expansion (all figures in £000s)

                       Forecasted      Forecasted          Forecasted revenue       Forecasted revenue
                       costs           revenue if          if the economy           if the economy
                                       the economy         remains unchanged        worsens
                                       improves

     Option 1:         200             500                 200                      (100)
     Open a new
     store

     Option 2: Buy     700             1300                800                      (150)
     a chain of
     three stores

     Option 3:         0               120                 80                       (50)
     Continue to
     research the
     market

        (a)   Define the term economies of scale.[2]

        (b)   Using Table 1, construct a fully labelled decision tree and identify the best option for
              BCS (show all your working).[6]

        (c)   Explain one possible disadvantage for BCS of taking out a long-term bank loan to fund
              either Option 1 or Option 2.[2]
                                                 –3–                                            8823 – 5012


2.   Dan James Delivery (DJD)

     Dan James, a sole trader, has been running Dan James Delivery (DJD), a food delivery
     service for local restaurants, since 2020. DJD is known for fresh and quickly delivered food.
     The constant growth in demand attracts new competitors. Dan is currently operating at full
     capacity utilization and would like to expand.

     The lease on Dan’s delivery van expires on 31 December 2023. Dan wants to buy a new and
     larger electric van on 1 January 2024.

                      Table 2: Selected information about the new electric van

                             Costs                              $50 000

                             Useful life                        5 years

                             Estimated residual/scrap value     $3900

                             Estimated depreciation rate        40 %

     (a)   State two advantages of leasing.                                                            [2]

     (b)   Using the straight-line method of depreciation, calculate the book value of the new
           electric van on 31 December 2025 (show all your working).[2]

     (c)   Using the reducing/declining balance method of depreciation, calculate for the new
           electric van:

           (i)    the depreciation allowance for 2024 and its book value on 31 December 2024
                  (show all your working);[2]

           (ii)   the depreciation allowance for 2025 and its book value on 31 December 2025
                  (show all your working).[2]

     (d)   Explain the impact on DJD’s profit, for the year ending 31 December 2024, if the
           reducing/declining balance method of depreciation is used instead of the straight-line
           method of depreciation.                                                                     [2]




                                                                                                Turn over
                                                   –4–                                        8823 – 5012


                                                 Section B
Answer two questions from this section.

3.   Anna’s pet salon

     In 2024, Anna Holborn plans to start a new business: a pet
     grooming salon. Although Anna has no managerial experience,
     she is eager to work for herself. In Anna’s city, three pet salons
     already exist. The market is very competitive.

                        Table 3: Selected data on the three existing pet salons

           Salon            Prices            Reputation out of           Independent or
                                              four stars (★)              franchise

           A                Medium            ★★★                         Franchise

           B                Low               ★                           Independent

           C                High              ★★                          Franchise

     Anna is considering two options for opening her salon:
     y Option 1: Open it as an independent business, called AH Salon.
     y Option 2: Open it as a franchise of Paws Boutique (PB), a nationwide chain of pet grooming
       salon franchises that currently has no franchise in Anna’s city.
                 Table 4: Anna’s forecasted initial costs of starting a pet salon as an
                  independent business (Option 1) or as a PB franchise (Option 2)

                                         Option 1: As an             Option 2: As a PB
                                         independent business        franchise

               Equipment                 $15 000                     $12 000

               Grooming supplies         $10 000                     $10 000

               Initial local promotion   $5000                       $2000

               Legal fees                $2000                       $4000

               Purchase of franchise     Not applicable              $10 000

               Total                     $32 000                     $38 000

     If Anna buys a PB franchise, she must pay 5 % of revenue to the franchiser. The franchiser
     will pay for regional and national – but not local – promotion. Anna must purchase equipment
     from the franchiser. In other cities, PB franchises are rated medium in terms of price and ★★
     in terms of reputation.
     Anna has limited financial resources. She has prepared a forecast for the first year. She
     forecasts, as a PB franchise, an average of 200 pet grooming services per month at a price
     of $30. As an independent business, she forecasts that sales would be 10 % lower. For both
     options, fixed costs, including her salary, would be $2800 per month. Variable costs would be
     $5 per pet grooming.

(This question continues on the following page)
                                                 –5–                                         8823 – 5012


(Question 3 continued)

     (a)   Define the term variable costs.[2]

     (b)   Using Table 3, construct a product position map/perception map of the three existing
           pet salons.                                                                              [4]

     (c)   Explain two problems that Anna may encounter when starting a new business.               [4]

     (d)   Recommend whether Anna should open her pet salon as an independent business
           (Option 1) or as a PB franchise (Option 2).[10]




                                                                                             Turn over
                                                 –6–                                             8823 – 5012


4.   Vegan Supplies (VS)

     Five years ago, Michael Thompson opened Vegan Supplies (VS) as a vegan food*
     wholesaler selling to the restaurant industry. Two years ago, VS also began producing
     its own range of high-quality vegan food. VS’s vegan product range includes cheese and
     burgers, kebabs and sausages. Michael built VS’s customer base for this product range
     by frequent attendance at trade exhibitions. VS mostly employs staff who are vegan, and
     Michael has a broad objective of promoting veganism. VS’s vision statement is “to build a
     vegan world”. Michael encourages an organizational culture designed to promote vegan
     philosophy and lifestyles.

     A total of 60 % of VS’s sales are products purchased for resale, and the remaining 40 % of
     sales are from VS’s own vegan product range. However, sales of the VS brand vegan foods
     from their own production are increasing, and Michael is keen to see this trend continue.

     Michael works closely with suppliers and restaurants to provide the products that restaurants
     want. VS mainly uses below-the-line promotion to market their products. VS’s quality control
     inspector is approaching retirement, and Michael is considering whether to keep a system of
     quality control or move to a system of quality assurance. He is aware that changes must be
     made to operate a system of quality assurance, such as total quality management (TQM).
     Michael must convince employees that the move to quality assurance is worthwhile. Giving
     employees responsibility for their own working may prove challenging. Michael plans to
     invest in different training methods to ensure the change works effectively.



* vegan food: food that does not contain animal products, including meat, dairy,
  and eggs

     (a)   Define the term objective.[2]

     (b)   With reference to VS, explain two elements of organizational culture.                        [4]

     (c)   Explain one advantage and one disadvantage for VS of using below-the-line promotion. [4]

     (d)   Recommend whether Michael should move from a system of quality control to a system
           of quality assurance.                                                             [10]
                                                 –7–                                            8823 – 5012


5.   Ultimate Warrior Gym PLC (UWG)

     Ultimate Warrior Gym PLC (UWG) has 212 gyms nationwide. Ali Smith is the chairman and
     majority shareholder. UWG’s business model involves providing high-tech equipment and
     employing personal trainers (PTs). In the past, UWG has struggled to recruit well-qualified
     PTs. UWG encourages its gym managers to be intrapreneurs.

     UWG is competitively priced, offers monthly contracts, and is open 24 hours a day, seven
     days a week. UWG uses social media marketing, including online forums. Through these
     forums, many members and PTs have formed friendships that give membership a rewarding
     social dimension. 95 % of UWG’s members renew their monthly contract.

     PTs are paid minimum wage but are allowed to organize private training sessions with
     UWG’s members. Consequently, it is common for only one member of staff to be on
     duty at a time. Recently, a gym member was seriously injured while lifting inappropriate
     weights unsupervised.

     The accident was a news item in the national media and required a crisis management
     response. Ali immediately recorded a video and posted it to UWG’s social media platforms.
     Apologizing for the accident, he announced that the PT contracts will be changed and they
     will no longer be allowed to arrange private training sessions. Ali also offered compensation
     to the person who was injured. However, an image mocking UWG was shared 50 000 times
     on social media.

     The crisis management response pacified investors, but 30 % of the PTs are conducting
     strike action, and some gyms have had to close due to a lack of employees. Comments on
     UWG’s online forums indicate that most members sympathize with the PTs.

     Ali is considering which industrial/employee relations methods UWG could use to get the PTs
     to accept a new contract.

     (a)   Define the term intrapreneur.[2]

     (b)   With reference to UWG, explain two reasons why Ali’s crisis management response
           may have been effective.                                                                    [4]

     (c)   Explain one advantage and one disadvantage for UWG of using social media marketing. [4]

     (d)   Evaluate two industrial/employee relations methods that UWG could use to get the PTs
           to accept a new contract.                                                           [10]




                                                                                                Turn over
                                                             –8–                                                    8823 – 5012


                                                        Section C

Answer one question from this section. The organizations featured in sections A and B and in the
paper 1 case study may not be used as a basis to your answer.

6.    With reference to an organization of your choice, discuss the impact of ethics and
      globalization on human resource management.                                                                             [20]


7.    With reference to an organization of your choice, discuss the impact of culture and
      innovation on operations management.                                                                                    [20]


8.    With reference to an organization of your choice, discuss the impact of change on
      marketing strategy.[20]


Companies, products, or individuals named in the stimuli are fictitious and any similarities with actual
entities are purely coincidental.








References:
3.		          BONDART, n.d. Professional male groomer making haircut of poodle teacup dog at grooming salon with
              professional equipment - stock photo. [image online] Available at: https://www.gettyimages.co.uk/detail/photo/
              professional-male-groomer-making-haircut-of-poodle-royalty-free-image/1407302298?adppopup=true
              [Accessed 9 March 2023]. Source adapted.
All other texts, graphics and illustrations © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
