8823 – 5014M




                 Markscheme


                  November 2023


               Business management


                  Standard level


                     Paper 2




21 pages
                                            –2–                                         8823 – 5014M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                               –3–                                     8823 – 5014M


The markbands and assessment criteria on page 3 should be used where indicated in the
markscheme.

       Marks        Level descriptor

       0            The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

       1–2          •   Little understanding of the demands of the question.
                    •   Few business management tools (where applicable), techniques and
                        theories are explained or applied, and business management
                        terminology is lacking.
                    •   Little reference to the stimulus material.

       3–4          •   Some understanding of the demands of the question.
                    •   Some relevant business management tools (where applicable),
                        techniques and theories are explained or applied, and some
                        appropriate terminology is used.
                    •   Some reference to the stimulus material but often not going beyond
                        the name of a person(s) and/or the name of the organization.

       5–6          •   Understanding of most of the demands of the question.
                    •   Relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques
                        and theories are explained and applied, and appropriate terminology
                        is used most of the time.
                    •   Some reference to the stimulus material that goes beyond the name
                        of a person(s) and/or the name of the organization.
                    •   Some evidence of a balanced response.
                    •   Some judgments are relevant but not substantiated.

       7–8          •   Good understanding of the demands of the question.
                    •   Relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques
                        and theories are explained and applied well, and appropriate
                        terminology is used.
                    •   Good reference to the stimulus material.
                    •   Good evidence of a balanced response.
                    •   The judgments are relevant but not always well substantiated.

       9–10         •   Good understanding of the demands of the question, including
                        implications, where relevant.
                    •   Relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques
                        and theories are explained clearly and applied purposefully, and
                        appropriate terminology is used throughout the response.
                    •   Effective use of the stimulus material in a way that significantly
                        strengthens the response.
                    •   Evidence of balance is consistent throughout the response.
                    •   The judgments are relevant and well substantiated.
                                                   –4–                                       8823 – 5014M


Assessment criteria for Section C

Criterion A: Knowledge and conceptual understanding
This criterion addresses the extent to which the candidate demonstrates knowledge and
understanding of the given concepts and relevant business management content (theories,
techniques or tools, depending on the requirements of the question).

 Marks    Level descriptor
   0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
   1      Superficial knowledge of the given concepts is demonstrated. Business
          management content is not selected or the content selected is irrelevant.
    2     Satisfactory understanding of one or both of the given concepts is demonstrated.
          Some business management content selected is relevant. The relevant content is
          satisfactorily explained.
    3     Good understanding of one or both of the given concepts is demonstrated.
          The business management content selected is relevant, though it may not be
          sufficient. The relevant content is generally well explained, though the explanation
          may lack some depth or breadth.
    4     Good understanding of both of the given concepts is demonstrated. The business
          management content selected is relevant, sufficient and well explained.


Criterion B: Application
This criterion addresses the extent to which the candidate is able to apply the given concepts
and the relevant business management content (theories, techniques or tools, depending on
the requirements of the question) to his or her chosen real-world organization(s). The real-
world organization(s) must not be the organization featured in the prescribed case
study for paper 1.

 Marks     Level descriptor
   0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
   1       The given concepts and/or any relevant business management content are
           connected to the real-world organization(s), but this connection is inappropriate or
           superficial.
    2      The given concepts and/or relevant business management content are connected
           appropriately to the real-world organization(s), but this connection is not developed.
    3      The given concepts and relevant business management content are generally well
           applied to explain the situation and issues of the real-world organization(s), though
           the explanation may lack some depth or breadth. Examples are provided.
    4      The given concepts and relevant business management content are well applied to
           explain the situation and issues of the real-world organization(s). Examples are
           appropriate and illustrative.
                                                    –5–                                        8823 – 5014M


Criterion C: Reasoned arguments
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate makes reasoned arguments. This
includes making relevant and balanced arguments by, for example, exploring different
practices, weighing up their strengths and weaknesses, comparing and contrasting them or
considering their implications, depending on the requirements of the question. It also
includes justifying the arguments by presenting reasonable evidence or other support for the
claims made.

    Marks   Level descriptor
      0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
      1     Statements are made but these are superficial.
      2     Relevant arguments are made but these are mostly unjustified.
      3     Relevant arguments are made and these are mostly justified.
      4     Relevant, balanced arguments are made and these are well justified.


Criterion D: Structure
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate organizes his or her ideas with
clarity, and presents a structured piece of writing comprised of:

•    an introduction
•    a body
•    a conclusion
•    fit-for-purpose paragraphs.

    Marks   Level descriptor
      0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
      1     Two or fewer of the structural elements are present, and few ideas are clearly
            organized.
      2     Three of the structural elements are present, or most ideas are clearly organized.
      3     Three or four of the structural elements are present, and most ideas are clearly
            organized.
      4     All of the structural elements are present, and ideas are clearly organized.


Criterion E: Individuals and societies
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate is able to give balanced
consideration to the perspectives of a range of relevant stakeholders, including individuals
and groups internal and external to the organization.

    Marks   Level descriptor
      0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
      1     One individual or group perspective is considered superficially or inappropriately.
      2     One relevant individual or group perspective is considered appropriately, or two
            relevant individual or group perspectives are considered superficially or
            inappropriately.
      3     At least two relevant individual or group perspectives are considered appropriately.
      4     Balanced consideration is given to relevant individual and group perspectives.
                                                  –6–                                  8823 – 5014M


                                              Section A
1. (a) Define the term secondary sector.                                                          [2]

This sector includes both construction and manufacturing. It uses resources from the
primary sector to manufacture finished goods or process raw materials to be used for
other secondary sector business. The secondary sector supports both the primary and
tertiary sector.

N.B. no application required. Do not credit examples.
Providing examples of secondary sector business alone is insufficient to receive marks.
However, exemplification can strengthen a definition and be a basis for a second mark (if
the definition was not fully complete).

Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.
Award [1] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and understanding.
Award [2] for a full definition that conveys knowledge and understanding similar to the answer above.

(b) Using the information in Table 1, calculate FD’s:


  (i)     current ratio at 31 December 2022 (show all your working);                              [2]
  (All figures in $000s).
  Cash + debtors + stock = current assets
  $17 + $39 + $40 = $96
  Overdraft + creditors + 90-day loan + 180-day loan = current liabilities
  $6 + $32 + $10 + $16 = $64
  Current ratio = Current assets/current liabilities
  Current ratio = $96/$64 = 1.5

  Award [2] if a candidate provides the correct answer with workings. Award [1] for working and
  [1] for the correct answer.
  Award [1] If a candidate who has shown workings provides a correct procedure (thus,
  demonstrates an understanding of the underlying concepts) but has made an error, or omission in
  calculation.
  Award [1] If a candidate does not show any working and simply writes the answer.
  Award no marks [0] merely for writing the formula.

  (ii)    acid test (quick) ratio at 31 December 2022 (no working required);                   [1]


  Acid test ratio = (Current assets - stock)/(current liabilities)
  Acid test ratio = (96 – 40)/64 = 0.875 (allow rounding)

  N.B. Accept 0.875 or 0.88. Do not accept 0.87 or 0.9.

  Award [1] for the correct answer (no working required).
  If the candidate shows workings, which is not required for this question, apply Own Figure Rule if
  the candidate incorrectly calculates current liabilities in 1 (b)(i).
                                               –7–                                      8823 – 5014M


  (iii)   total equity at 31 December 2022 (no working required);                                   [1]

  Equity = Share capital + Accumulated retained profit = $10 + $22 = $32

  Accept $32 000

  Award [1] for the correct answer. A correct answer must include the sign $ (no working required)

  (iv)    net profit margin for the year ending 31 December 2022 (show all your working).     [2]

  Net profit margin = (net profit before interest and tax) / (sales revenue) x 100
  Sale revenue = 22 drones x $400 x 12 months = $105 600
  Sale revenue - Cost of goods sold – expenses = net profit before interest and tax
  $105 600 - $33 000 - $56 000 = $16 600
  Net profit margin = ($16 600 / $105 600) x100% = 15.72% (allow rounding)

  N.B. Accept 15.7%. Do not accept 16% or 15.71%.

  Award marks as follows,
  [2] if a candidate provides the correct answer with workings. A correct answer must include the
  percentage sign (%)
  [1] If a candidate who has shown workings provides a correct procedure (thus, demonstrates an
  understanding of the underlying concepts) but has made an error in calculation or the answer does
  not include the percentage sign (%).
  [1] If a candidate does not show any working and simply writes the answer.
  Award no marks [0] merely for writing the formula.


(c) Comment on WF’s offer to purchase shares of FD from Gary.                                             [2]

Candidates may answer this question in one of two ways.
They may comment on the fact that, by selling 60% of the shares to WF, Gary will be losing
control of the business. Though he would stay on as CEO for three years, he no longer would
be completely free to run the business as he sees fit.
Or, candidates may comment on the price of the WF’s offer. 60% of the net book value of the
business is $19 200 (Equity x 60% = $32 000 x 0.6). WF is offering $35 000 for those shares, which
means that Gary would earn a premium of $15 800, which he may or may not find attractive.

N.B. Candidates are not expected to evaluate WF’s offer. Rather, they are expected to comment on
potential implications of it.

Award [1] for a basic comment addressing one of the two issues above. Award an additional [1] for
application to the stimulus.
If a candidate says something like “If Gary accepts the offer, he would lose control over the business,
but he would also earn a capital gain (or profit) on the sale of shares.” Award [2]. If a candidate
comments on only one of the two issues above, the candidate must have more specific detail, like
60% or $15 800, for the application mark.
                                                     –8–                                         8823 – 5014M


  2. (a) State two features of a sole trader.                                                                   [2]

  A sole trader is a person who is the exclusive owner of a business, entitled to keep all profits after
  tax has been paid but liable for all losses; a sole proprietor.

  Features include:
     • full control;
     • the sole trader owns and runs the business;
     • not a separate legal entity. No legal distinction exists between the business and the sole
         trader;
     • unlimited liability;
     • finance is usually limited;
     • registering the business is generally relatively easy and inexpensive and quick.

    N.B. Do not accept risk taker as a feature of a sole trader.

  Accept any other relevant feature.
  N.B. no description is required.
  Award [1] for each relevant feature identified. Award a maximum of [2].

  (b) Using the information in Table 2, prepare a fully labelled cash-flow forecast for AAP for the four
  months from January 2024 to April 2024.                                                               [6]

                          January         February      March        April 2024
                          2024            2024          2024
Cash inflows:
Sales (cash sales
                          $2000           $2000         $2000        $2000
revenue)
Total receipts
                          $2000           $2000         $2000        $2000
(inflows)
Cash outflows:
Helicopter rent           $1000           $1000
Loan payment              $300            $300          $300         $300
Alejandro’s salary        $550            $550          $1000        $1000
Drone maintenance                                       $200         $200
Total cash payments
                          $1850           $1850         $1500        $1500
(outflows)
Net cash flow             $150            $150          $500         $500
Opening balance           $0              $150          $300         $800
Closing balance           $150            $300          $800         $1300

  Accept slightly different headings / format such as opening balance at the top or at the
  bottom.
  Do not penalize if there is no overall title as it is not specified in the subject guide, unlike the profit
  and loss account / balance sheet where a title is expected.

  N.B. Allow candidate own figure rule (OFR): if a candidate makes an error in one row and carries it
  through the remainder of the forecast it is only one error. This provision includes both mathematical
  errors and conceptual errors (for example, if a candidate has the maintenance in the incorrect
  month).

  [1] if the candidate has some idea of what a cash-flow forecast is and looks like.
  [2] for a cash flow that has some problems in layout and wording and which has three
  mistakes (apply OFR).
                                                –9–                                       8823 – 5014M


 [3] for a largely correct cash flow that has some minor problems layout and wording with layout and
which has two mistakes (apply OFR).
Errors could include in addition to number placement problems and mathematical errors, conceptual
errors (using the term “net profit” rather than “net cash flow”) or omissions, such as not having a line
like “closing balance” or “totals”.
[4] for a largely correct cash flow that has some minor problems with layout and wording
and which has one mistake (apply OFR) or the candidate does not produce a
mathematically correct cash flow.
[5] for a mathematically correct cash flow that has some omission of the wording above.
[6] for a fully correct cash-flow forecast with a generally accepted format and lines for total
inflows/receipts, total outflows/payments (or some other acceptable wording), a line for Net
cash flow / inflow, etc. and lines for opening and closing balance.
Full working is not expected.

(c) Explain one suitable external source of finance, other than loan capital, that Alejandro could use
to purchase the drone.                                                                               [2]

Leasing: A lease is a contract outlining the terms under which one party agrees to rent an asset—
in this case, a drone—owned by another party.

The purchase of new technology like drones can be risky because of how rapidly it can become
obsolete (albeit the competitive advantage it can give). Alejandro might want to upgrade to a new
model according to the business needs. Leasing is one way of mitigating the risk.
Drones can be expensive to pay for in its totality. Unlike larger machinery, it is often possible to
purchase a drone in a lump sum, but usually a bad idea. Why? It can seriously constrain cashflow,
leaving the business unable to pay for day-to-day expenses. In this particular case, it looks like the
business will allow Alejandro to increase his salary. Leases consist of a deposit followed by a
series of monthly payments (plus interest), allowing for the spreading of the cost without
compromising working capital.

Third party finance through shared ownership schemes such as partnership: This type of business
is formed by two or more people. Often they are friends, associates or people with similar or
related skills. Partnerships are popular with professional people with related qualifications. In this
case, Alejandro could ask another photographer with the skills for aerial photography to invest in
the purchase of the drone. Operated as a partnership, they could seek at specializing in aerial
photography.

N.B. Do not accept trade credit or overdraft.

Accept any other appropriate external source of finance.
Award [1] for a relevant generic identification or description of an adequate external source of
finance and a further [1] for any additional explanation in context.
[2] cannot be awarded for the external source of finance if the response lacks either explanation and
/ or application to Alejandro’s Aerial Photography as a sole trader.
                                               – 10 –                                   8823 – 5014M


                                            Section B

3. (a) Define the term variable costs.                                [2]

Variable costs are recurring costs that change with output or activity. When sales or production
increases, variable costs increase as well.

N.B. No application required. Do not credit examples.

Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.
If a candidate says "variable costs are costs that vary,” award [0]
Award [1] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and understanding.
Award [2] for a definition that conveys full understanding. To receive [2], the candidate must specify
that variable costs change with output or activity.

(b) Using Table 3, construct a product position map/perception map of the three existing
pet salons.                                                                                         [4]




N.B. if a candidate uses the word “quality,” rather than “reputation,” accept.

Award [1] for some understanding of a product position/perception map.

Award [2] for a correctly drawn product position/perception map with axes properly labelled.

Award [3] for a correctly drawn product position/perception map with axes properly labelled and has
placed two of the three businesses in the correct place on the map.

Award [4] for a correctly drawn product position/perception map with axes properly labelled and has
placed the three businesses in the correct place on the map.

N.B. The axes can be reversed (the Y axis could be price and the X axis could be reputation).

Accept salon A if placed on or near to the reputation axis as this represents midway between high
and low on the price axis.

Accept abbreviations for labels so long as clear.
                                             – 11 –                                   8823 – 5014M


(c) Explain two problems that Anna may encounter when starting a new business. [4]

Common problems that new business encounters include:
• Difficulty recruiting suitable employees as hers is new with no track record;
• lack of finance - again new with no track record;
• lack of identity or reputation in the marketplace - Anna has limited resources for promotion;
• limited initial customer base (the market is very competitive);
• owners have many demands on their time - Anna is possibly a sole trader;
• lack of experience of those opening the business - Anna has no managerial experience;
• poor market research - Anna’s lack of financial resources may suggest this is true.

  Accept any other relevant problem that a new business may encounter.

  N.B. if Anna opens as an independent business, she will have to establish an identity in the
  marketplace (which would be less of an issue if she opens as a PB franchise).

  Award marks as follows:
  Mark as 2+2.
  Award [1] for identification of a common problem that a business may encounter and an additional
  [1] for an explanation and application to the stimulus. Award a maximum of [2].
  [2] can not be awarded per problem if the response lacks either explanation and / or application.
  For example:
  For an identification or a description of a problem with or without application [1].
  For explanation of a problem with no application [1].
  For explanation of a problem and application [2].
  Maximum award overall: [4].

(d) Recommend whether Anna should open her pet salon as an independent business (Option 1) or
as a PB franchise (Option 2).                                                           [10]

  Both options have advantages and disadvantages.

  Option 1: advantages
  • Anna is fully her own boss, which appeals to her;
  • Anna has full decision control over what she does;
  • she retains all revenue;
  • forecasts are favourable. Anna does not “need” to be a franchise.

  Option 1: disadvantages
  • many new businesses face a range of problems. She will have no support from a
    franchiser. She will be all on her own;
  • she is entering a competitive market;
  • Anna has no managerial experience.

  Option 2: advantages
  • Anna will be able to get equipment and supplies cheaper, presumably because the
    franchiser enjoys purchasing economies of scale;
  • as a national chain, the PB brand is well known;
  • PB will pay for national and regional promotion;
  • franchisor offers support and guidance.
                                           – 12 –                                 8823 – 5014M


Option 2: disadvantages
• Anna wants to be her own boss. Operating a PB franchise, she will lose some control over
  her business;
• she has to pay a one-time fee to buy a franchise fee and, ongoing, 5% of her revenue;
• the extant pet salon franchise in the market has a better reputation than PB, even though its
  prices are comparable;
• Anna will need to pay for local promotion – although not as much as Option 1.

     Accept any substantiated evaluation/judgment/recommendation.

     It is expected that candidates provide a conclusion with a substantiated
     judgment.

     Maximum          Should Anna OPT FOR 1 OR 2          Judgments/conclusion
     Mark award
                       Minimal attempt. Does not really understand the demands of the
     1-2
                       question. No application, theoretical answer
     3                One argument for or one argument n/a
                      against one option.
                      Limited use of stimulus.
     4                One argument for and                 n/a
                      one argument against for one
                      option
                      Or, two or more arguments for one
                      side of argument and none for the
                      other.
                      Some use of stimulus.
     5                A balanced argument for one          n/a
                      option (at least one argument for
                      and one against) and an
                      unbalanced argument for the other
                      option (at least one argument for or
                      against) Some use of stimulus.
     6                Balanced arguments (at least one No
                      argument for and one against) for judgments/conclusions
                      both options. Good use of stimulus.
     7–8              Balanced arguments (at least one
                      argument for and one against) for Judgments/conclusions
                      both options plus a conclusion that based upon analysis and
                      is more than nominal –               explanation in the body
                      actually flows out of the analysis. of the response
                      Largely effective use of business
                      language and the stimulus
     9–10             Balanced arguments (at least one
                      argument for and one against) for Two arguments for, two
                      both options plus a conclusion that arguments against plus
                      is more than nominal –               a conclusion that is
                      actually flows out of the analysis. more than nominal –
                      Rich use of business language,       actually flows out of the
                      business theory and the stimulus analysis.

     Use the above table and mark according to the markbands found on page 3.
                                               – 13 –                                     8823 – 5014M


4. (a) Define the term niche market.                                                                 [2]

   A niche market is a specific unique market, typically a subset of a larger market, with
   specific wants and needs. Niche markets are typically small and often products sold in niche
   markets are more expensive than those outside the niche are. Customers in niche markets are
   typically passionate about the products and are thus willing to pay a premium.

   N.B. no application required. Do not credit examples.
   Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.
   Award [1] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and understanding.
   Award [2] for a full definition that conveys knowledge and understanding similar to the answer
   above.

(b) Explain why WJ regularly needs more working capital.                                             [4]

  According to the stimulus, WJ has a long working capital cycle. The working capital cycle refers
  to the process, involving time and funds, whereby a business purchases supplies, converts
  them into finished goods inventory, sells the inventory, and receives payment for them. As a
  manufacturer, WJ purchases raw materials on credit, converts the raw materials into finished
  goods, and then sells to wholesalers on credit. This process ties cash up. Though the credit
  WJ receives provides them with resources, those resources are presumably tied up in non-
  cash assets (inventory and debtors’ accounts) for a period of time longer than the credit terms
  WJ receives. One supplier’s shortening of credit terms (from 60 to 30 days) has made the
  issue of working capital worse. WJ’s sales are increasing, which means that it needs more and
  more capital invested in current assets.
  With every dollar of sales growth, WJ needs more working capital. For many companies, and
  especially those like WJ with rapidly increasing sales, profits are not enough to finance this
  ever-expanding need for working capital.

  Award [1] for only a partial/unclear understanding of the working capital.
  Award [2] for a clear explanation of the working capital and for linking it to the concept of working
  capital cycle.
  Award an additional [2] for a sound and thorough application to the stimulus.
  Award a maximum of [4] in total.

  For [4], a candidate must indicate some understanding that the working capital cycle consists of
  inventory turnover, debtor turnover, minus creditor turnover.
                                              – 14 –                                      8823 – 5014M


(c) With reference to WJ’s new competitors, explain the terms “penetration pricing” and
“loss leader”.                                                                                     [4]

  Penetration pricing occurs when one company, trying to gain market share, enters a market
  with lower prices than its competitors to lure customers away from those competitors. For
  years, WJ, an established business in the eco-friendly camping gear market, was able to
  charge a premium for its camping gear. Now, however (“the market is changing”), new entrants
  into the eco-friendly market are trying to “buy” market share by offering their equipment at prices
  lower than WJ’s.
  A loss leader strategy occurs when a company sells one of its products at a price well below
  market – typically at a loss – to attract customers to buy other typically related, complementary,
  profitable products. One of WJ’s competitors was selling a tent at a price that, Cameron
  suspected, was below what it cost them to make it. However, this approach makes customers
  aware that the competitor is now in the eco-friendly camping equipment market, and customers
  might buy other, profitable camping products from the competitor.

  Mark as 2 + 2.

  Award [1] for providing a basic definition of penetration pricing and a further [1] for a
  development with respect to WJ and/or its competitors. Award a maximum of [2].
  [2] cannot be awarded if the response lacks either explanation and / or application.

  Award [1] for providing a basic definition of the loss leader and a further [1] for a
  development with respect to WJ and/or its competitors. Award a maximum of [2].
  [2] cannot be awarded if the response lacks either explanation and / or application.

  Award a maximum of [4] in total.
                                                  – 15 –                                    8823 – 5014M


     (d) Recommend whether Cameron should choose Option 1 or Option 2.           [10]

     Option 1 has several advantages. First, going public would raise WJ’s profile, something it may
     need as more companies move into the eco-friendly camping equipment market. With the new
     modern sustainable factory, WJ can continue to make sufficient eco-friendly camping equipment to
     meet market demand. The new factory, built with new sustainable features, can further enhance
     WJ’s brand-focused environmental friendliness. By manufacturing its products themselves, WJ
     can ensure product quality and control all of its practices.
     Disadvantages: However, going public is expensive. Cameron would no longer be the majority
     shareholder and would have to answer to his shareholders in a way he had not previously had to
     do. As a publicly traded company, WJ would lose some its cachet to its niche-market following.
     Further, the capital raised would be insufficient to cover all of WJ’s capital requirements, and so it
     would have to take on additional bank debt, which would come with interest expense and have to
     be repaid.
     Option 2 has several advantages. Cameron would not have to take WJ public and would thus
     retain his 70% (controlling) interest in the company. The pressure of rising working capital
     requirements would be reduced substantially, as WJ’s inventory turnover time would be reduced
     considerably: it would receive goods from is overseas manufacturers, buy them on credit, and
     immediately sell the inventory to wholesalers. WJ would be lowering its fixed costs substantially.
     Option 2, however, also has disadvantages. Managing an extended supply chain is outside of
     Cameron’s area of expertise. Turning over manufacturing to manufacturing suppliers in developing
     countries could tarnish WJ’s brand if those companies did not themselves follow sustainable
     practices or other practices that developed countries generally want (no child labour, for example).
     WJ would also have less control over quality.

     Accept any other relevant advantages and disadvantages to either option.

 Maximum                  Option 1                Option 2                Judgments/conclusion
 Mark award
                           Minimal attempt. Does not really understand the demands of the
 1-2                       question.
                          No application, theoretical answer
 3                        Unbalanced               N/A                  N/A
 4                        Unbalanced               Unbalanced           N/A
 5                        One balanced (one argument for and one        N/A
                          argument against) and the other option in an
                          unbalanced fashion
 6                        Both balanced                                 No
                                                                        judgments/conclusions
 7-8                      Balanced                                      Judgments/conclusions
                          Largely effective use of business language    based upon analysis
                          and the stimulus                              and explanation in the
                                                                        body of the response
 9-10                     Balanced                                      Judgments/conclusions
                          Rich use of business language, business       based upon analysis
                          theory, and the stimulus                      and explanation in the
                                                                        body of the response

Use the above table and mark according to the markbands found on page 3.
                                                  – 16 –                                     8823 – 5014M


    5. (a) Define the term social marketing.                                                             [2]

      Any activity that seeks to influence social behaviour to benefit the target audience and society
      overall, using concepts from commercial marketing.
      Alternative definition: a marketing approach aimed at influencing a positive change in
      individual behaviour and improvements in societal well-being.

      N.B. No application required. Do not credit examples.
      Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.
      Award [1] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and understanding.
      Award [2] for a full, clear definition that conveys knowledge and understanding similar to the
      answer above.

    (b) Using the Ansoff matrix, explain two of ME’s growth strategies.                                  [4]




    The strategies could be:
•   Product development: ME continuously developed new products sold to existing markets like
    the traditional burger, roasted potatoes, etc.
•   Market development: ME opened outlets in different geographical locations/ towns near by using
    the current/ same products
•   Market penetration: Selling the same products/the same markets/customers, ME spend money
    on ATL promotion to attract more customers into their current outlets.
•   Related diversification: new plant based/healthy drink or even the movement to vegan burgers,
    assuming new segments were targeted with new product provided full explanation that ME’s target
    health-conscious drinkers/active drinker.

    N.B. Do not penalize if the matrix is not drawn but candidates are expected to show understanding of
    the model and refer to the types of products/types of markets using the terminology above.

    Mark as 2 + 2

    Award [1] for each appropriate strategy and an additional [1] for a development with respect to ME.
    Award a maximum of [2]

    [2] can not be awarded per strategy if the response lacks either explanation and / or application.
                                               – 17 –                                   8823 – 5014M


For example:
For an identification or a description of a strategy with or without application [1].
For explanation of a strategy with no application [1].
For explanation of a strategy and application [2].
Maximum award overall: [4].

(c) Explain one advantage and one disadvantage for ME of using a loss leader pricing strategy for
the new product that will be launched in 2024.                                                   [4]

Possible advantages:
Given the increased competition in a mature saturated market and the concern about the future, a
loss leader strategy may attract more people to the outlet. A low price is likely to encourage
customers to try the new product and hopefully brand loyalty can be developed.
While purchasing the drink at a very attractive and competitive price, they are likely to purchase
some complementary products available in the outlet that are currently facing competition.

Possible disadvantages:
Given the current fall in profit, ME may quickly descend into a loss-making position overall. The
new drink may not attract the expected customers as it is said that the market for plant base
burgers is also reaching maturity/saturation.
This strategy may be suitable for a short term only and may be unsustainable in the
medium/long term. If ME will increase the price after a certain period, customers may resent the
price increase and stop purchasing the product and search for an alternative among the
competitors.

Accept any other relevant advantage/disadvantage with appropriate application to the type of product
and to the nature of the strategy itself.

Mark as 2 + 2.
Award [1] for one appropriate advantage and an additional of [1] for a development with respect to
ME. Award a maximum of [2].

Award [1] for one appropriate disadvantage identified and an additional [1] for a development with
respect to ME. Award a maximum of [2].

[2] can not be awarded per advantage/disadvantage if the response lacks either explanation and / or
application.
For example:
For an identification or a description of an advantage/disadvantage with or without application [1].
For a partial answer which may lack application to ME [1].
For explanation of an advantage/disadvantage with no application [1].
For explanation of an advantage/disadvantage and application [2].
Maximum award overall: [4].
                                             – 18 –                                    8823 – 5014M


(d) Using the Boston Consulting Group (BCG) matrix, evaluate ME’s core product range.       [10]




An overall evaluation of the management of the product portfolio/range should be provided.

•   Traditional beef burger is a dog that moved to this position after being a cash cow. The
    product is no longer profitable and the market is not growing (loss-making product);
•   Roasted organic potatoes is a cash cow;
•   Organic, low-fat burgers is a saturated/mature cash cow that is moving quickly towards the
    dog position. It does not make profit; it only breaks even;
•   Vegan, plant-based burgers is also a mature cash cow. More profitable than the organic
    burger but profit is levelling off;
•   Vegan pancake is a dog. A loss-making product. Probably went straight from a question marks
    position to being a dog.

A new plant-based drink product is still being developed and therefore is a cash drainer. Its future
is unknown.

On the positive side, ME introduced new products in short intervals. ME‘s managers clearly
displayed awareness that new products should be introduced to ensure a balance range. ME
captured the new social trends and moved into organic and vegan products. Some were
successful and clearly while being cash cows provided ME with the required cash to further
develop new products as well as cash to support the new product along the product life cycle to
reach maturity. All but one product did reach maturity/saturation.
ME management, being worried about the fall in profit as of 2020 and the future financial position
of ME, decided to introduce a new plant-based product to possibly fill a current gap in the
product range.

Disadvantages: However, now the product portfolio is largely unbalanced. ME has not got any
questions marks or stars, products in the introductory and growth stages. The dogs are cash
drainers and the cash cows, apart from the potatoes, are not very profitable or just break even. It
does not come as a surprise that the management in 2020 is worried about ME’s financial future. It
said in the stimulus that the profit is falling significantly. The most recent product introduced was
a failure.
                                              – 19 –                                     8823 – 5014M


There is no guarantee that the new drink be a success. There are many competitors in the
market. Even if the product will be different and exciting for the customers, the likelihood is that the
other competitors will follow soon. ME is unlikely to be able to patent a plant-based drink.
Moreover, the new drink will need financial support during the introductory and growth phase.
The use of a loss leader strategy is likely to make ME’s financial future in danger despite raising
revenue due to the low price. This pricing policy can only be sustainable in the short run.
Overall, in the short term the management of ME is right to be concerned. The product ranges are
currently not well managed.
Perhaps, more than one product should be developed every year or at shorter interval to reduce
the financial risk. Perhaps more products should be introduced imminently rather than relying on
a drink only.

Accept any other substantiated/justified judgment.

N.B. Ideally, candidates should place the products in the appropriate places on the BCG. However,
candidates may only describe/explain the positioning of each product on the model/matrix in terms of
market growth and market share.

Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.
                                                   – 20 –                                     8823 – 5014M


                                                Section C
Questions 6–8. Please mark the candidate response using the assessment criteria on pages 4–5.

6.    With reference to an organization of your choice, discuss the impact of ethics and
      globalization on human resource management.                                                       [20]

7.    With reference to an organization of your choice, discuss the impact of culture and
      innovation on operations management.                                                              [20]

8.    With reference to an organization of your choice, discuss the impact of change on
      marketing strategy.                                                                               [20]

N.B. Although the question asks for the application of one concept on another, it is still expected that
Business Management content will be aligned with the concepts especially the second concept (the one
being acted on).

Please note that candidates can conclude that there was a minimal impact, however it has to be based
on balanced arguments and evaluation.

Additional guidance in relation to the assessment criteria
For each criterion, the aim is to find the descriptor that conveys most accurately the level attained by the
candidate, using the best-fit model. It is not necessary for every single aspect of a level descriptor to be
met for that mark to be awarded.
• The highest level descriptors do not imply faultless performance and should be achievable by a
candidate.
• A candidate who attains a high level of achievement for one criterion will not necessarily reach high
levels of achievement for the other criteria and vice versa.

If only one concept is addressed:
• Criteria A, B, C and E: award up to a maximum [3].
• Criterion D: full marks can be awarded.

Where the question asks for impacts of two concepts on content, examiners must allow for
unbalanced treatment of the two concepts throughout a candidate’s response. One concept may be
more significant than the other.

Criterion B
For [2]: “…connection is not developed” should be treated the same as superficial.

Criterion C
1 + 1 arguments are expected per concepts.
• Question 8 requires consideration of the impact of one concept on a second concept – therefore accept
2 + 2 arguments for a balanced response.
• Justification is through logic or data.
• For [2] there is no balance as there are no counter arguments at all, or the arguments are all one-sided
then this would be unjustified.
• For [3] there are some balanced arguments – some of which are justified.

Criterion D
• Introductions need to be concise and related to the question.
• The candidate’s response does not to have explicit headings for each structural element.
• A body is the area in which the substance of arguments occurs. It is usually located between the
introduction and the conclusion.
• Fit-for-purpose paragraph means that ideas are presented in a clear academic way. For example, one
idea per paragraph.
                                                    – 21 –                                   8823 – 5014M



Criterion E
• One example of an “individual” could be an individual consumer or an individual manager. However,
this cannot be considered with a “group” of consumers or a management team.
• For [4], a balanced response: look at the perspectives of both individual and group(s).
• The chosen individual, group needs to be applicable and relevant to the question with specific
explanation.
• Candidates need to go beyond stating the stakeholder.
• Please do not use the adjective ‘inappropriate’ in the descriptor for [2]. If inappropriate award [1].

Candidates need not explicitly say “stakeholder”.

In section C, the question rubric explicitly states that “organizations featured in sections A and B and in
the paper 1 case study may not be used as a basis” to candidate’s answers to questions 6, 7 and 8.
When this happens please award marks as follows:
Criterion A: award a maximum of [1]. The business management content cannot be relevant if the
organization is fictitious.
Criterion B: 0 marks – there is no connection to a “real-world organization”
Criterion C: award a maximum of [1]. The arguments cannot be relevant if the organization is fictitious.
Criterion D: mark as normal.
Criterion E: award up to a maximum of [1]. The individual and/or group perspective(s) cannot be relevant
if the organization is fictitious.
