8823 – 9226M




                 Markscheme


                  November 2023


               Business management


                   Higher level


                     Paper 1




18 pages
                                            –2–                                         8823 – 9226M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                              –3–                                    8823 – 9226M


The markbands and assessment criteria on pages 3–4 should be used where indicated
in the markscheme.

    Section A         Level descriptor

    Q1    Q2    Q3
    (b)   (b)   (b)

    Marks

    0                 The work does not reach a standard described by the
                      descriptors below.

    1–2               • Little knowledge and understanding of relevant issues and
                          business management tools (where applicable),
                          techniques and theories.
                      •   Little use of business management terminology.
                      •   Little reference to the stimulus material.

    3–4               • A description or partial analysis of some relevant issues
                          with some use of business management tools (where
                          applicable), techniques and theories.
                      •   Some use of appropriate terminology.
                      •   Some reference to the stimulus material that goes beyond
                          the name of a person(s) and/or the name of the
                          organization.
                      •   At the lower end of the markband, responses are mainly
                          theoretical.

    5–6               • An analysis of the relevant issues with good use of
                          business management tools (where applicable),
                          techniques and theories.
                      •   Use of appropriate terminology throughout the response.
                      •   Effective use of the stimulus material.
                                      –4–                                 8823 – 9226M



Section B   Level descriptor
Q4 (d)

Marks

0           The work does not reach a standard described by the
            descriptors below.

1–2         •   Little understanding of the demands of the question.
            •   Few business management tools (where applicable),
                techniques and theory are explained or applied and
                business management terminology is lacking.
            •   Little reference to the stimulus material.

3–4         •   Some understanding of the demands of the question.
            •   Some relevant business management tools (where
                applicable), techniques and theories are explained or
                applied, and some appropriate terminology is used.
            •   Some reference to the stimulus material but often not
                going beyond the name of a person(s) and/or the name of
                the organization.

5–6         • Understanding of most of the demands of the question.
            • Relevant business management tools (where applicable),
              techniques and theories are explained and applied, and
              appropriate terminology is used most of the time.
            • Some reference to the stimulus material that goes beyond
              the name of a person(s) and/or the name of the
              organization.
            • Some evidence of a balanced response.
            • Some judgments are relevant but not substantiated.

7–8         • Good understanding of the demands of the question.
            • Relevant business management tools (where applicable),
              techniques and theories are explained and applied well,
              and appropriate terminology is used.
            • Good reference to the stimulus material.
            • Good evidence of a balanced response.
            • The judgments are relevant but not always well
              substantiated.

9–10        • Good understanding of the demands of the question,
              including implications, where relevant.
            • Relevant business management tools (where applicable),
              techniques and theories are explained clearly and applied
              purposefully, and appropriate terminology is used
              throughout the response.
            • Effective use of the stimulus material in a way that
              significantly strengthens the response.
            • Evidence of balance is consistent throughout the
              response.
            • The judgments are relevant and well substantiated.
                                                  –5–                                       8823 – 9226M


Section C, question 5

Criterion A: Knowledge and understanding of tools, techniques and theories
This criterion addresses the extent to which the candidate demonstrates knowledge and understanding
of relevant business management tools, techniques and theories, as stated and/or implied by the
question. This includes using appropriate business management terminology.

 Marks    Level descriptor
   0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
   1      Superficial knowledge of relevant tools, techniques and theory is demonstrated.
   2      Satisfactory knowledge and understanding of relevant tools, techniques and
          theories is demonstrated.
    3     Good knowledge and understanding of relevant tools, techniques and theories is
          generally demonstrated, though the explanation may lack some depth or breadth.
    4     Good knowledge and understanding of relevant tools, techniques and theories is
          demonstrated.


Criterion B: Application
This criterion addresses the extent to which the candidate is able to apply the relevant business
management tools, techniques and theories to the case study organization.

 Marks    Level descriptor
   0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
   1      The relevant business management tools, techniques and theories are connected
          to the case study organization, but this connection is inappropriate or superficial.
    2     The relevant business management tools, techniques and theories are
          appropriately connected to the case study organization, but this connection is not
          developed.
    3     The relevant business management tools, techniques and theories are generally
          well applied to explain the situation and issues of the case study organization,
          though the explanation may lack some depth or breadth. Examples are provided.
    4     The relevant business management tools, techniques and theories are well
          applied to explain the situation and issues of the case study organization.
          Examples are appropriate and illustrative.


Criterion C: Reasoned arguments
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate makes reasoned arguments. This includes
making relevant and balanced arguments by, for example, exploring different practices, weighing up their
strengths and weaknesses, comparing and contrasting them or considering their implications, depending
on the requirements of the question. It also includes justifying the arguments by presenting evidence for
the claims made.

 Marks    Level descriptor
   0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
   1      Statements are made but these are superficial.
   2      Relevant arguments are made but these are mostly unjustified.
   3      Relevant arguments are made and these are mostly justified.
   4      Relevant, balanced arguments are made and these are well justified.
                                                   –6–                                       8823 – 9226M




Criterion D: Structure
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate organizes his or her ideas with clarity, and
presents a structured piece of writing comprised of:

   •    an introduction
   •    a body
   •    a conclusion
   •    fit-for-purpose paragraphs.

 Marks      Level descriptor
   0        The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
   1        Two or fewer of the structural elements are present, and few ideas are clearly
            organized.
    2       Three of the structural elements are present, or most ideas are clearly organized.
    3       Three or four of the structural elements are present, and most ideas are clearly
            organized.
    4       All of the structural elements are present, and ideas are clearly organized.


Criterion E: Individual and societies
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate is able to give balanced consideration to the
perspectives of a range of relevant stakeholders, including individuals and groups internal and external
to the organization.

 Marks      Level descriptor
   0        The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
   1        One individual or group perspective is considered superficially or inappropriately.
   2        One relevant individual or group perspective is considered appropriately, or two
            relevant individual or group perspectives are considered superficially or
            inappropriately.
    3       At least two relevant individual or group perspectives are considered
            appropriately.
    4       Balanced consideration is given to relevant individual and group perspectives.
                                            –7–                                      8823 – 9226M


                                         Section A

1. (a) Outline one advantage and one disadvantage for BRD of converting to a public
   limited company (lines 27–28). [4]
 Advantages include:
 • BRD can raise additional finance, such as the sale of shares, to achieve the acquisitions of
    Matchfix PLC and Enam Ltd. and to broaden BRD’s product range;
 • higher interest rates made the sale of shares more attractive;
 • BRD can place a market value on the business;
 • it would increase the profile of the business leading to it being better known and possibly
    leading to increased sales and profits;
 • BRD can widen the shareholder base. Public shareholders can buy and sell shares. This
    may be better for BRD than having a small number of larger shareholders (like Geoff and
    Arnold);
 • access to other finance opportunities taking into account that BRD’s bank refused to
    extend its overdraft, which now stood at £8 million.
 Disadvantages include:
 • BRD can face more regulatory requirements e.g. they must have an Annual General
     Meeting;
 • BRD´s management and operations will require higher levels of transparency;
 • BRD could become vulnerable to takeovers. As they increase the level of acquisitions, they
     may face a challenge to their ownership. The situation with 4Change is an example of this
     (35% ownership by 4Change). Arnold and Geoff will lose control;
 • BRD’s share price may fluctuate with their fortunes. It can rise and fall quickly leading to a
     lack of stability (share price fell by more than 50% in 2021);
 • changes in board of directors and strategy.


  Accept any other relevant advantage and disadvantage.

  Mark as 2 + 2

  Award [1] for each appropriate advantage/disadvantage identified and an additional [1]
  for a description of how it impacts on BRD.

  Award a maximum of [2] per advantage/disadvantage.

  Award a maximum of [4] in total.
                                            –8–                                        8823 – 9226M


(b) Explain the leadership styles used by Arnold with the different departments in BRD’s
Liverpool factory (lines 58–62 and lines 73–75). [6]

Several leadership styles could be employed by Arnold. These include autocratic; paternalistic;
democratic; laissez-faire and situational.

It could be argued that the style used by Arnold is mixed. In the factory he is keen to learn what
he can about each of his production employees. The definition of paternalistic leadership
suggests that a dominant authority figure treats employees as if they are members of a large
extended family.

In the design department, the allowance of the ‘Design Team Freedom Month’ suggests that
designers are trusted to develop products and ideas with minimal supervision. This would
assume a sort of laissez-faire or at least democratic approach to leadership.
From the employees' perspective, it is likely that the employees in different departments will feel
differently about the effectiveness of Arnold as a leader.

Accept any other relevant style and explanation.

Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.

Award a maximum of [3] for a theoretical answer or for limiting answer to only one
style.

For [5-6] at least two leadership styles are named and developed correctly in context.

Award a maximum of [5] if the explanation is mainly descriptive, but in context.

Award a maximum of [6] for a developed answer in context.
                                            –9–                                       8823 – 9226M


2. (a) Outline one advantage and one disadvantage for BRD of having low labour turnover
   (lines 63–64).                                                                    [4]

 Advantages include:
 • good quality staff remain. The staff at BRD’s Liverpool factory work effectively and want to
    stay. Employees in the Liverpool factory have worked there for over 20 years;
 • BRD do not have to continually recruit and train new staff;
 • long serving members of staff are often easier to motivate. BRD’s management have built
    strong relations with employees. Arnold Brondy, is proud of his relationship with the Liverpool
    factory employees. He speaks at least once every two weeks to each of the 107 production
    employees, knows them all by name and prides himself on knowing their family situations. He
    also keeps a record in his office of staff birthdays and makes a point of giving a card and small
    gift on an employee’s birthday. This is likely to lead to them offering greater commitment in
    times of need.
  Disadvantages include:
  • salary costs are high for longer serving employees who receive an automatic 3% salary
     increase every three years;
  • with low labour turnover there are fewer opportunities for staff development and
     promotion;
  • employees could lack drive and ambition. BRD staff work well but the lack of desire can lead
     to lower quality output;
  • managers can get lazy with a staff who have stagnated;
  • less recruitment means fewer outside influences. A lack of new ideas can be an issue.
     Designers may lack inspiration after long periods in the same role. Outside recruitment can
     import new ideas and approaches. A change of culture may be good for BRD.


 Accept any other relevant advantage and disadvantage.

 Mark as 2 + 2.

 Award [1] for each appropriate advantage/disadvantage identified and an additional [1] for
 a description of how it impacts on BRD.

 Award a maximum of [2] per advantage/disadvantage.

 Award a maximum of [4] in total.
                                             – 10 –                                      8823 – 9226M


(b) Using the Ansoff matrix, explain what alternatives to diversification BRD could have
considered (lines 24–25). [6]

Ansoff matrix is a strategic planning tool to assist with future growth option planning.
Diversification, in Ansoff matrix terms refers to the selling of new products in new markets.

Alternative strategies include:
• Market penetration refers to a business selling more of its existing products to its existing
   customers (selling more of its existing products in the same market). Arnold felt that BRD
   could have focused on one product but realized the need to change if the business was to
   prosper. BRD has a loyal customer base, but this base is getting progressively older, and sales
   fell year after year from 2010;
• market development refers to a business trying to enter new markets (or new market
   segments in the existing market) with its existing product range. BRD was already selling in
   several countries worldwide like UK, Australia, New Zealand, USA and Canada. However, sales
   in the USA and Canada were very low. Was there an opportunity to expand this still further?;
• product development refers to a business trying to sell new products to your existing
   customer base (market). Consumers now wanted more sophisticated toys. BRD could have
   widened their product base utilizing new design ideas (plastic models, new train, slot car
   designs, 2-rail system), etc. to target their current customers. Every year, each member of the
   design department is given responsibility for the design of one new model train, slot car or
   plastic model kit (This is known within the company as “Design Team Freedom Month”)


Accept any other relevant alternative strategy and explanation.

Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.

Award [1] if a strategy or strategies is/are named but the explanation is incorrect or
omitted.

Award a maximum of [3] for a theoretical answer or for limiting answer to only one
alternative.

Award a maximum of [4] if one strategy is named and correctly developed but the
second strategy is named correctly but developed incorrectly.

For [5-6] at least two strategies are named and developed correctly in context.

Award a maximum of [5] if the explanation is mainly descriptive, but in context.

Award a maximum of [6] for a developed answer in context.
                                            – 11 –                                    8823 – 9226M


3. (a) Outline one advantage and one disadvantage that could arise from BRD’s decision to
   make its model train sets from plastic rather than metal from 2024 (lines 108–110). [4]

 Advantages include:
 • the trains will be more price-competitive. In recent times BRD has seen quite a price
   difference between their products and the competition. “Prices charged for BRD’s train sets
   were uncompetitive”;
 • new technology (3D printers etc) allows for a very similar product in terms of detail to be
   produced;
 • production is faster than using metal further improving costs. “This took less time than it would
   have taken to produce just one in metal, and it was less expensive”;
 • plastic is cheaper so BRD could lower prices which may result in an increase in sales;
 • plastic is cheaper than metal resulting in increased profits.
 Disadvantages include:
 • customers may view the changed product in a negative way. Customers have valued the
    trains being made with metal (accurately made and well-designed models). This might impact
    on BRD’s sales;
 • it can have a negative impact on the whole BRD brand;
 • plastic cannot be recycled so BRD could get a poor reputation on sustainability. Some
    directors had misgivings as the plastic used is not yet recyclable.
 N.B. do not accept only “changing from metal to plastic” without further expansion on how
 this affects BRD.

 Accept any other relevant advantage and disadvantage.

 Mark as 2 + 2

 Award [1] for each appropriate advantage/disadvantage identified and an additional [1] for
 a description of how it impacts on BRD.

 Award a maximum of [2] per advantage/disadvantage.

 Award a maximum of [4] in total.
                                            – 12 –                                  8823 – 9226M


(b) Explain strategies, other than the issuing of additional shares to the existing
shareholders, that BRD could have used to improve its liquidity in 2022 (lines
124–138). [6]

Strategies include:
• controlling the overheads (this could include: finding less expensive ways to produce like 3D
   printing, reducing fringe benefits, etc);
• selling off unnecessary assets (older machinery or factories) considering that sales fell year
   after year from 2010. BRD's share of the UK market had fallen from a peak of 60% in 2001 to
   20%, while sales to consumer in New Zealand and Australia followed similar pattern. BRD is
   likely to have idle production capacity
• increase sales by reassessing pricing strategies. Prices are uncompetitive for the train sets
   (line 112). BRD could shift to increase production of slot cars;
• improve the quality of the Matchfix PLC plastic model kits to improve sales and customer
   satisfaction, taking into account that customer complaints about quality issues with Matchfix
   PLC plastic model kits have increased;
• increase payment times for supplies. This may only help short term. Suppliers were
   beginning to panic. One key supplier had already cancelled BRD’s 30-day trade credit period.
   Will BRD be able to renegotiate?
• reduce its level of unsold stock in its Liverpool factory valued at £6 million, by offering
   discounts or promotions to its customers;
• reduce production of train sets to lower expenses;
• replace overdrafts by a medium/long term debt taking into account that BRD’s bank refused
   to extend its overdraft, which now stood at £8 million. BRD may renegotiate new terms with the
   bank;
• debt factoring, BRD can maintain the same credit period, but the factoring will advance the
   receivables for a fee (no context);
• decrease payment times for customers (no context).
Accept any other relevant strategy and explanation.
N.B. do not accept business angels, grants as BRD has liquidity issues and these are long-term
strategies. Accept any other relevant strategy and explanation.

Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on page 3.

Award a maximum of [3] for a theoretical answer for limiting answer to only one
strategy.

For [5-6] at least two strategies are named and developed correctly in context.

Award a maximum of [5] if the explanation is mainly descriptive, but in context.

Award a maximum of [6] for a developed answer in context.
                                                  – 13 –                                    8823 – 9226M



                                               Section B

4. (a) Define the term cost-plus (mark-up) pricing.                                                   [2]

   Adding a fixed mark-up for profit to the unit cost of making a product.

   Alternative definition: adding a fixed percentage or a fixed amount to the cost of production.

   Alternative definition: Cost-plus (mark-up) pricing refers to adding a mark-up to the average unit
   cost of producing a product.

   [1] cannot be awarded for saying cost-plus pricing is a “mark-up” only.

   The definition has to be developed as above. Candidates need to refer to unit/production/full cost for
   [2].

   Beware of circular definitions which cannot be rewarded.

   N.B. no application required. Do not credit examples.
   Candidates are not expected to word their definition exactly as above.
   Award [1] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and understanding.
   Award [2] for a full definition that conveys knowledge and understanding similar to the answer above.


(b) Explain one advantage and one disadvantage for BRD of using just-in-case (JIC) stock control for
    the manufacture of its model train sets.                                                       [4]

   Advantages:

   •   Should help planning for peak sales in December;
   •   can plan for steady production throughout the year as no need for overtime or hiring additional
       staff during peak demand periods e.g. Usually in December, train set sales equal three month’s
       production.

   Disadvantages:

   •   System is not working, some stock left unsold e.g. BRD has 300 limited-edition train sets,
       made in 1999 to mark the Millennium, in stock. Increases stock holding costs;
   •   capital is tied up in stocks;
   •   financial implications, for example the cash-flow problems BRD have experienced in the past;
   •   unsold stock may decline in value as no longer seen as relevant BRD has 300 limited-edition
       train sets, made in 1999 to mark the Millennium, in stock.

   Accept any other relevant advantage/disadvantage.

   N.B. award [0] if candidates explain the advantages and disadvantages of just-in-time (JIT) stock
   control.

   Mark as 2+2.
   Award [1] for each advantage and additional [1] for an explanation of how it relates to BRD.
   Award [1] for each disadvantage and additional [1] for an explanation of how it relates to BRD.
   [2] can not be awarded per advantage/disadvantage if the response lacks either
                                              – 14 –                                     8823 – 9226M


explanation and / or application.
For example:
For an identification or a description of an advantage/disadvantage with or without
application [1].
For explanation of an advantage/disadvantage with no application [1].
For explanation of an advantage/disadvantage and application [2]. Maximum award overall: [4].


(c) (i) Calculate the difference between the cost for BRD to make its own packaging and the cost to
buy the packaging from GXG (show all your working).                                               [3]

CTM = 100 000 X £0.55 + £5 000 = £60 000
CTB = 100 000 X £0.56 = £56 000
Difference = £60 000 - £56 000 = £ 4000

OR in terms of cost per unit
CTM = £60 000/100 000 = £0.60
CTB = £56 000/100 000 = £0.56
Difference = £ 0.04

Alternative method: volume-based pricing

CTM = 100 000 X £0.55 + £5 000 = £60 000
CTB = (75 000 x 0.70) + (15 000 x 0.66) + (10 000 x 0.56)
 = 52 500 + 9900 + 5600 = £68 000
Difference = 68 000 – 60 000 = £8000

OR in terms of cost per unit
CTM = £60 000/100 000 = £0.60
CTB = £68 000/100 000 = £0.68
Difference = £ 0.08

N.B. allow BOD for the use of the $ or € sign instead of £.

Award [3] for all correct calculations and the correct answer which must include the correct sign (£).

Award [2] for a reasonable attempt with two correct calculations with or without the sign, where the
difference is not calculated. Or the correct answer without the correct sign (£).

Award [1] for an attempt to use the data, for example one correct calculation with or without the
correct sign (£).

Do not reward formula only.
                                                  – 15 –                                  8823 – 9226M


     (ii) Suggest one factor, other than cost, that BRD should consider before deciding whether to make
its own packaging or buy packaging from GXG.                        [1]

   Factors could include:

    •   Germany a long way away – could be delays;
    •   quality – High quality packaging is a feature of BRD train sets;
    •   human resource considerations;
    •   production facilities creating the packaging;
    •   trust (infers quality);
    •   coordination;
    •   exchange rate;
    •   political and legal aspects to be considered.

   Accept any other relevant factor.

   Award [1] for an appropriate and relevant factor related to BRD. No development or context is
   needed as the question is only worth [1].

   (d) Using information from the case study and the additional information above, recommend whether
   BRD should choose Option 1 (install solar panels) or Option 2 (outsource production).         [10]

   Option 1:
   • Cost £2,572,763, total electricity savings 75% per year;
   • Business has finance issues – can it afford capital costs?;
   • Electricity costs fall by over £1.2m in first year of operation but only a small proportion of
      overall costs;
   • Electricity costs will increase 10% per annum so further saving;
   • Environmentally sound – could be used in marketing;
   • Assumes 10% increase each year – maybe pessimistic;
   • Electricity only accounts for 10 % of variable costs so impact on overall unit costs not that
      significant;
   • Payback period is quite short – 2 years and 2 months approx. (£1 113 750 + £1 225 125 + £233
      888)
   Option 2:
   • Chinese production. How about reliability issues? Distance? Delivery issues? Quality?;
   • no capital costs;
   • impact on labour relations, redundancy costs;
   • BRD train sets will now have to account for all factory fixed costs – raises BRD train total
      costs.
   N.B. Candidates may suggest that it doesn't have to be either Option 1 or Option 2.

   Accept any other relevant evaluation.

   Marks should be allocated according to the mark bands on page 4 with further guidance below.
   Theoretical answer or context limited to naming the business or lack of development max [4].
   Discussion of only one option marks limited to [5].
   Discussion of Option 1 and 2 with limited reference to the business or no clear balance max [6].
   Options considered, good use of evidence, particularly from section B, but no effective conclusion
   award a maximum of [8].
   For [10] the answer needs to be a fully supported conclusion/evaluation, clearly relevant to BRD with
   good use of context.
                                                   – 16 –                                      8823 – 9226M


                                                Section C

5. Using the case study and the additional information on pages 5 and 6, recommend whether BRD
should choose Option 1 (location and product change) or Option 2 (repurpose unused factory space).

   Strategy 1

   Arguments for:

   •   Highly valuable piece of land, £28 million release of that value would open up many
       opportunities;
   •   suitable factory nearby, reasonable rent, low set up cost;
   •   opportunity to develop a new modern product;
   •   market for unused stock (India);
   •   realizes brand value;
   •   keeps head office and design functions local;
   •   there should be benefits from outsourcing;

   Arguments against:

   •   Contrary to what BRD has always done. Big impact on BRD brand?;
   •   loss of jobs, redundancy costs, impact on Liverpool;
   •   ignores other stakeholders;
   •   is there demand for new product? What happens to support for existing products?;
   •   it’s a bit extreme. Could there be a more moderate, similar development?
   •   Indian retailer offered £3m to purchase BRD’s stocks of train sets valued at £10m (70% off);
   •   restraining forces are slightly higher than driving forces (FFA), but how reliable are the
       weights? Have all factors been considered? How about bias?

   Strategy 2

   Arguments for:

  • Could be synergy with existing operations;
  • with total setup costs of £900 000 and net incomes starting at £350 000 per year for entry there will
    be a short payback period;
  • seems a bigger relative advantage from FFA but this seems rather a weak analysis.
  • It might attract younger customers

   Arguments against:

  • How reliable is the financial data? The income from the shop/café seems very high;
  • although the existing business remains, this is a new venture. Lack of experience?
  • Might need highly trained staff

   Accept any other relevant discussion.

   N.B. if a candidate responds to this question without any reference to the additional stimulus material
   (the additional material that comes with question 5 in the examination paper), the maximum mark
   that the candidate can receive under criteria A, B, C, and E (all the criteria except structure) is [2] per
   criterion. Award a maximum of [12] overall.
                                                   – 17 –                                    8823 – 9226M


    Marks should be allocated according to the assessment criteria on pages 5–6 with further guidance
    below.

    Criterion A: possible theories, management tools and techniques include: Accounting
    techniques and ratios, interpreting data, Ansoff, force field, importance of assumptions, also,
    possibly, Fishbone, Boston Consulting Group matrix, marketing issues, HRM/management issues,
    SWOT/force field/decision trees (if used with a sense of purpose).

    For [4]: Tools, techniques and theory understood and developed well with some relevance to the
    additional stimulus material.

    For [2]: some understanding of at least two tools, techniques or theories, but not
    developed.

    Criterion B: Is about the use of tools, techniques, theories and stimulus applied to
    the decision. Application will be judged by the use of the stimulus material in particular
    the extra material.
    Remember, understanding has been rewarded in Criterion A. So B is about USE.

    For [4]: relevant tools, techniques and theories are applied well to the case study context and
    additional stimulus material, the application is convincing and relevant.
    For [4]: Financial data from page 5 (Tables 3 and / or 4) plus information from the force
    field analysis (Table 5) is used.

    No use of financial data from page 5 (Tables 3 and / or 4), or information from the force
    field analysis (Table 5), award a maximum of [3].

    If only one option considered, award a maximum of [3].
    For [2]: some limited context/application but not developed. Use of tools limits candidate’s
    ability to make reasoned arguments.

    Criterion C: Is about the process of making a decision and the strength of the
    recommendation. Options discussed in a balanced way, conclusions drawn as to whether
    they work. Remember, ‘do nothing’ can be a recommendation.

    For [4]: There needs to be a clear recommendation supported by the data.
    For [2]: Some limited arguments but not justified. Or limited analysis (e.g. one-sided argument) but
    candidate arrives/draws a reasoned conclusion.

    Criterion D: Structure: This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate organizes his or
    her ideas with clarity, and presents a structured piece of writing comprised of:
•   an introduction
•   a concluding paragraph. Please note this can be different from the concept of a
    conclusion/recommendation in Criterion C. D can be rewarded without a recommendation.
•   fit-for-purpose paragraphs. This means: not too long, each focused on distinct issues,
•   logical structure. This means whether there is a clear flow to guide the reader through the discussion,
    how the paragraphs are sequenced.

    For [4]: all four elements present, clearly organized.
    For [2]: no logical structure but other elements present or logical structure with other elements
    missing.

   Criterion E: Is about the extent to which stakeholders (both groups and individuals) are
   considered.
• individuals: Arnold Brondy, an Indian retailer,
• groups: The various stakeholders especially board members –Board of directors (4change
                                              – 18 –                                     8823 – 9226M


and others), employees, customers/visitors.

N.B. to award a mark there must be reference to the stakeholder(s)’ perspective(s). Naming the
stakeholder(s) is not enough.

For [4] individual(s) and group(s) perspectives are considered in a balanced way. i.e.
needs 1 or more of both individuals’ and groups’ perspectives developed.

For [2]: one individual or one group perspective considered appropriately, or several individuals’
and/or groups’ perspectives considered superficially.
