8823 – 5105M




               Markscheme


               November 2023


                Economics


                Higher level


                  Paper 3




15 pages
                                            –2–                                         8823 – 5105M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                              –3–                                       8823 – 5105M


Notes for examiners:

1. Whenever relevant, carry over marks must be awarded. If a candidate makes an error in
   calculation, but then uses the incorrect figure appropriately and accurately in later question
   parts, then the candidate may be fully rewarded. This is the “own-figure rule” and you should
   put OFR on the script where you are rewarding this.

2. Alternative approaches may be taken in responses to the [4] questions that use A02 command
   terms. If this is the case and the alternative approaches are valid, then full credit should
   be given.

3. A candidate may be penalized for not rounding correctly, failing to give answers correct to
   2 dp or, in some cases, for not including the appropriate units. However, a candidate may only
   be penalized ONCE per script (not per part) for each type of error.


1.   (a)   (i)   Define the term common pool resources (common access resources).                [2]

                 Level                                                              Marks
                 0             The work does not meet a standard described by the   0
                               descriptors below
                 1             Vague definition                                     1
                               For the idea that they are rivalrous
                               OR non-excludable
                 2             Accurate definition                                  2
                               For an understanding that they are rivalrous
                               AND non-excludable
                                      –4–                                         8823 – 5105M


(ii)   The phrase “tragedy of the commons” is associated with examples of common pool
       resources (common access resources). Using a production externalities diagram,
       explain the meaning of this phrase.                                            [4]

       Level                                                                       Marks
       0        The work does not meet a standard described by the                 0
                descriptors below.
       1        The written response is limited.                                   1-2
                For a negative production externalities diagram in which the
                MSC curve lies above the S, MPC curve and shows that the
                market output is greater than the socially optimum level of
                output
                OR
                that explains that the use of common pool resources is
                responsible for negative externalities due to depletion (or
                unsustainable use) of resources which leads to
                overproduction/overuse (free market equilibrium is greater than
                the socially optimum level of output).
       2        The written response is accurate.                                  3-4
                For a negative production externalities diagram in which the
                MSC curve lies above the S, MPC curve and shows that the
                market output is greater than the socially optimum level of
                output
                AND
                that explains that the use of common pool resources is
                responsible for negative externalities due to depletion (or
                unsustainable use) of resources which leads to
                overproduction/overuse (free market equilibrium is greater than
                the socially optimum level of output).
                                          –5–                                         8823 – 5105M


        NB If a response draws a consumption externality diagram, it cannot be rewarded.
        However, if the explanation refers to the depletion/overconsumption of a resource, the
        response may receive [2] with the stamp ECF (error carried forward).

        Candidates who incorrectly label diagrams can be awarded with a maximum of
        [3]. The y axis may be labelled price but could be costs or benefits and the x axis is
        labelled quantity.

(iii)   Using the data in Table 2, calculate the price elasticity of demand for European
        seabass following the change in price from 2017 to 2018.                                 [3]

        P (2018) = 33 522 / 5587 = 6.00                 [1]

        PED = (%∆Qd)/(%∆P) = 24.05/(−4.31)

        OFR applies if the price has been calculated incorrectly.

        Any valid working (correct %Δ Qd or %Δ P, provided the formula is not inverted) is
        sufficient for [1].

        = -5.58 OR 5.58                                 [1]

        An answer of -5.58 or 5.58 without any valid working is sufficient for [2].

(iv)    Using the data in Table 1 and Table 2, calculate the income elasticity of demand
        for European seabass when per capita incomes in Portugal changed from 2017
        to 2018.                                                                                 [2]

        YED = (%∆Qd)/(%∆Y) = 24.05/5.70                 [1]

        Any valid working (correct %Δ Qd or %Δ Y, provided the formula is not inverted) is
        sufficient for [1].

        = 4.22                                          [1]

        An answer of 4.22 without any valid working is sufficient for [1].

  (v) Using Figure 1, calculate the impact of this tax on the producer surplus for the
      island nation’s fishermen.                                                                 [2]

        PS1= (14x28)/2 = 196

        PS2=(12x24)/2 = 144

        Any valid working is sufficient for [1]

        144 – 196

        OR [(24+28)x2] /2

        = – $52 000 OR decrease of $52 000 OR decreased by 26.53%

        An answer of 52 000 or 52 without any valid working is sufficient for [1].

        For full marks to be awarded the response must provide valid working and include
        correct units.
                                         –6–                                          8823 – 5105M


(vi)    Explain why this tax is regressive.                                                    [2]

         Level                                                                  Marks
         0        The work does not meet a standard described by the            0
                  descriptors below.
         1        Vague explanation                                             1
                  The idea that high- and low-income earners pay the
                  same tax per unit
                  OR low-income earners are burdened (affected) more by
                  the tax.
         2        Accurate explanation                                          2
                  For a clear understanding that it is regressive since the
                  same dollar tax amount is paid by all individuals, so it is a
                  bigger proportion of the income of low-income earners.

(vii)   State one kind of regulation this island nation could adopt to decrease the risk of
        depleting the pollock fish stock in its sea.                                           [1]

        Possible regulations may include:
         • Minimum length of caught fish
         • Establishment of (shorter) fishing seasons / hours
         • Regulation of the size / type of trawlers used
         • Quotas (fishing)
        Any other valid response.

(viii) Explain why collective self-governance can, under certain conditions, lead to
       sustainable management of common pool resources.                                        [4]

        NB Candidates may take one of two approaches to this question, each of which are
        valid.

        Approach 1

         Level                                                                  Marks
         0        The work does not meet a standard described by the            0
                  descriptors below.
         1        The written response is limited.                              1–2
                  For an explanation that collective self-governance is a
                  system where users [1] of resources manage the
                  resources by themselves [1]
                  OR
                  that because users realise that it is in their interests to
                  limit the use of these resources/not to focus only on their
                  own benefit [1] the resources will be used in a
                  sustainable manner [1].
         2        The written response is accurate.                             3-4
                  For an explanation that collective self-governance is a
                  system where users [1] of resources manage the
                  resources by themselves [1]
                  AND
                  that because users realise that it is in their interests to
                  limit the use of these resources/not to focus only on their
                  own benefit [1] the resources will be used in a
                  sustainable manner [1].
                                             –7–                                          8823 – 5105M


            Approach 2 (students may focus on the conditions)

             Level                                                                  Marks
             0        The work does not meet a standard described by the            0
                      descriptors below.
             1        The written response is limited.                              1-2
                      For a limited explanation of one condition, award a
                      maximum of [1].
                      For an accurate explanation of one condition (refer to
                      level 2) OR a limited explanation of two conditions,
                      award a maximum of [2].
             2        The written response is accurate.                             3–4
                      For an accurate explanation of one condition AND a
                      limited explanation of one other condition, award a
                      maximum of [3].

                      For an accurate explanation of two conditions, award a
                      maximum of [4].

                      Accurate explanations may include:
                      The idea of local communities realizing that self-
                      interested behaviour risks depletion of the resource in the
                      long term and that for such arrangements to succeed.
                      Accurate conditions may include:
                      • The resource is not at a point of deterioration so that
                          there is little or no advantage to organizing
                      • Users are dependent on the resource for a major
                          portion of their livelihood
                      • Users must be able to communicate and engage in
                          face-to-face bargaining
                      • They must develop rules of enforcement, monitoring
                          and conflict-resolution mechanisms
                      Any other valid condition.

(b)   Using the text/data provided and your knowledge of economics, recommend a policy
      which could be introduced to limit the unsustainable use of fisheries around the world.     [10]

      Possible policies may include (but are not restricted to):
      • Fishing quotas (including transferable quotas)
      • Taxation (on various fishing related activities)
      • Ending subsidies
      • Education/consumer nudges
      • International agreements
      Any other valid policy.

      NB If more than one policy is recommended, only the best policy should be rewarded, unless
      the policies are shown to be complementary or if they are compared/contrasted with the
      student’s one chosen policy.
                                                –8–                                       8823 – 5105M


                                        Assessment Criteria

Recommend—present an advisable course of action with appropriate supporting evidence/reason in
relation to a given situation, problem or issue.

  Marks                                        Level descriptor

    0      • The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

   1–2     • The response identifies a policy.
           • The response uses no economic theory to support the recommendation.
           • Economic terms are stated but are not relevant.
           • The response contains no use of text/data to support the recommendation.
           • The response contains no evidence of synthesis or evaluation.

   3–4     • The response identifies an appropriate policy.
           • The response uses limited economic theory to support the recommendation in a
             superficial manner.
           • Some relevant economic terms are included.
           • The response contains no use of relevant text/data to support the recommendation.
           • The response contains evidence of superficial synthesis or evaluation.

   5–6     • The response identifies and explains an appropriate policy.
           • The response uses relevant economic theory to partially support the recommendation.
           • Some relevant economic terms are used appropriately.
           • The response includes some relevant information from the text/data to support
             the recommendation.
           • The response contains evidence of appropriate synthesis or evaluation but
             lacks balance.

   7–8     • The response identifies and fully explains an appropriate policy.
           • The response uses relevant economic theory to support the recommendation.
           • Relevant economic terms are used mostly appropriately.
           • The use of information from the text/data is generally appropriate, relevant and applied
             correctly to support the recommendation.
           • The response contains evidence of appropriate synthesis or evaluation that is
             mostly balanced.

   9–10    • The response identifies and fully explains an appropriate policy.
           • The response uses relevant economic theory effectively to support
             the recommendation.
           • Relevant economic terms are used appropriately throughout the response.
           • The use of information from the text/data is appropriate, relevant and supports the
             analysis/evaluation effectively.
           • The response contains evidence of effective and balanced synthesis or evaluation.
                                                   –9–                                        8823 – 5105M


2.   (a)   (i)     Distinguish between a common market and a monetary union.                                 [3]

                   For any two features of a common market:
                   • Free trade
                   • Common external tariff/common policies towards non-member countries
                   • Free movement of capital
                   • Free movement of labour                                             [2]

                   AND that a monetary union (additionally) has (one of):
                   • Common currency
                   • Common central bank                                                         [1]

           (ii)    Outline one disadvantage of joining a monetary union.                                     [1]

                   Any one valid disadvantage, such as:
                   • Members are deprived of independent monetary policy
                   • Members are deprived of independent exchange rate policy
                   • Members have limited room to pursue an independent fiscal policy
                   • Loss of sovereignty
                   Any other valid response.

           (iii)   Using Table 3, calculate the expenditures of the typical consumer in the Czech
                   Republic in 2019. Enter your results in Table 4.                                          [1]

                                                                 2018           2019        2020
                    Annual expenditures (CZK)                    5970           6274        6362
                    CPI                                           100          105.09      106.57

                   6274

                   NB An accurate figure which is in the text box but not inserted into the table may be
                   rewarded.

           (iv)    Using Table 4 and assuming 2018 is the base year, calculate the CPI for the Czech
                   Republic for 2020. Enter your results in Table 4.                                 [1]

                   106.57

                   An accurate figure which is in the text box but not inserted into the table may be
                   rewarded.

           (v)     Using Table 4, calculate the rate of inflation in the Czech Republic for 2019 and for
                   2020.                                                                                 [2]

                   2019: (105.09 - 100)/100 x 100 = 5.09% OR 5.09                                      [1]

                   2020: (106.57 -105.09) /105.09 x 100 = 1.41% OR 1.41 OR 1.4                         [1]

                   Workings are not required.

                   OFR applies from part (iv).
                                        – 10 –                                      8823 – 5105M


(vi)   Using your answer to part (a)(v), calculate the real rate of interest in 2019, given that
       the nominal interest rate was 12.44 %.                                                    [1]

       12.44 - 5.09 = 7.35% OR 7.35                                                       [1]

       Workings are not required.

       OFR applies from part (v).
                                      – 11 –                                          8823 – 5105M


(vii) Explain two limitations of using the CPI to measure inflation.      [4]

       Level                                                                    Marks
       0        The work does not meet a standard described by the              0
                descriptors below.
       1        The written response is limited.                                1–2
                For a limited explanation of one limitation, award a
                maximum of [1].

                For an accurate explanation of one limitation (refer to
                level 2) OR a limited explanation of two limitations,
                award a maximum of [2].

                Limited reasons may include:
                • Quality of many products improves over time
                • Consumers buy goods from a variety of
                    outlets/markets
                • Consumers may buy less of a good that has become
                    more expensive
                • The basket of goods consumers buy changes
                • Different groups have different expenditure patterns
                • Different locations have different prices
                • Households changing their expenditure.
       2        The written response is accurate.                               3–4
                For an accurate explanation of one limitation AND a
                limited explanation of one other limitation, award a
                maximum of [3].

                For an accurate explanation of two limitations, award a
                maximum of [4].

                Accurate explanations may include:
                • Although the price of a good (in the basket) has
                  risen, its quality has also improved
                • Consumers/households may now be buying their
                  goods from outlets/markets that are not sufficiently
                  surveyed by the government
                • Consumers/households may have substituted
                  cheaper items when the price of one item increased,
                  but their weights are fixed
                • New goods appear in the market and are bought by
                  consumers but are included only at a later date in
                  the CPI basket
                • Different groups have different expenditure patterns
                  and, therefore, the calculated inflation rate does not
                  apply to all groups
                • Prices may vary significantly between areas of a
                  country and, therefore, the calculated inflation rate
                  does not apply to all areas
                • Households changing their expenditure patterns
                  significantly because of tastes changing after the
                  basket was constructed.
                Any other valid explanation.
                                       – 12 –                                      8823 – 5105M


(viii) If in 2018 US$ 1.00 = CZK 22.72, calculate how many US dollars (US$) an American
       would need in order to buy the same basket of goods that the typical Czech consumer
       bought in 2018.                                                                   [1]

       US$ 262.76 OR 263

       US$ sign not required.

(ix)   Define the term crowding out.                                                        [2]

         Level                                                               Marks
        0        The work does not meet a standard described by the          0
                 descriptors below.
        1        Vague definition                                            1
                 For the idea that increased government expenditures
                 leads to less private investment
                 OR expansionary fiscal policy is ineffective
        2        Accurate definition                                         2
                 For a clear understanding that financing a budget deficit
                 requires that the state borrow funds, which may lead to
                 higher interest rates decreasing private investment.
                 OR that if the state employs more resources, this will
                 limit their availability for private investment

(x)    Using an appropriate diagram, explain the impact of deteriorating infrastructure
       on Kenya’s potential output.                                                         [4]

        Level                                                                Marks
        0        The work does not meet a standard described by the          0
                 descriptors below.
        1        For drawing a correctly labelled diagram with LRAS          1-2
                 shifting left (or a Keynesian AS ‘shifting’ left or a PPF
                 shifting inwards)
                 OR
                 for an explanation that productive capacity
                 decreases/factors of production decrease, which leads
                 to potential output decreasing.
        2        The written response is accurate.                           3-4
                 For drawing a correctly labelled diagram with LRAS
                 shifting left (or a Keynesian AS ‘shifting’ left or a PPF
                 shifting inward).
                 AND
                 for an explanation that productive capacity
                 decreases/factors of production decrease, which leads
                 to potential output decreasing.
                              – 13 –                                  8823 – 5105M




OR




OR




An alternative approach, which may be rewarded, is to use a business cycle diagram
that shows the potential output curve becoming flatter.
                                           – 14 –                                   8823 – 5105M


           Candidates who incorrectly label diagrams can be awarded with a maximum of [3]. For
           AD/AS, the vertical axis may be Average (General) Price Level, APL or Price level.
           The horizontal axis may be real output, real national output, real income, real national
           income, real GDP or real Y. A title is not necessary.

           For a PPC diagram, there must be two goods or groups of goods competing for the
           same resources on the axes. Good X and Good Y are appropriate, but simply X and Y
           are not sufficient. A title is not necessary.

(b)   Using the text/data provided and your knowledge of economics, recommend a policy to
      the government of Kenya that would lead to higher investment.                       [10]

      Possible policies may include (but are not restricted to):
      • Decreasing the size of the budget deficit
      • Structural reforms in the banking sector
      • Improving access to credit for SMEs
      • Providing incentives and decreasing regulations so that SMEs merge
      • Decreasing business taxes
      • Investing in necessary infrastructure
      • Programs to lower corruption
      • Expansionary monetary policy
      Any other valid policy.

      NB If more than one policy is recommended, only the best policy should be rewarded,
      unless the policies are shown to be complementary or if they are compared/contrasted
      with the student’s one chosen policy.
                                                – 15 –                                    8823 – 5105M


                                        Assessment Criteria

Recommend—present an advisable course of action with appropriate supporting evidence/reason in
relation to a given situation, problem or issue.

  Marks                                        Level descriptor

    0      • The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

   1–2     • The response identifies a policy.
           • The response uses no economic theory to support the recommendation.
           • Economic terms are stated but are not relevant.
           • The response contains no use of text/data to support the recommendation.
           • The response contains no evidence of synthesis or evaluation.

   3–4     • The response identifies an appropriate policy.
           • The response uses limited economic theory to support the recommendation in a
             superficial manner.
           • Some relevant economic terms are included.
           • The response contains no use of relevant text/data to support the recommendation.
           • The response contains evidence of superficial synthesis or evaluation.

   5–6     • The response identifies and explains an appropriate policy.
           • The response uses relevant economic theory to partially support the recommendation.
           • Some relevant economic terms are used appropriately.
           • The response includes some relevant information from the text/data to support
             the recommendation.
           • The response contains evidence of appropriate synthesis or evaluation but
             lacks balance.

   7–8     • The response identifies and fully explains an appropriate policy.
           • The response uses relevant economic theory to support the recommendation.
           • Relevant economic terms are used mostly appropriately.
           • The use of information from the text/data is generally appropriate, relevant and applied
             correctly to support the recommendation.
           • The response contains evidence of appropriate synthesis or evaluation that is
             mostly balanced.

   9–10    • The response identifies and fully explains an appropriate policy.
           • The response uses relevant economic theory effectively to support
             the recommendation.
           • Relevant economic terms are used appropriately throughout the response.
           • The use of information from the text/data is appropriate, relevant and supports the
             analysis/evaluation effectively.
           • The response contains evidence of effective and balanced synthesis or evaluation.
