8823 – 5201M




                   Markscheme


                   November 2023


                      Geography


               Higher and standard level


                       Paper 1




25 pages
                                            –2–                                         8823 – 5201M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                         –3–                                             8823 – 5201M


Paper 1 markbands

These markbands are to be used for paper 1 at both standard level and higher level.

Marks   Level descriptor
        AO1: Knowledge and understanding of              AO3: Synthesis and              AO4: Selection, use and
        specified content                                evaluation                      application of a variety of
                                                                                         appropriate skills and
        AO2: Application and analysis of
                                                                                         techniques
        knowledge and understanding

  0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
 1–2    The response is too brief, lists unconnected information, is not focused on the question and lacks
        structure.
        • The response is very brief or descriptive,      • No evidence of evaluation     • Information presented is not
          listing a series of unconnected comments          or conclusion is expected       grouped logically (in
          or largely irrelevant information. The            at this level.                  paragraphs or sections).
          knowledge and understanding presented is                                        • Maps, graphs or diagrams
          very general with large gaps or errors in                                         are not included, are
          interpretation. Examples or case studies                                          irrelevant or difficult to
          are not included or only listed.                                                  decipher (only if appropriate
        • There is no evidence of analysis.                                                 to the question).
        • Terminology is missing, not defined,
          irrelevant or used incorrectly.


 3–4    The response is too general, lacks detail, is not focused on the question and is largely unstructured.

        • The response is very general. The              • If appropriate to the         • Most of the information is not
          knowledge and understanding presented            question, the conclusion is     grouped logically (in
          outlines examples, statistics, and facts         irrelevant.                     paragraphs or sections).
          that are both relevant and irrelevant. Links   • There is no evidence of       • Maps, graphs or diagrams
          to the question are listed.                      critical evaluation of          included lack detail, are
        • The argument or analysis presented is not        evidence (examples,             incorrectly or only partially
          relevant to the question.                        statistics and case             interpreted without explicit
        • Basic terminology is defined and used but        studies).                       connections to the question
          with errors in understanding or used                                             (only if appropriate to the
          inconsistently.                                                                  question).
 5–6    The response partially addresses the question, but with a narrow argument, an unsubstantiated
        conclusion, and limited evaluation.
        • The response describes relevant                • If appropriate to the        • Logically related information is
          supporting evidence (information,                question, the conclusions      grouped together (in sections
          examples, case studies et cetera),               are general, not aligned       or paragraphs) but not
          outlining appropriate link(s) to the             with the evidence              consistently.
          question.                                        presented and/or based on • Maps, graphs or diagrams
        • The argument or analysis partially               an incorrect interpretation    included do not follow
          addresses the question or elaborates one         of the evidence.               conventions, and include
          point repeatedly.                              • Other perspectives on          relevant and irrelevant
        • Relevant terminology is defined and used         evidence (examples,            interpretations in the text (only
          with only minor errors in understanding or       statistics and case studies)   if appropriate to the question).
          is used inconsistently.                          and/or strengths and
                                                           weaknesses of evidence
                                                           are listed.
                                                       –4–                                             8823 – 5201M


7–8    The response addresses the whole question, the analysis is evaluated and the conclusion is relevant
       but lacks balance.
       •  The response describes            • If appropriate to the question, the     • Logically related
          relevant supporting evidence        conclusion is relevant to the question,   information is grouped
          correctly (information, examples    aligned with the evidence but             together (in sections)
          and case studies) that covers all   unbalanced.                               consistently.
          the main points of the question, • Other perspectives on evidence           • Maps, graphs or
          describing appropriate links to     (examples, statistics and case            diagrams included
          the question.                       studies) and/or strengths and             contribute to/support the
       • The argument or analysis is          weaknesses of evidence are                argument or analysis
          clear and relevant to the           described.                                (only if appropriate to
          question but one-sided or                                                     the question).
          unbalanced.
       • Complex terminology is defined
          and used correctly but not
          consistently.
9–10   The response is in-depth and question-specific (topic and command term); analysis and conclusion
       are justified through well-developed evaluation of evidence and perspectives.
       •   The response explains correct     •   If appropriate to the question, the     •   Response is logically
           and relevant examples,                conclusion is relevant to the question,     structured with
           statistics and details that are       balanced and aligned with the               discussion (and if
           integrated in the response,           evidence.                                   appropriate to the
           explaining the appropriate link   •   Evaluation includes a systematic and        question, a conclusion)
           to the question.                      detailed presentation of ideas, cause       focusing on the
       •   The argument or analysis is           and effect relations, other                 argument or points
           balanced, presenting evidence         perspectives; strengths and                 made, making it easy to
           that is discussed, explaining         weaknesses of evidence are                  follow.
           complexity, exceptions and            discussed; (if appropriate) includes    •   Maps, graphs or
           comparisons.                          justification of the argument and           diagrams are annotated
       •   Complex and relevant                  conclusion.                                 following conventions
           terminology is used correctly                                                     and their relevance is
           throughout the response.                                                          explained and support
                                                                                             the argument or
                                                                                             analysis (only if
                                                                                             appropriate to the
                                                                                             question).
                                                     –5–                                     8823 – 5201M


                                                  Section A
Option A — Freshwater

1.   (a)   (i)    State the peak rainfall, in millimetres, for the storm.                               [1]

                  8

           (ii)   State the time difference, in hours, between the peak discharges at point A
                  and point B.                                                                          [1]

                  26

     (b)   Outline one reason for the short lag time for river X, a rural drainage basin.               [2]

           Award [1] for the reason and [1] for development / explanation.

           For example, short lag time is caused by a deforested/unvegetated drainage basin [1]
           which has rapid run-off and limited interception [1].

            Other reasons include:
           • Type and duration of rainfall
           • Snow melt
           • Antecedent rainfall
           • Shape/size of drainage basin
           • Slope/geology/soil of drainage basin.

           Do not accept aspects of urbanization as these are rural drainage basins.

     (c)   Explain two advantages of an integrated drainage basin management (IDBM) plan.           [3 + 3]

           Award [1] for each advantage and up to [2] for development / explanation in each case.

           For example, the IDBM coordinates the management of water for the river basin [1]
           in order to allow equitable use for farmers/domestic users [1] providing a reliable/high quality
           water supply [1].

           Other advantages (maybe economic, political, environmental, social) include:
                 • Provides a holistic framework for coordination between different stakeholders
                 • Coordinates conservation of water/land/resources in the drainage basin
                 • Protects ecosystems – fish, wildlife
                 • Enhances the importance of sustainability
                 • Provides a long-term vision for the river basin.

           Award a maximum of [4] if the candidate focuses merely on a dam.
                                                  –6–                                      8823 – 5201M


2.   (a)   Evaluate the effectiveness of two or more different ways of mitigating flood risk.     [10]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

           The increase in frequency, magnitude and severity of river flooding has become a
           serious hazard, especially in urban and densely populated rural areas, resulting in
           considerable injury, loss of life and damage to property. It is important that flood
           mitigation measures are implemented in different drainage basins. Ways include
           hard and soft engineering, planning, and flood warning technology. Flood mitigation
           measures may occur at different scales, from individual households to larger
           communities and at a national level.

           Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
           • Ways include measures to reduce the magnitude and frequency of floods, and
             measures to mitigate the damage caused by floods to communities and property.
           • On a larger scale, such as a drainage basin, flood mitigation includes both hard and
             soft engineering, planning, management, and flood prediction.
           • Hard engineering includes dams, levée strengthening, and channel modification.
             Soft engineering includes changes in land use, afforestation, creation of wetlands.
             Planning includes land use zoning and flood warning systems.
           • Flood mitigation implemented by households includes increased awareness,
             flood proofing of buildings and insurance.
           • The effectiveness of various measures will depend on their success, cost and
             reduction in flood risk faced by communities. Small-scale, relatively cheap, local
             measures may be more cost-effective than expensive, large-scale schemes.
           • Some schemes, while being effective in one area, may cause an increase in
             flooding further downstream.

           Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
           evaluation (AO3) of the statement in a way that examines the varying effectiveness
           of different flood mitigation measures. These may vary between different places, at
           varying scales, for different communities. The relative power of different stakeholders
           in relation to implementation of measures might also be considered. Another approach
           might be to examine flood mitigation measures in contrasting places at different levels
           of economic development.

           For 5–6 marks, expect weakly-evidenced outlining of one or more flood mitigation
           measures

           For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account which includes:
           • either an evidenced explanation of the effectiveness of two or more mitigation measures
           • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
             and/or perspectives, possibly examining future possibilities for mitigation.

           For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                 –7–                                      8823 – 5201M



2.   (b)   Examine the power of different stakeholders in managing the consequences
           of agricultural activity on water quality.                                                [10]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

           Agricultural practices have a negative impact on water quality. These include chemical
           pollution through the release of nutrients, fertilizers, pesticides, and animal waste. Also,
           irrigation practices may result in salinization. Farms discharge large quantities of organic
           matter and sediments into water bodies. Stakeholders concerned in the management
           of the consequences of agriculture on water quality include farmers, industrial and domestic
           consumers, water companies, and governments. Each have different priorities, perspectives
           and power; their interests may be in conflict and difficult to reconcile.

           Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
           • Stakeholders include farmers, industrial and domestic consumers, environmentalists
             and water companies, governments. Each have different priorities and interests,
             which may be in conflict and difficult to reconcile.
           • Agriculture has a major impact on water quality, through chemical pollution from
             pesticides and fertilizers, animal waste, and sediment from soil erosion. Also,
             salinization resulting from irrigation.
           • Other effects include eutrophication, as well as impacts on biodiversity, aquatic
             ecosystems and on human health.
           • Management strategies might include reducing discharges of chemicals and animal
             waste, improving irrigation techniques to reduce salinization, and changing land
             use to reduce sediment runoff.
           • Management is challenging, partly because of the conflicting views and perspectives
             of different stakeholders, as well as cost issues.

           Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
           evaluation (AO3) of the statement in a way that examines the possibilities for
           management, and the varying power and conflicting views of different stakeholders.
           Another approach might be to examine management problems for different places at
           varying levels of development.

           For 5–6 marks, expect weakly-evidenced outlining of at least one consequence of
           agricultural practices on water quality.

           For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account which includes:
           • either an evidenced explanation of the consequences of agricultural activity on water
             quality, and the power of different stakeholders in management.
           • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
             and/or perspectives, possibly examining future ideas for management.

           For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                    –8–                                    8823 – 5201M


Option B — Oceans and coastal margins


3.   (a)   (i)    Identify the island in the Galápagos that lies on the equator (0°).                  [1]

                  Isla Isabela

           (ii)   Estimate, in km2, the area of Isla San Cristóbal.                                    [1]

                  Allow answers between 750 - 1000

     (b)   Apart from banning fishing, outline one other reason why the newly protected
           areas were created.                                                                         [2]

           Award [1] for a reason and [1] for explanation / development.

           For example: To preserve the biodiversity of the area [1] by reducing the amount
           of disturbance to wildlife [1].

           Other reasons include:
           • To allow scientific research
           • To promote ecotourism
           • To stop the extraction of other natural resources, like oil and gas

     (c)   Explain two strategies (other than marine reserves) to reduce overfishing.              [3 + 3]

           Award [1] for the strategy and up to [2] for further development/explanation/exemplification.

           For example, introducing fishing quotas [1] which limits the amount of fish caught
           per fishing boat [1] for example, EU’s Common Fisheries Policy [1].

           Other possibilities include:
           • Establishing aquaculture
           • Closing of fishing areas / having set season length / restricting time at
             sea / monitoring size and number of boats
           • Increasing mesh size – reducing the catching of juvenile fish
           • Satellite and logbook surveillance and penalties for illegal landings.
                                                 –9–                                        8823 – 5201M


4.   (a)   Examine the causes of ocean acidification and the possible impacts on coral reefs.             [10]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

           Oceanic waters have become increasingly acidic in recent times. This acidification has
           possible serious consequences on coral reefs and other marine organisms and
           ecosystems. The oceans play a critical role in capturing CO2 from the atmosphere.
           The CO2 dissolves in water to form a weak acid. The oceans have absorbed about a
           third of the atmospheric CO2 resulting from human activities, such as urban and industrial
           pollution, leading to a steady decrease in ocean pH levels. With increasing atmospheric
           CO2, the chemical balance will change even more during the next century. Ocean
           acidification is an important threat to coral reef ecosystems, because it reduces the
           availability of carbonates that reef building corals need to produce their skeletons.
           However, the effect on coral reefs is not straightforward; not all reefs are affected in the
           same way.

           Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
           • The role of the oceans as a store/sink of carbon dioxide (CO2)
           • Oceans have become increasingly acidic in recent times, due mainly to high
             levels of atmospheric CO2
           • Increases in atmospheric CO2 is mainly due to human activities, such as urban
             and industrial pollution
           • Acidification of the oceans has significant impacts on coral reef ecosystems,
             crustacea, and marine food chains. Reef building organisms are lacking in
             carbonates to produce their skeletons
           • However, the relationship between oceanic acidification and coral reef ecosystems
             is not clear. Some parts of the world are being affected more than others, and in
             some areas certain species of coral are re-growing
           • Impacts of CO2 on coral reefs are not solely acidification; rise in global temperatures
             (global warming from rise in CO2) may lead to bleaching.


           Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
           evaluation (AO3) of the statement in a way that examines the processes affecting
           the role of the oceans as a carbon store, how these have changed over time and the
           effects on marine ecosystems in different places. Another approach might be to
           examine the scale of the threats for different places.

           For 5–6 marks, expect weakly-evidenced outlining of at least one cause of ocean
           acidification, and/or the impacts on coral reefs.

           For 7–8 marks, expect a well-structured account, which includes:  
           • either an evidenced explanation of the causes of ocean acidification, and
              possible impacts on coral reefs (do not expect balance).
           • or a discursive conclusion, possibly recognizing that not all reefs are
              affected in the same way, as more research is needed, and considering
              possible scope for management.

           For 9–10 marks, expect both traits.
                                                 – 10 –                                    8823 – 5201M


4.   (b)   Examine how changes in relative sea level result in the formation of two or more
           coastal landforms.                                                                        [10]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

           Changes in relative sea level are caused by isostatic, tectonic and eustatic processes,
           resulting in submergent and emergent coastal landforms. Eustatic processes are associated
           with the advance and retreat of glaciers and ice caps, as well as thermal expansion, resulting
           in changes in world-wide sea levels. Isostatic and tectonic processes are more local,
           involving uplift or depression of the Earth’s crust. Coastal landforms on emergent coastlines
           include raised beaches and relict (fossil) cliffs. Submerged coasts include landforms such as
           rias and fjords.

           Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
           • Changes in relative sea levels may be caused by isostatic, tectonic or eustatic processes,
             or a combination
           • Emergent coastlines cause a fall in relative sea level, leading to the formation of
             raised beaches and relict cliffs
           • Relict cliffs are steep slopes formerly eroded by the sea and now raised above sea
             level. They may contain wave-cut notches, caves and arches, showing evidence of
             former marine erosion
           • Raised beaches are flat surfaces which were formerly wave-cut platforms or beaches.
             They may occur in front of relict cliffs and covered by sand or rounded pebbles
           • Submerged coastlines are caused by a relative rise in sea level; the coastline is “drowned”
           • Fjords are drowned glacial valleys; relatively deep and straight. Rias are drowned
             former river valleys, with a sinuous profile.

           Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
           evaluation (AO3) of the statement in a way that examines the processes resulting in
           changes in sea level and associated landforms in different places. Another approach
           might be to examine the effects of relative sea level changes over time, recognizing
           that both emergence and submergence may occur in the same place at different times.

           For 5–6 marks, expect weakly-evidenced outlining of the formation of one or more
           landforms resulting from changes in sea level.

           For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account which includes:
           • either an evidenced explanation of the formation of two or more coastal landforms
             resulting from changing sea levels.
           • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
             and/or perspectives. They may recognize that sea level can both rise and fall in the
             same area resulting in a complex landscape.


           For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                 – 11 –                                    8823 – 5201M


Option C — Extreme environments

5.   (a)   (i)    Identify which type of sand dune requires strong wind and a small amount
                  of sand.                                                                            [1]

                  Longitudinal dunes

     (a)   (ii)   Estimate the minimum percentage of sand required for the formation
                  of transverse dunes.                                                                [1]

                  35 (Accept answers between 30–40)

     (b)   Outline one reason why vegetation is important in dune formation.                          [2]

           Award [1] for a reason and [1] for development.

           For example: The vegetation reduces wind velocity [1] so that sand is deposited [1].

           Other reasons include:
           • The role of root systems in stabilization
           • Decaying vegetation increases organic matter in the soil

     (c)   Explain two weathering processes that occur in hot arid environments.                  [3 + 3]

           Award [1] for each named process and up to [2] for development / explanation.

           For example: Exfoliation / onion skin weathering [1] occurs due to repeated
           heating and cooling of rock [1] causing repeated expansion and contraction
           and layers peel away [1].

           Other possibilities include:
           • Granular and block disintegration
           • Freeze-thaw
           • Salt crystal growth
           • Chemical weathering (hydrolysis)
                                                  – 12 –                                      8823 – 5201M


6.   (a)   Examine the challenges for local stakeholders caused by tourism in
           extreme environments.                                                                            [10]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

           The growth of tourism in extreme environments has resulted in significant challenges
           for local stakeholders. Extreme environments include cold and high-altitude, and hot arid.
           Due to physical challenges these areas were formerly often isolated and sparsely
           populated. Tourism has resulted in a large influx of people, together with developments
           in settlement, infrastructure, and tourist facilities, resulting in pressures on local people,
           their economy and physical environment.

           Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
           • Local stakeholders include: farmers, businesses (touristic and others), politicians,
             environmentalists, indigenous peoples
           • Challenges for local stakeholders may be environmental, economic, and social – this
             creates conflict/tension
           • Environmental pressures include significant landscape changes, damage to fragile
             ecosystems, different types of pollution
           • Economic challenges include ownership, employment, conflict between local and large
             international tour operators, economic leakage, and increased prices for land and property
           • Stress on local infrastructure e.g. roads, water supply, power
           • Social challenges include loss of traditional lifestyles and customs, and exploitation
           • Consideration should be given as to how these challenges might be managed, and
             turned into opportunities for local stakeholders.

           Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
           evaluation (AO3) of the statement in a way that examines the power and challenges for
           local stakeholders in different places, and possibilities for mitigation. Another approach
           might be to examine the extent to which the challenges might be successfully managed,
           or to compare the scale of the challenges.

           For 5–6 marks, expect weakly-evidenced outlining of at least one challenge caused by
           tourism for local stakeholders in an extreme environment.

           For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account which includes:
           • either an evidenced explanation of a variety of challenges caused by tourism for different
             local stakeholders in extreme environments
           • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical
             concepts and/or perspectives.

           For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                 – 13 –                                     8823 – 5201M


6.   (b)   To what extent can the causes of desertification be successfully managed?                     [10]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

           Desertification is a major environmental challenge in arid and semi-arid regions, caused
           by various factors, including climatic change and human activities such as overgrazing,
           removal of vegetation cover, soil exhaustion and misuse of water resources. Addressing
           the causes of desertification is critical in the eradication of poverty in vulnerable human
           populations. This will help improve environmental sustainability. Management strategies
           should be implemented at the local and global scales, with the active engagement of
           stakeholders and local communities.

           Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
           • Causes include climatic change and human activities such as population pressure,
             overgrazing, removal of vegetation cover, soil exhaustion and misuse of water resources.
           • Management involves different stakeholders at local, national, and international levels.
           • Management strategies might include restoring vegetative cover for soil conservation
             and against wind and water erosion; planting trees; reducing overgrazing; soil
             conservation; water management; drought resistant crops.
           • Global efforts to combat climate change which might affect rainfall.
           • Reducing population pressure might allow restoration of soil fertility and managing the
             water supplies.
           • Some causes of desertification might be more easily managed than others – e.g. climate
             change versus local initiatives – at different scales, and over differing time periods.

           Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
           evaluation (AO3) which examines the challenges of combatting desertification in different
           places and time scales. Another approach might be to look at the varying power of different
           stakeholders and the possibilities for change.

           For 5–6 marks, expect weakly-evidenced outlining of at least one cause and/or
           management of desertification.

           For 7–8 marks, expect a well-structured account which includes:
           • either an evidenced discussion of different management strategies to combat the
             causes of desertification
           • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical
             concepts and/or perspectives.

           For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                  – 14 –                                   8823 – 5201M


Option D — Geophysical hazards

7.   (a)   Using evidence from the diagram, identify one effect of mass movement on:

           (i)    the human landscape;                                                                [1]

                  cracked and uneven road; tilted power poles; cracks in house; broken fence

           (ii)   the physical landscape.                                                             [1]

                  dead trees; cracks (in soil); hummocks / ridges / slump / surface slip

     (b)   Outline one way in which human activity may increase the instability of a slope.           [2]

           Award [1] for a valid human activity and [1] for development / explanation.

           For example: Undercutting a slope for building roads [1] reduces the resistance to gravity by
           removing support [1].

           Other possibilities include:
           • Building on steep gradients
           • Deforestation
           • Mining/waste heaps
           • Disturbing drainage.

     (c)   Explain why vulnerability to mass movement hazards might vary between
           communities due to:

           (i)    one economic reason;                                                                [3]

                  Award [1] for a valid reason and up to [2] for development.

                  For example: The wealthier the community [1] the more able they are to invest in
                  research about geology of the slope [1] and use retaining walls to prevent damage
                  to roads [1].

                  Other possibilities include:
                  • Insurance for domestic/business
                  • Compensation from the government
                  • Quality of the building/materials

           (ii)   one social reason.                                                                  [3]

                  Award [1] for a valid reason and up to [2] for development.

                  For example: Education levels about risks of landslides vary between communities
                  [1] and good levels of education would mean people choose to live elsewhere [1]
                  reducing death and injury [1].

                  Other possibilities include:
                  • Perception
                  • Population characteristics
                  • Healthcare.
                                                – 15 –                                    8823 – 5201M


8.   (a)   Examine reasons why some high-magnitude earthquakes have low-level
           impacts on people and property.                                                          [10]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

           The impact of earthquakes is influenced by both geophysical and geographic factors.
           The magnitude and frequency of earthquakes is significant. High magnitude, low frequency
           earthquakes may be very destructive of people and property. However, not all high
           magnitude earthquakes have the same impacts – these will vary according to factors such
           as location of epicentre, and human factors such as level of preparedness, population
           density, rural/urban location, economic development, and degree of isolation.

           Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
           • High magnitude, low frequency earthquakes are often very destructive with intense
             shaking and tsunami/landslides/liquefaction
           • Different places are more vulnerable than others to large earthquakes
           • The impact of earthquakes varies with geophysical factors, such as type of plate
             margin and depth/location of epicentres
           • Human factors such as population density, level of economic development, time of
             day and degree of isolation, and levels of preparedness affect the level of impact.

           Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
           evaluation (AO3) of the statement which examines the relationship between
           magnitude/power of earthquakes and the scale of impacts in different places. Another
           approach might be to examine how the relationship affects areas at different levels of
           development, and how this may change over time.

           For 5–6 marks, expect weakly-evidenced outlining of at least one reason why some high
           magnitude earthquakes have low impacts.

           For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account which includes:
           • either an evidenced explanation of reasons why high magnitude earthquakes
             may have low impacts on people and property
           • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical
             concepts and/or perspectives.

           For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                 – 16 –                                    8823 – 5201M


8.   (b)   To what extent are pre-event management strategies successful in reducing
           vulnerability to volcanic hazard events?                                                  [10]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

           Population growth in both rural and urban areas is increasingly occurring in regions subject
           to hazardous volcanic activity, especially on destructive plate margins around the Pacific
           Ring of Fire. Violent, explosive, volcanic activity, accompanied by ash falls, pyroclastics,
           lahars, lava flows, and sometimes large tsunami, pose a significant risk to populations and
           places. Management strategies undertaken prior to a major eruption might reduce
           vulnerability at the local and wider scale. To be effective, management strategies should
           understand magnitude, frequency, and timing of possible future events, so that effective
           measures might be taken to reduce human vulnerability.

           Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
           • Magnitude/frequency analysis is important for knowledge of probability of future
             volcanic events; but these are not accurate forecasts
           • Mapping of active volcanic areas, and monitoring of craters to try and predict
             likelihood/timing of future eruptions, including GPS monitoring, seismic activity and
             changes in chemistry
           • Hazard risk mapping; land use zoning of hazard prone areas. Assessment of risk
             from lava flows, and possible tsunami
           • Early warning systems and evacuation plans/routes in case of eruptions
           • Success of strategies depend on available technology and funding. Also, awareness
             of past volcanic activity in an area, and previous experience of accuracy of warnings
           • Rural areas in low-income countries remain vulnerable, compared
             with people in high income countries.

           Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
           evaluation (AO3) of the statement which examines the success and cost of management
           strategies in different places at varying scales, and the roles and power of various
           stakeholders. Another approach might be to compare effectiveness in different places at
           varying levels of economic development.

           For 5–6 marks, expect weakly-evidenced outlining of the success of at least one pre-event
           management strategy.

           For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account which includes:
           • either an evidenced examination of the success of pre-event management strategies
             in reducing vulnerability
           • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
             and/or perspectives, assessing the effectiveness of strategies.

           For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                  – 17 –                                    8823 – 5201M


Option E — Leisure, tourism and sport

9.   (a)   (i)    Identify the type of building found at grid reference 268236.                       [1]

                  Youth hostel – only answer

           (ii)   State the height difference, in metres, between spot heights X and Y on the map.    [1]

                  135

     (b)   Using map evidence, outline one reason why the area around Keswick might be
           suitable as a festival site.                                                               [2]

           Allow [1] for reason and [1] for development using map evidence.

           For example: Keswick is accessible [1] as shown by the good communication links
           (main road / bus station) [1].

           Other possibilities include:
           • Accommodation / camping sites
           • Scenery
           • Flat land.

     (c)   Explain two management strategies to increase site resilience in rural tourist
           hotspot areas.                                                                         [3 + 3]

           Award [1] for describing a relevant management strategy, and up to [2] for further
           development / explanation of how it increases site resilience.

           For example: Establishing National Parks/conservation areas [1] which seek to provide
           information/education about the environment [1] and help to maintain/conserve the rural
           area for the future [1].

           Possible strategies include:
           • Limiting visitor numbers
           • Constructing new footpaths / boardwalks
           • Banning off-road vehicles
           • Limiting the purchase of second homes
           • Developing eco-tourism
           • Rubbish bins / waste facilities.
                                                  – 18 –                                     8823 – 5201M


10.   (a)   Examine the benefits and costs for different stakeholders of the involvement
            of transnational corporations (TNCs) in expanding tourism.                                 [10]

            Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

            TNCs have been central in the growth and globalization of international tourism in recent
            decades. They dominate the tourist industry, including transportation, accommodation,
            cheap package holidays, and the development of tourist resorts around the world. Benefits
            for stakeholders might include employment, increased standard of living, higher wages and
            the possibility of promotion. However, there have also been significant costs to different
            stakeholders at different scales. The costs are environmental, social, economic, and political.

            Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
            • TNCs dominate the international tourism industry (e.g. transportation, accommodation,
              package holidays)
            • TNCs are the main reason for the development of mass tourism
            • They bring significant development to low-income countries and communities (e.g.
              revenues, employment, infrastructure); raising living standards through the multiplier effect
            • Development of tourist resorts attracts international tourists
            • However, there are significant costs, including leakage of revenues, low-paid employment,
              damage to heritage sites and local customs
            • Uneven development, as tourist resorts are “islands of development in seas of poverty”.

            Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
            examination (AO3) of the statement which examines the benefits and costs of TNC
            involvement for different stakeholders. Compares the roles and power of stakeholders in
            different places and scales. Another approach might be to consider the possibilities for
            change, to reduce the costs for stakeholders.

            For 5–6 marks, expect weakly-evidenced outlining of at least one benefit and/or cost of
            TNCs in expanding tourism.

            For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account which includes:
            • either an evidenced explanation of the benefits and costs for different stakeholders
              of TNC involvement in expanding tourism
            • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
              and/or perspectives, assessing the relative benefits and costs.

            • For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                     – 19 –                                        8823 – 5201M


10.   (b)   To what extent is participation in leisure activities in different societies related
            to economic development?                                                                       [10]

            Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

            There has been a significant growth in participation in different leisure activities, linked to
            economic development in different societies. Economic development has brought an
            increase in leisure time and holidays, but the cost of some leisure activities is prohibitive in
            some societies. Other factors such as attitudes to gender and stage in lifecycle may also be
            important. There is also variation in types of leisure activity, from sports and tourism to more
            sedentary activities such as watching TV, which are linked to factors other than economic
            development.

            Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
            • Growth in participation is linked to increasing disposable incomes and personal
              affluence, increasing leisure time and fewer working hours
            • Economic development is also accompanied by increased investment in leisure
              infrastructure, greater opportunity and choice for leisure
            • Increased participation may also result in greater investment in leisure facilities, resulting
              in economic development
            • Improvements in transport and communications, including social media, increasing
              exposure/access to new leisure activities
            • Cost of some leisure activities is prohibitive to less affluent people and communities.
              Some leisure activities are associated with more affluent groups and others with less
              well-off societies
            • Culture and religion, and demographic factors, such as stages in lifecycle; also, political
              factors like government influence. Promotion of activities to support mental and physical
              health
            • Other factors also influence participation, including changing attitudes towards gender,
              race and disability.

            Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
            evaluation (AO3) of the statement which examines the role of economic development,
            and of other factors, on participation in societies from perspectives of different stakeholders.
            Another approach might be to examine changes in participation in different places and on
            varying time and spatial scales, which might vary within a community or between countries.

            For 5–6 marks, expect weakly-evidenced outlining of at least one relationship between
            participation and economic development and/or other factors.

            For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account which includes:
            • either an evidenced examination of the extent to which economic and other factors affect
              participation in leisure activities in different societies
            • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
              and/or perspectives.

            • For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                  – 20 –                                     8823 – 5201M


Option F — Food and health

11.   (a)   (i)    State the number of USA states in 2016 that had an obesity level of ≥35%.             [1]

                   5

            (ii)   Using a compass direction, identify the area of the USA that has mainly
                   20–24% obesity levels in 2008.                                                        [1]

                   North-West / West

      (b)   Outline one possible reason why most of the USA states showed increased levels
            of obesity in 2016.                                                                          [2]

            Award [1] for the reason, and [1] for explanation / development.

            For example: Increased consumption of fast foods [1], meaning more saturated
            fats are consumed [1].

            Other reasons include:
            • More sedentary lifestyle / lack of exercise
            • Greater use of computers/laptops/smartphones – less exercise
            • Lifestyle choices
            • Poor education
            • Poverty levels.

      (c)   Explain two consequences of the disease burden on society resulting from an
            ageing population.                                                                   [3 + 3]

            Award [1] for each valid consequence, and up to [2] for further development / explanation.

            For example: Expenses to the taxpayer / family [1] as there are more old people with
            dementia [1] who need special care [1]

            Other possibilities include:
            • Cost of medication
            • Higher demand for hospital specialists / training in elderly care
            • Surgery costs (e.g. hip and knee operations for Arthritis)
            • Mental health issues (e.g. related to loneliness / Covid-19)
            • Mortality.
                                                  – 21 –                                     8823 – 5201M


12.   (a)   To what extent are agribusiness transnational corporations (TNCs) the most
            important influence on food consumption habits?                                        [10]

            Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

            Agribusinesses are dominant in global food productions systems, and hence play a major
            role in influencing food consumption. They control most aspects of the food chain, such as
            production, processing, sales, prices, and advertising. The purchase of food by consumers
            is influenced by price and convenience. This has led to an increase in processed foods,
            ready meals, fast food, and soft drinks, resulting in increased levels of obesity and heart
            disease. Globalization means that the nutrition transition also affects low-income countries.
            Also important are education, levels of wealth, media, culture, and health concerns.

            Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
            • Agribusinesses increasingly dominate food production systems, from production to
              processing and manufacture, distribution, and sales
            • They influence what is grown, where, and at what price
            • Consumers enjoy low-cost foodstuffs, low prices, and convenience. Increased demands
              for processed foods and fast food
            • Low prices influence purchase of fast and processed foods by low income groups;
              unequal influence on health
            • Exotic foods available all year round
            • Link between media advertising and agribusiness, affecting dietary choices
            • Globalization means that nutrition transition affects low-income countries, with rising
              incomes and urban lifestyles.
            • Other factors also affect dietary choice – e.g. education, levels of wealth, media, culture,
              and health concerns.

            Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
            evaluation (AO3) of the statement which examines the power of agribusinesses, and related
            stakeholders, such as the media, in influencing dietary choices of people in different places
            and time. Another approach might be to examine people are overcoming the influence of
            TNCs by favouring local, independently produced foodstuffs with a low carbon footprint.

            For 5–6 marks, expect weakly-evidenced outlining of at least one way that agribusiness
            TNCs may influence food consumption habits.

            For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account which includes:
            • either an evidenced discussion of the extent to which agribusiness TNCs influence food
              consumption habits
            • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) of the relative importance of TNCs,
              recognizing that other factors also influence food consumption habits.


            For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.

            Note. McDonalds is a TNC but not an agribusiness TNC so any response dealing only with a
            fast food TNC receives a maximum of 4.
                                                   – 22 –                                      8823 – 5201M


12.   (b)   To what extent do economic factors influence the diffusion of disease?                        [10]

            Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

            Globalization, improved communications, and the increasing movement of people between
            different places has contributed to the diffusion of diseases in recent years. Some diseases
            may diffuse rapidly over a wide area. The rate and extent of diffusion of disease is influenced
            by economic factors, such as wealth and poverty, investment in health care to prevent and
            treat disease, and amount of travel between places. Other factors are also important in
            affecting diffusion. These include physical (climate, isolation), social and political factors.

            Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
            • Reference may be made to one or more diseases. The rate and type of diffusion
              (relocation, expansion) will vary according to the type of disease
            • Economic factors the affect the extent and rate of diffusion in different places.
              These apply at different scales, from local to national and international
            • Inequalities in levels of wealth and poverty play an important role – low-income groups,
              (because of quality of life) are more prone to disease and may have limited access to
              basic medical care. Richer communities more able to limit and control disease diffusion
            • Economic factors may also include research into disease, availability of effective
              vaccinations, and cures
            • Other factors also play an important role in diffusion. These include physical factors,
              degree of isolation, population density. Political factors, including quarantine, restrictions
              on movement, promotion of relief and health care, education are also important.

            Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
            evaluation (AO3) of the statement which examines ways in which economic factors affect
            the rate and extent of diffusion between different places. The importance of other factors
            should also be considered and evaluated.

            For 5–6 marks, expect weakly- evidenced outlining of at least one economic factor
            influencing the diffusion of disease.

            For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account which includes:
            • either an evidenced discussion of the extent to which economic and other factors
              influence the diffusion of disease
            • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) of the relative importance of economic
              and other factors.

            • For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                    – 23 –                                     8823 – 5201M


Option G — Urban environments

13.   (a)   (i)    Estimate the carbon footprint, in millions of tonnes of CO2, of New York.                [1]

                   Allow answers between 230–240

            (ii)   State the relationship between population and carbon footprint.                          [1]

                   Positive / the lower the population, the lower the carbon footprint, or vice versa

                   Accept no relationship shown


      (b)   Outline one reason why some small cities have very high carbon emissions.                       [2]

            Award [1] for a valid reason and [1] for development / explanation.

            For example: Some small cities use large amounts of fossil fuel for electricity
            generation [1] in order to heat/cool homes [1].

            Other reasons include:
            • High vehicle ownership
            • Manufacturing
            • High consumer economy
            • Personal wealth allows disproportionate usage.

      (c)   Explain two eco city design strategies to reduce the urban ecological footprint.            [3 + 3]

            Award [1] for a relevant design strategy and up to [2] for explanation / development /
            exemplification that shows how the design attempts to manage the urban
            ecological footprint.

            For example: Installing solar panels on houses [1] so that a renewable resource is
            used for hot water / heating / lighting [1] thereby decreasing fossil fuel dependence [1].

            Other possible strategies include:
            • Waste production limited (recycling)
            • Green spaces provided
            • Reclaiming brownfield sites
            • Circular economy
            • Modifications / retrofitting to existing houses e.g. double glazing
            • Having a good public transport system – reducing private vehicles.

            Allow smart city technologies that link to ecological benefit.
                                                   – 24 –                                     8823 – 5201M


14.   (a)   Evaluate the success of strategies to reduce the impacts of air pollution on
            people in one or more urban areas.                                                          [10]

            Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

            Urban air pollution is a major concern in cities around the world. Growing urban populations
            and industry, together with increased volumes of traffic, have resulted in severe air pollution,
            affecting public health and the environment. Urban air emissions are also a major contributor
            to global warming. Management strategies should address the short- and long-term causes
            of air pollution, and help the city achieve sustainable growth. Management strategies include
            monitoring of distribution and sources of pollution, ways of reducing pollution from domestic,
            industry and transport, and planning for a sustainable future.

            Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
            • High levels of air pollution are associated with population growth, industry, and
              increased volumes of traffic, burning fossil fuels, and emitting toxic gases and particles
            • Air pollution has a major impact on human health, the environment, and global climate
            • Management strategies, aimed at reducing the impacts on people, rely on monitoring
              of sources, spatial distribution and effects of pollution on human health
            • Stakeholders at local, regional, and national scales, have a key role in planning for a
              sustainable future
            • Strategies might include reducing reliance on fossil fuels in homes, industry and transport
            • Reducing traffic volumes in congested areas, development and encouraging use of public
              transport
            • The role of education, incentives, and laws to reduce pollution
            • Success will also partly depend on levels of wealth and poverty.

            Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
            evaluation (AO3) of the statement which examines ways in which urban air pollution may
            be successfully managed. The power and perspectives of different stakeholders, and how
            successful management may vary between different places. Another approach might be to
            focus on the contribution of managing air pollution to development of sustainable cities.

            For 5–6 marks, expect weakly-evidenced outlining of at least one way of reducing the
            impacts of urban air pollution.

            For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account which includes:
            • either an evidenced explanation of strategies to reduce the impact of air pollution on
              people
            • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) of the success of management policies
              in reducing the impact of air pollution on people.

            For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                 – 25 –                                   8823 – 5201M




14.   (b)   To what extent has urban growth been accompanied by improvements in
            infrastructure?                                                                    [10]

            Marks should be allocated according to the markbands.

            The speed and scale of urban growth, especially in low-income countries, brings
            challenges to the improvement in infrastructure, such as power, transport, IT
            communications, waste/sewage and water. Established cities must also continually
            upgrade and extend their infrastructure to keep up with demands of economic
            development, improve living standards and create more sustainable urban environments.

            Possible applied themes (AO2) demonstrating knowledge and understanding (AO1):
            • Provision of basic infrastructure (e.g. power, transport, IT communications, waste, water)
              is essential to people’s quality of life and economic growth
            • Infrastructure is costly to install, maintain and improve. So, often does not keep pace
              with urban growth
            • Rapid urban growth, especially in low-income countries, is often not accompanied by
              infrastructure improvement, resulting in power failures, poor communications, poor
              quality water and sanitation. Living standards suffer as a result
            • In established cities, infrastructure must change and upgrade to meet demands of
              economic growth and rising living standards. Wealthier areas often fare better than poorer
              areas – resulting in regional inequalities at different scales
            • Infrastructure improvements are also necessary for the development of sustainable cities.

            Good answers may be well structured (AO4) and may additionally offer a critical
            evaluation (AO3) of the statement which shows understanding of the issues surrounding
            infrastructure development, the power, and perspectives of different stakeholders, and
            how this varies between different places and scales. Another approach might be to
            examine how the relationship between urban growth and infrastructure may vary over time,
            perhaps resulting in a more sustainable future.

            For 5–6 marks, expect weakly-evidenced outlining of at least one infrastructure
            improvement in an urban area.

            For 7–8 marks, expect a structured account which includes:
            • either an evidenced explanation of the extent to which urban growth has been
              accompanied by improvements in infrastructure in one or more urban areas
            • or a discursive conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) grounded in geographical concepts
              and/or perspectives, examining the extent to which improvements have occurred.

            For 9–10 marks, expect both of these traits.
