8823 – 5206M




               Markscheme


               November 2023


                Geography


                Higher level


                  Paper 3




12 pages
                                            –2–                                         8823 – 5206M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                       –3–                                            8823 – 5206M


Paper 3 part (a) markbands

 Marks   Level descriptor
         AO1: Knowledge and understanding of                 AO3: Synthesis       AO4: Selection, use and
         specified content                                   and evaluation       application of a variety of
                                                                                  appropriate skills and techniques
         AO2: Application and analysis of knowledge
         and understanding
   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
  1–3    The response is general, not focused on the question, and lacks detail and structure.
         • The response is very brief or general, listing a • No evidence of • Information is listed but is not
            series of unconnected comments or largely         synthesis or     grouped together in paragraphs,
            irrelevant information. Evidence is general or    evaluation is    or paragraphing is erratic.
            relevant to the topic, but not to the question.   expected.      • If present, the conclusion is brief,
         • Evidence (that is, facts, statistics, examples or                   does not summarize the argument
            theories) is listed, lacks detail, and the                         and/or does not address the
            relevance to the question is unclear.                              question.
         • Evidence is not used to formulate an argument
            or an analysis.
         • Everyday language is used; there is little use
            of geographical terminology or it is used with
            errors in understanding.
  4–6    The response only partially addresses the question; evidence is both relevant and irrelevant and is
         largely unstructured.
         • The response partially addresses the question • No evidence of • Paragraphs do not reflect
           and/or does not meet the requirements of the      synthesis or    grouping of information that
           command term. Key evidence is not included.       evaluation is   addresses a specific element of
         • A mix of relevant and irrelevant evidence is      expected.       the question.
           outlined (that is, facts, statistics, examples or               • If present, the conclusion is one-
           theories) and any links to the question are only                  sided, addressing only part of the
           listed.                                                           question.
         • The evidence presented supports only one
           element or interpretation of the question.
         • Key geographical terms are defined briefly.
           The terminology used is both relevant and
           irrelevant to the question.
  7–9    The response addresses most parts of the question and outlines an analysis supported by relevant
         evidence but may lack clear links between paragraphs.
         • The question is broken down into parts and        • No evidence of     • A series of standalone paragraphs
           most parts of the question are addressed in         synthesis or         each addressing a specific
           the response, with supporting evidence for          evaluation is        element of the question but
           each aspect of the question. The response           expected.            lacking clear links connecting
           meets the requirements of the command term.                              them all into a coherent whole.
         • Relevant evidence (that is, facts, statistics,                         • The conclusion repeats and
           examples or theories) is described, focused                              summarizes the analysis or
           on the question and mostly correct. Links with                           argument, but may contain new
           the question are described.                                              information as well.
         • The analysis outlines a two-sided argument
           briefly (if appropriate) and is mostly
           descriptive, using examples as explanation.
         • Correct definitions are given, and relevant and
           irrelevant specialist geographical terms are
           used with occasional errors; or everyday
           language is used.
                                                           –4–                                       8823 – 5206M


10–12   The response addresses all aspects of the question; the analysis is explained using evidence
        integrated in the paragraphs, and it is well structured.
        • All aspects of the question are addressed        • No evidence of   • Paragraphs focus on a relevant point
          and the response meets the requirements            synthesis or       of the argument and integrate the
          of the command term.                               evaluation is      supporting evidence. Paragraphs
        • Detailed evidence (that is, facts, statistics,     expected.          are linked and support the logical
          examples or theories) are integrated in                               flow of the argument and response.
          sentences and paragraphs, and links made                            • The conclusion summarizes the
          between evidence and the question are                                 evidence and argument, and links all
          explained and relevant.                                               back to the question.
        • The response explains how the two sides
          of the argument (if appropriate) are
          supported by detailed evidence that is
          integrated in sentences.
        • Clear, correct definitions and use of
          geographical language is integrated in the
          sentences and throughout the response.
                                                       –5–                                            8823 – 5206M


Paper 3 part (b) markbands

 Marks   Level descriptor
         AO1: Knowledge and                    AO3: Synthesis and evaluation           AO4: Selection, use and
         understanding of specified                                                    application of a variety of
         content                                                                       appropriate skills and
                                                                                       techniques
         AO2: Application and analysis of
         knowledge and understanding
   0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
  1–4    The response is general, not focused on the question, and lacks detail and structure.
         • The response is very brief or         • No synthesis or evaluation is      • Information is listed but is
            general, listing a series of           expected at this level.              not grouped together in
            unconnected comments or largely • No links are presented between the        paragraphs, or
            irrelevant information. Evidence is    response and (sub)topics in the      paragraphing is erratic.
            general or relevant to the topic,      guide.                             • If present, the conclusion is
            but not the question.                • No valid opinion or perspective on   brief, does not summarize
         • Evidence (that is, facts, statistics,   the issue is formulated.             the argument and/or does
            examples or theories) is listed,                                            not address the question.
            lacks detail, and the relevance to
            the question is unclear.
         • Evidence is not used to formulate
            an argument or an analysis.
         • Everyday language is used; there
            is little use of geographical
            terminology or it is used with
            errors in understanding.
  5–8    The response only partially addresses the question with limited links to the guide; evidence is both
         relevant and irrelevant and is largely unstructured.
         • The response partially addresses • No synthesis or evaluation is       • Paragraphs do not reflect
           the question and/or does not         expected at this level.             grouping of information that
           meet the requirements of the       • The link(s) between the response    addresses a specific
           command term. Key evidence is        and the guide focus on one topic;   element of the question.
           not included.                        other potential links are listed. • If present, the conclusion is
         • A mix of relevant and irrelevant   • A valid but limited opinion or      one-sided, addressing only
           evidence is outlined (that is,       perspective on the issue is         part of the question.
           facts, statistics, examples or       formulated.
           theories) and any links to the
           question are only listed.
         • The evidence presented supports
           only one element or interpretation
           of the question.
         • Key geographical terms are
           defined briefly. Terminology used
           is both relevant and irrelevant to
           the question.
 9–12    The response addresses most parts of the question with developed links to the guide and outlines an
         analysis supported by relevant evidence but may lack clear links between paragraphs.
         • The question is broken down into • Synthesis or evaluation is required • A series of standalone
           parts and most parts of the            at this level.                          paragraphs each
           question are addressed in the        • Links between the response and          addressing a specific
           response, with supporting              the guide refer to multiple topics      element of the question but
           evidence for each aspect of the        and are described.                      lacking clear links
           question. The response meets         • Opinion or perspective presented is     connecting them all into a
           the requirements of the command        aligned with the response but the       coherent whole.
           term.                                  links are not made explicit or the    • The conclusion repeats and
         • Relevant evidence (that is, facts,     link is a general statement.            summarizes the analysis or
           statistics, examples or theories) is   Other perspectives or interpretations   argument, but may contain
           described, focused on the              are listed without details.             new information as well.
           question and mostly correct.
                                                       –6–                                             8823 – 5206M


          Links with the question are
          described.
        • The analysis outlines a two-
          sided argument briefly (if
          appropriate) and is mostly
          descriptive, using examples as
          explanation.
        • Correct definitions are given, and
          relevant and irrelevant specialist
          geographical terms are used with
          occasional errors; or everyday
          language is used.
13–16   The response addresses all aspects of the question; the analysis is explained and evaluated using
        evidence integrated in the paragraphs, and it is well structured.
        • All aspects of the question are      •   Synthesis and evaluation is           • Paragraphs focus on a
          addressed and the response               required at this level.                 relevant point of the
          meets the requirements of the        •   Links between the response and          argument and integrate the
          command term.                            (sub)topics from the guide are          supporting evidence.
        • Detailed evidence (that is, facts,       explained and supported by the          Paragraphs are linked and
          statistics, examples or theories)        evidence in the response.               support the logical flow of
          are integrated in sentences and      •   The opinion or perspective              the argument and
          paragraphs, and links made               presented is explicitly linked to the   response.
          between evidence and the                 range of evidence included in the • The conclusion
          question are explained and               response, including critical             summarizes the evidence
          relevant.                                analysis of the relative certainty of    and argument, and links all
        • The response explains how the            evidence used, describing other          back to the question.
          two sides of the argument (if            perspectives or interpretations of
          appropriate) are supported by            evidence.
          detailed evidence that is
          integrated in sentences.
        • Clear, correct definitions and use
          of geographical language is
          integrated in the sentences and
          throughout the response.
                                                   –7–                                        8823 – 5206M


1.   (a)   Analyse the environmental impacts of global trade in two local contexts.                  [12]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on pages 3 to 4.

           Global trade includes movements of food, natural resources, commodities and some
           kinds of waste. Notable trade patterns include: trade between the Global South and
           high-income developed countries, and commodity movements along shipping lanes.

           Environmental impacts are those pertaining to the physical environment (land, water
           and air quality; water availability). Most impacts will be negative although some positive
           impacts and/or perspectives may be identified too. Partial credit can be given to answers
           dealing with the “built” environment if the response includes an analysis of global trade.
           Answers focused on transboundary pollution can be credited provided there is some
           focus on the role of global trade (e.g. role of palm oil trade in Indonesian deforestation
           and transboundary smoke haze).

           Local contexts can be analysed at varying scales, ranging from localized impacts
           in particular settlements or rural areas, to larger-scale national or world regions, or
           along shipping corridors. Partial credit can be given to answers dealing with
           planetary-scale impacts of climate change or plastic in the oceans provided the
           response also includes some analysis of global trade.

           Likely themes for analysis include:
           • Impacts along specified shipping lanes (linked with oil or commodity shipping
               movements).
           • Environmental issues linked with the global shift of industry and polluting
               manufacturing e.g. “airpocalypse” in Chinese export zones.
           • Food production systems for global agribusiness, and local impacts on water,
               soils etc.
           • Local issues associated with e-waste trade and treatment (credit an account of
               environmental impacts that analyses the linked social and health impacts for
               communities).

           Expect some detailed local evidence in the highest-scoring responses, along with some
           detailed analysis of the global trade responsible for the impacts.

           Good answers may apply (AO2) a wider range of knowledge and understanding (AO1)
           in a well-structured way (AO4). One approach might be to provide a structured systematic
           analysis of different kinds of environmental impact (water quality, soil health etc). Another
           approach might be to provide a structured systematic analysis of different perspectives on
           the impacts (e.g. idea that Global North populations have unjustly and unfairly benefited from
           the shift of polluting industries to the Global South).

           For 4–6 marks, expect some weakly evidenced outlining of trade’s environmental
           impacts in one or two places / countries / contexts.

           For 7–9 marks, expect a structured, evidenced analysis of:
           • either the environmental impacts of global trade in two specific contexts
           • or more varied types of impact, or varying perspectives on the impacts.

           For 10–12 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                            –8–                                      8823 – 5206M


(b)   “High-income Western countries still have more global power than other countries.”
      To what extent do you agree with this statement?                                         [16]
      Credit all content in line with the markbands. Marks should be allocated according to
      the markbands on pages 5 to 6. Credit unexpected approaches wherever relevant. Power
      is the ability to directly make or influence change or equilibrium at different scales. Power
      is vested in citizens, governments, institutions and other players, and in processes in the
      natural world. Different kinds of power include soft power (exerting influence through
      diplomacy, culture, the media and other “soft” strategies) and hard power (including military
      strength and using economic tools such as sanctions).
      High-income Western countries (HIWCs) include European and North America states,
      Australia and New Zealand i.e. the Global North. Their influence can be compared with, for
      example, the low-income countries (LICs) and emerging economies (EEs) of the Global
      South, or high-income Middle Eastern and/or Asian states e.g. Japan, South Korea, Qatar.
      Possible applied themes (AO2) include knowledge and understanding (AO1) of:
      • Global superpowers and their economic, geopolitical and cultural influence, both
           positive and negative [Guide 4.1].
      • Influence of HIWCs within G7/8, G20 and Organization for Economic Cooperation and
           Development (OECD) groups [Guide 4.1] and the UN [Guide 5.1].
      • Global lending institutions, including the International Monetary Fund (IMF) [Guide 4.1].
      • Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) and outsourcing by transnational corporations based in
           HIWCs [Guide 4.2].
      • An overview of international aid, loans and debt relief and the role of HIWCs [Guide 4.2] .
      • The diffusion of Western cultural traits and cultural imperialism, and varying negative or
           more positive perspectives on this [Guide 5.2].
      • Diffusion of cultural traits originating in LICs / EEs, such as music or food [Guide 5.2]
      • issues relating to key role of some LICs in global tensions/conflicts (some organizations
           e.g. Boko Haram are globally influential but in negative ways) [Guide 6.1].
      • Examples of sporting or musical or sporting celebrities from non-HIWCs.

      Good answers may synthesize (AO3a) three or more of the above (or other) themes
      in a well-structured (AO4) way.

      Good answers may additionally offer a critical evaluation (AO3b) of the statement
      that evaluates the distinction between different types of power and influence. Another
      approach might be to evaluate the scale of influence, or global role, of particular
      countries that are not HIWCs. Another approach might be to evaluate the influence of
      LICs as global stakeholders who may be able to influence global governance of
      climate change or other concerning issues. A good evaluation may conclude with a
      substantiated final judgement on the overall power and influence of HIWCs.

      For 5–8 marks, expect weakly evidenced and/or imbalanced outlining of two
      or three relevant themes.

      For 9–12 marks, expect:
      • either a structured synthesis that links together several well-evidenced
        themes from the guide
      • or a critical conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) informed by geographical
        concepts and/or perspectives.

      For 13–16 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                  –9–                                        8823 – 5206M


2.   (a)   Using examples, analyse ways in which civil society organizations have contributed
           to the management of global environmental challenges.                              [12]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on pages 3 to 4.

           Civil society organizations occupy the political space between the state and
           individuals. CSOs operate at varying scales from local to global (including globally
           connected networks of local CSOs). They may contribute in varying ways including
           important campaigning, influencing and advocacy roles, aiming to participate in
           governance as stakeholders by helping to steer decisions of powerful state and private
           sector players. All potentially creditable CSO illustrations must be rewarded.

           Important global environmental challenges include climate change, biodiversity loss,
           oceanic pollution and major transboundary pollution events. By their nature, some
           local-scale issues (e.g. e-waste disposal in Ghana) are also part of a broader global
           challenge (established international trade in waste). Credit all such relevant examples.

           Likely themes for analysis include:
           • Illegal waste movements [Guide 4.2].
           • Transboundary pollution patterns and/or shipping lane pollution [Guide 6.2].
           • Global shift of polluting industries and/or global agribusiness systems [Guide 6.2].
           • Rejection of globalized production, including campaigns against TNCs and in favour
               of local sourcing of food and goods by citizens [Guide 5.3].
           • The success of international CSOs in attempting to raise awareness about, and find
               solutions for, environmental risks associated with global interactions, including such
               actions as petitions, protests and other forms of influence or advocacy [Guide 6.3].

           National governments, MGOs and commercial businesses cannot be credited as CSO
           examples. Such answers can still gain partial credit (band 4-6), provided there is sufficient
           focus on the management of global environmental challenges.

           Good answers may apply (AO2) a wider range of knowledge and understanding (AO1)
           in a well-structured way (AO4). One approach might be to provide a structured
           systematic analysis of different scales of action/issue. Another approach might be to
           provide a structured systematic analysis of different types of environmental challenge and
           the physical and human processes that have led to them and which are the focus of CSO
           action. Another approach might be to analyse the relative success of different campaigns.

           For 4–6 marks, expect some weakly evidenced outlining of two or more instances
           of environmental challenges and/or campaigns.

           For 7–9 marks, expect a structured, evidenced analysis of:
           • either two examples of CSO action to help tackle environmental challenge(s)
           • or different types of contribution/action by CSOs (raising awareness, fund-raising, etc).

           For 10–12 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                            – 10 –                                   8823 – 5206M


(b)   “Businesses play a larger role in global development than governments and
      multi-governmental organizations (MGOs) do.” To what extent do you agree
                                                                                              [16]
      with this statement?
      Credit all content in line with the markbands. Marks should be allocated according to
      the markbands on pages 5 to 6. Credit unexpected approaches wherever relevant.
      Businesses includes the world’s largest TNCs but also small-scale enterprises such
      as local businesses established using micro-lending; or businesses and cooperatives
      operating under the Fairtrade umbrella.
      Global development is a broad and contested concept/process which encompasses
      economic growth but also social, cultural and political changes. The SDGs provide a
      development framework with goals and targets.
      Governments and multi-governmental organizations include state actors (e.g.
      nationally or regionally powerful countries such as US, China, Australia, Japan, UK)
      and global/regional organizations such as the G7/8/20, OECD, OPEC, UN, EU, IMF.
      Possible applied themes (AO2) include knowledge and understanding (AO1) of how:
      • The largest TNCs, especially technology companies, have enormous power, for example
         through foreign direct investment (FDI). The developmental changes they bring – both
         positive and negative – may be hard for governments to regulate and resist [Guide 5.2].
      • Technology TNCs create shrinking-world technologies that can play a key role in growth
         and development (access to mobile phones, connectivity, etc) [Guide 4.2].
      • But profit repatriation and tax avoidance by TNCs and wealthy individuals may limit
         positive impacts on development (capital flight ideas) [Guide 6.1].
      • Multi-governmental organizations / trade blocs regulate trade and investment to promote
         growth and economic development etc. OPEC countries use their collective power to
         help influence global energy prices to help fund their own economic growth [Guide 4.1].
      • But MGOs, by their nature, operate at a global scale which may be disconnected from the
         local needs of communities. International lending is channeled through governments and
         may not always benefit the communities most in need of support [Guide 4.1].
      • Microlending has helped many people to establish small-scale enterprises; however,
         views differ on this practice and its long-term role in development [Guide 5.1].

      Good answers may synthesize (AO3a) three or more of the above (or other) themes in
      a well-structured (AO4) way.

      Good answers may additionally offer a critical evaluation (AO3b) of the statement that
      discusses disparities in power among different stakeholders in development (communities,
      governments, businesses, etc). Another approach might be to critically discuss varying
      perspectives on what is meant by global development. Another approach might be to
      evaluate how far the validity of the statement is place specific and may be true in some
      local contexts but not others. A good evaluation may conclude with a substantiated final
      judgement on the overall degree to which the statement is true.

      For 5–8 marks, expect weakly evidenced outlining of two or three relevant themes.

      For 9–12 marks, expect:
      • either a structured synthesis that links together several well-evidenced themes from the
        guide
      • or a critical conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) informed by geographical concepts and/or
        perspectives.

      For 13–16 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                                  – 11 –                                     8823 – 5206M


3.   (a)   Using two examples of transnational corporations (TNCs), analyse ways in which
           they have made different places more interconnected.                                        [12]

           Marks should be allocated according to the markbands on pages 3 to 4.

           Transnational corporations have operations in multiple countries; the largest being truly
           global corporations with operations in every world region and most countries. Examples
           can be drawn from different sectors of industry, including agribusinesses (Cargill, Del Monte),
           manufacturing (Ford, Coca-Cola, Lego), banking and insurance (Santander, media (Netflix)
           and technology (Google/Alphabet, Meta/Facebook). The most successful TNCs operate
           across multiple sectors (Amazon, Tata, Microsoft).

           The key course concept of place is applicable at a range of scales. TNCs connect particular
           locations (cities, export processing zones, agricultural areas etc.) in additional to
           larger-scale countries and world regions (for example, manufacturing in Asian countries
           destined for European and North American markets). Expect the best answers (band 10-12)
           to apply the concepts of place and/or scale rather than only naming countries.

           Places become interconnected in varied ways. Flows of money, commodities, ideas and
           people can all contribute to the interconnectivity of places. Part of this connectivity stems
           from supply chains and the production and consumption of goods. TNCs also connect
           places through the spread of ideas and culture.

           Likely themes for analysis include:
           • TNC supply chains and the connections between company headquarters and places
               where products are produced, including offshored production and named export zones.
           • More detailed supply chain connections (e.g. linkages between places where final
               products are assembled and other places where product parts have been made).
           • Flow of foreign investment and flows of profits (including to offshore tax havens).
           • The diffusion of ideas and cultural traits via branded commodities, and subsequent
               connections between different consumer markets.
           • Some TNCs may work in partnership with Fairtrade (which creates direct connections
               between consumers and producers).

           Good answers may apply (AO2) a wider range of knowledge and understanding (AO1)
           in a well-structured way (AO4). One approach might be to provide a structured systematic
           analysis of the different types of connection and/or flow which are relevant to each chosen
           TNC / case study. Another approach might be to analyse the differing scales or categories
           of connected places (e.g. connections between different categories of country, or more
           geographically specific connections between specific named cities, local areas, factories,
           export zones etc).

           For 4–6 marks, expect some weakly evidenced outlining of the presence of one or two
           TNCs in different countries/markets.

           For 7–9 marks, expect a structured, evidenced analysis of:

           • either a range of connections which the two TNCs have created (do not expect balance
             between the two examples at the lower end)
           • or how TNCs connect places (e.g. specific cities or regions) at the global or other
             geographical scale.

           For 10–12 marks, expect both of these traits.
                                              – 12 –                                       8823 – 5206M


(b)   “The world’s countries are all losing their independence and identity because of
      global interactions.” To what extent do you agree with this statement?                          [16]

      Credit all content in line with the markbands. Marks should be allocated according to the
      markbands on pages 5 to 6. Credit unexpected approaches wherever relevant.

      Independence has different facets – including sovereignty (in relation to global rules and
      agreements), financial freedom (in relationship to lending and debts) or an ability to resist global
      flows of ideas and information. There are many other possible dimensions to consider. Identity
      has multiple dimensions, spanning different cultural traits (language, music and food, perceptions
      of ethnic, racial or religious identity, etc). One view is that local societies may suffer cultural
      erosion and sovereignty losses due globalization. Another view is that global interactions have
      provoked a backlash which may mean that national sovereignty and identities could increasingly
      become strengthened or contested rather than simply weakened or lost.

      Global interactions, like globalization, is a term which comprises many different global
      flows and connections. As the guide notes, “global interaction suggests a two-way and complex
      process whereby cultural traits and commodities may be adopted, adapted or resisted by
      societies. The process is neither inevitable nor universal.”

      Possible applied themes (AO2) include knowledge and understanding (AO1) of the diverse
      challenges and opportunities associated with:
      • Membership of global groups may carry a political cost (in terms of independence).
         EU members have partially surrendered sovereignty in return for increased internal
         trade, migration, investment [Guide 4.1].
      • Shrinking world technologies bring cultural changes to the identity of places [Guide 4.3].
      • TNCs offer foreign investments while spreading ideas and culture via different forms of trade
         (including music, language, food and clothing). These changes may be difficult for
         governments to regulate and resist, with long-term implications for national identity and
         independence [Guide 5.2].
      • However, civil society organizations and protest groups may challenge global interactions,
         advocating against issues ranging from migration to global trade (as opposed to local
         sourcing) [Guide 5.3].
      • Governments may choose not to join MGOs or to censor flows of ideas[Guide 5.3].
      • Re-shoring and other recent developments [Guide 6.3].

      Good answers may synthesize (AO3a) three or more of the above (or other) themes
      in a well-structured (AO4) way.

      Good answers may additionally offer a critical evaluation (AO3b) of the statement that
      thoughtfully evaluates the overall extent of identity and independence losses by taking into
      account varying perspectives on what these words/ideas really mean. Another approach might be
      to critically evaluate how far different local places or communities within countries may be
      affected by identity changes and globalizing processes. A good evaluation may conclude with a
      substantiated final judgement on the net effect of global interactions on national identity and
      independence.

      For 5–8 marks, expect weakly evidenced and/or imbalanced outlining of two or
      three relevant themes.

      For 9–12 marks, expect:
      • either a structured synthesis that links together several well-evidenced themes
        from the guide
      • or a critical conclusion (or ongoing evaluation) informed by geographical concepts
        and/or perspectives.

      For 13–16 marks, expect both of these traits.
