© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Information technology in a global society
Case study: The return of the physical retail store

For use in May and November 2023




Instructions to candidates
y Case study booklet required for higher level paper 3 information technology in a global society
  examinations.




                                                                                               5523 – 5501
     7 pages                                               © International Baccalaureate Organization 2022
                                                    –2–                                            5523 – 5501


Foreword
The ITGS case study, The return of the physical retail store, is the stimulus material for the research
investigation required for May 2023 and November 2023 higher level paper 3. All of the work related to
the case study should reflect the integrated approach explained on pages 15–17 of the ITGS guide.

Candidates should consider The return of the physical retail store with respect to:
y relevant IT systems in a social context
y both local and global areas of impact
y social and ethical impacts on individuals and societies
y current challenges and solutions
y future developments.

Candidates are expected to research real-life situations similar to The return of the physical retail store
and relate their findings to first-hand experiences wherever possible. Information may be collected
through a range of activities: secondary and primary research, field trips, guest speakers, personal
interviews and email correspondence.

Responses to examination questions must reflect the synthesis of knowledge and experiences that
the candidates have gained from their investigations. In some instances, additional information may be
provided in examination questions to allow candidates to generate new ideas.
                                                  –3–                                           5523 – 5501


     Overview
     Although there has been a significant increase in the number of customers who shop online,
     research by Salesforce, a popular customer relationship management platform, suggests that
     customers of all ages, including 62 % of Baby Boomers and 58 % of Generation Z, still prefer to
 5   make their purchases in a physical store.

     The retail industry is highly competitive, and retailers are finding it difficult to stand out. Some
     retailers think that upgrading their physical stores is a better way of creating an engaging
     experience so that their customers can be immersed in their brand culture. It is apparent that the
     future success of physical stores may be dependent on a retailer’s willingness to embrace change.

10   Current situation
     MCA Sports is a retailer based in Europe. They sell a variety of products, including sports clothing,
     footwear and wearable technologies. The first MCA Sports store opened in 1980, and there are
     currently over twenty physical stores in five European cities.

     According to customer feedback, one of the strengths of MCA Sports is the service that customers
15   receive when in the physical stores.

     MCA Sports is considering using digital technologies in their physical stores to enhance the
     customer experience and future-proof their business.

     Next steps: upgrading the flagship store
     In March 2022, MCA Sports recruited Madeleine Starc as the Chief Executive Officer. Her brief was
20   to make MCA Sports a brand leader. Madeleine’s previous job was in the high-tech industry, and her
     first change was to recruit André Eglise as IT Manager. André had experience in delivering projects
     using emerging technologies, such as augmented reality (AR) and customer service robots.

     Madeleine’s vision is to deliver an engaging and immersive in-store customer experience. As a
     technological determinist, she passionately believes that digital engagement through technological
25   innovation will offer both excitement and convenience for customers. This will provide a competitive
     advantage for MCA Sports. Madeleine has asked André to lead the upgrade project to transform
     the physical store in Geneva, Switzerland. This store was chosen due to the city’s cultural diversity:
     Switzerland has four official languages, with many more spoken as well, and Geneva is inhabited
     by citizens of over 150 nationalities. Madeleine plans to eventually upgrade all the other MCA
30   Sports stores as well.

     The Geneva store will become MCA Sports’ flagship store and will incorporate four
     new technologies:
     y Augmented reality (AR) solutions
     y An in-store companion app
35   y Customer service robots
     y Smart shelves




                                                                                                Turn over
                                                  –4–                                        5523 – 5501


     Augmented reality solutions include augmented reality mirrors. These will enable shoppers to
     project their images onto a large screen and virtually try on different items of clothing
     (see Figure 1).

                                  Figure 1: An augmented reality mirror




40   The in-store companion app will use augmented reality to overlay information about each item of
     clothing. The app can only be used when customers are physically in the store. It will provide
     real-time information, including product availability (see Figure 2 and Figure 3).

             Figure 2: An in-store                      Figure 3: An in-store companion app
               companion app                            with augmented reality functionality

             9:30                                              9:30

               Shop
                                                               ?                   ×

                Men’s          Women’s




                Kid’s           Bags




                        Sale



                                                                      i
                                                 –5–                                          5523 – 5501


     Customer service robots will use natural language processing to greet customers, answer
     questions and guide customers around the store. They will be able to recognize and process
45   requests in Chinese, English, French, German, Italian and Romansh (see Figure 4).

                         Figure 4: A customer service robot used in store




     Currently, MCA Sports has a centrally managed stock inventory system and utilizes radio
     frequency identification (RFID) tags and technologies. Smart shelves will make further use of these
     existing technologies and gather more information about customer behaviour, thereby improving
     inventory management (see Figure 5).

                              Figure 5: An example of smart shelving




                                       OUT OF STOCK



                                                                   OUT
                                       OUT OF STOCK                 OF
                                                                  STOCK




                                                                                             Turn over
                                                  –6–                                           5523 – 5501


50   Madeleine anticipates that, once customers are in the flagship store, these technologies will lead
     to an increase in sales. She also expects this to increase the number of customers using MCA
     Sports’ online store.

     Madeleine has set up a committee to carry out a feasibility study for the upgrade project. In
     addition to André, she has invited Loic Rossignol, the Data Protection Officer, to join the committee.
55   Loic is concerned that the four new technologies will lead to the collection of more personal data
     from customers. Madeleine has also invited Carol Aujean, the manager of the Geneva store, as
     she has an insight into the behaviours of existing staff and customers.

     At the start of the first committee meeting, André presented the proposal for the introduction of
     the four new technologies. However, the proposal was not met with the level of enthusiasm that
60   he had anticipated, with Loic and Carol raising a number of concerns. By the end of the meeting,
     there were several unanswered questions, and André realized that getting everyone to support the
     proposal would be extremely difficult. To gain an understanding of the nature of Loic and Carol’s
     concerns, André plans to produce a comprehensive stakeholder analysis matrix.

     Madeleine is confident that the plans for the flagship store will be a huge success and has tasked
65   the committee with investigating the possible challenges faced at the next meeting.

     Challenges faced
     The committee at MCA Sports need to determine whether the:
     y new in-store technologies will integrate with the existing radio frequency identification (RFID)
       stock management system
70   y new in-store technologies will enhance the customer experience as anticipated
     y customer service robots will be able to provide an equivalent or better level of service than the
       customers are already receiving
     y collection of increased quantities of data about customer behaviours and stock inventory will
       lead to an enhanced customer experience
75   y collection of increased quantities of customer data will meet the data protection requirements for
       the company
     y customers will want to use the new in-store technologies
     y staff in the Geneva store will have the opportunity to be involved at each stage of the
       upgrade project
80   y staff will embrace the new in-store technologies
     y new in-store technologies may be culturally insensitive.

     Technological background
     Students will only need to consider augmented reality (AR) technologies. They do not need to
     investigate virtual reality (VR) technologies.

85   Additional terminology
     Many of these terms are not explicitly stated in the case study but are included to provide teachers
     and students with areas to explore within the contexts of the challenges faced.
                                                    –7–                                            5523 – 5501


Additional terminology
Augmented reality (AR)
Companion app
Customer service robots
Interoperability
Smart shelving
Stakeholder analysis matrix
Stock inventory system
Technological determinism
Technological skepticism


Any individuals named in this case study are fictitious and any similarities with actual entities are purely
coincidental.




Disclaimer:
Content used in IB assessments is taken from authentic, third-party sources. The views expressed within them belong to their
individual authors and/or publishers and do not necessarily reflect the views of the IB.

References:
Figure 4      Tokumeigakarinoaoshima, 2014. Serviceroboter Pepper. [online] Available at: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
              File:SoftBank_pepper.JPG [Accessed 22 November 2021].
All other texts, graphics and illustrations © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
