8823 – 5513/5514M




                       Markscheme


                       November 2023


                    Information technology
                       in a global society


                Higher and standard level


                           Paper 2




16 pages
                                           –2–                                  8823 – 5513/5514M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                    –3–                                 8823 – 5513/5514M



Critical Thinking – explanation, analysis and evaluation
These trigger words often signal critical thinking. The bold words are the key terms in the various criteria.
Explanation – Because, as a result of, due to, therefore, consequently, for example
Analysis – Furthermore, additionally, however, but, conversely, likewise, in addition, on the other hand,
whereas
Evaluation ‫ –ؘ‬My opinion, overall, although, despite, on balance, weighing up
Examiners should be aware that in some cases, candidates may take a different approach, which
if appropriate should be rewarded. If in doubt, check with your team leader.
    •   In the case of an “identify” question read all answers and mark positively up to the maximum marks.
        Disregard incorrect answers.

    •   In all other cases where a question asks for a certain number of facts
        eg “describe two kinds”, mark the first two correct answers. This could include two
        descriptions, one description and one identification, or two identifications.


    •   It should be recognized that, given time constraints, answers for part (c) questions are
        likely to include a much narrower range of issues and concepts than identified in the
        markband. There is no “correct” answer. Examiners must be prepared to award full marks
        to answers which synthesize and evaluate even if they do not examine all the stimulus
        material.
                                                   –4–                                 8823 – 5513/5514M


Using assessment criteria for external assessment

For external assessment, a number of assessment criteria have been identified. Each assessment criterion
has level descriptors describing specific levels of achievement, together with an appropriate range of
marks. The level descriptors concentrate on positive achievement, although for the lower levels failure to
achieve may be included in the description.

Examiners must judge the externally assessed work at SL and at HL against the four criteria (A–D) using
the level descriptors.

• The same assessment criteria are provided for SL and HL.

• The aim is to find, for each criterion, the descriptor that conveys most accurately the level attained by
  the candidate, using the best-fit model. A best-fit approach means that compensation should be made
  when a piece of work matches different aspects of a criterion at different levels. The mark awarded
  should be one that most fairly reflects the balance of achievement against the criterion. It is not
  necessary for every single aspect of a level descriptor to be met for that mark to be awarded.

• When assessing a candidate’s work, examiners should read the level descriptors for each criterion until
  they reach a descriptor that most appropriately describes the level of the work being assessed.
  If a piece of work seems to fall between two descriptors, both descriptors should be read again and the
  one that more appropriately describes the candidate’s work should be chosen.

• Where there are two or more marks available within a level, examiners should award the upper marks if
  the candidate’s work demonstrates the qualities described to a great extent. Examiners should award
  the lower marks if the candidate’s work demonstrates the qualities described to a lesser extent.

• Only whole numbers should be recorded; partial marks, that is fractions and decimals, are not
  acceptable.

• Examiners should not think in terms of a pass or fail boundary, but should concentrate on identifying
  the appropriate descriptor for each assessment criterion.

• The highest level descriptors do not imply faultless performance but should be achievable by
  a candidate. Examiners should not hesitate to use the extremes if they are appropriate descriptions of
  the work being assessed.

• A candidate who attains a high level of achievement in relation to one criterion will not necessarily attain
  high levels of achievement in relation to the other criteria. Similarly, a candidate who attains a low level
  of achievement for one criterion will not necessarily attain low achievement levels for the other criteria.
  Examiners should not assume that the overall assessment of the candidates will produce any particular
  distribution of marks.

• The assessment criteria must be made available to candidates prior to sitting the examination.
                                                    –5–                                  8823 – 5513/5514M



                   Themes: Business and employment; Home and leisure

Criterion A — The issue and stakeholder(s)                                                              [4]

 1.   (a)    Describe one social/ethical concern related to the IT system in the article.

             [1] : for identification of the concern (which does not have to be explicitly named).
             [2] : there needs to be an explicit description of the impact/result/consequences/
             effect/outcome on the taxi driver, passengers, and app developers/administrators.

            Social/ethical concerns may include the following:
             • Reliability – the app may not work (app server is down; app is being updated
               delaying the service); drivers’ or passengers’ phones may run out of battery or
               malfunction. Impact: driver cannot locate passenger who is then late for an
               appointment.
             • Surveillance – data stored about the use of the app may be used to monitor
               activities of passengers. Impact: the privacy of the passengers could be
               invaded. Passengers could be blackmailed if they do not want their
               whereabouts known.
             • Privacy – data collected and stored could be misused.
             • Digital divide – Not all passengers may be able to use this technology (lack of
               appropriate phone/lack of skills). Impact: this service may not be available to
               everyone.
             • Authenticity – the passenger riding the taxi may not be the person who booked
               the taxi. Impact: if an accident occurs the victim may be wrongly identified.
             • Privacy – data collected and stored could be used by staff or hackers who
               profit from using the information. Impact passenger is harmed or threatened.
             • Security – safety of information, hacking, inappropriate access, 3rd party
               access.
                                                 –6–                                  8823 – 5513/5514M


(b)       Describe the relationship of one primary stakeholder to the IT system in the article.

           [1] : Who – identification of the stakeholder.
           [2] : What are they doing with the IT system and Where in the IT system
           (technical part).

          Primary stakeholders may include the following:
           • Passenger using the app to book/share a trip/data stored in company database.
           • Taxi driver using the app to pick up a passenger.
           • Family / friends who are using the app to follow the passenger’s trips.
           • Red Dragon Taxi Company and administrators for the Red Dragon Taxi Company. Who
              have access to all of the data and potential use of the data .



Marks                            Level descriptor

      0        The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

               Either an appropriate social/ethical concern or the relationship of one primary
      1        stakeholder to the IT system in the article is identified.
               Either an appropriate social/ethical concern or the relationship of one primary
      2        stakeholder to the IT system in the article is described or both are identified.
               Either an appropriate social/ethical concern or the relationship of one primary
      3        stakeholder to the IT system in the article is described; the other is identified.
               Both an appropriate social/ethical concern and the relationship of one primary
      4        stakeholder to the IT system in the article are described.
                                                    –7–                                  8823 – 5513/5514M


Criterion B — The IT concepts and processes                                                                  [6]

 2.    (a)    Describe, step-by-step, how the IT system works.
              IT system: GPS, smartphone apps, databases.

             Note to examiners:
             Award [1] if there is some understanding of the process but NOT in a step-by-step
             approach using the information within the article with possibly some steps missing.
             Award [2] if there is a logical step-by-step account using the information within the article
             (but it may lack some detail).
             Award [3] if there is a step-by-step account that identifies information about how the IT
             system works that goes beyond the article.
             Award [4] if there is a step-by-step account that describes information about how the IT
             system works that goes beyond the article.

             Answers provided in the article include the following:
              • Passenger uses app to book a taxi.
              • App works out the location of the customer.
              • App selects a taxi to pick up the customer.
              • The app displays the taxi number and current location on passenger and
                driver’s phone.
              • Invoice for the journey is automatically sent to the customer.
              • Passengers and drivers can communicate to the Customer Service Department via the
                app.

             Basic element award up to [2 max]
              • Passenger uses app to share the trip up to five people.
              • Passenger uses app to rate the driver.
              • Driver uses app to rate the passenger.

These could include:

             Answers with additional information (2 additional identified for 3 marks and 2
             or more 2 described for 4 marks) to that in the article may include the
             following:
             (GPS could also be called location services – award marks correspondingly):
              • Red Dragon Taxi Company app is installed on the (GPS-enabled) phone by
                  passengers and drivers.
              • Drives have a driver’s app connected to Red Dragon Taxi Company that
                  connects a passenger to the driver’s (GPS-enabled) phone.
              • Drivers can use the inbuilt navigation tool in their ride-sharing app (driver’s
                  app).
              • Passengers’ (GPS-enabled) smartphones connect to the Red Dragon Taxi
                  Company app using WiFi, 4G, etc.
              • The Red Dragon Taxi Company app uses the driver’s phone GPS to track the
                  location of the taxi.
              • The location of the car is seen in real time.
              • The app pinpoints the passenger and driver’s location using GPS trilateration
                  (accept triangulate) and cellphone networks.
              • If the driver is using the driver’s app navigation tool, there may be a delay if
                  the app is not updated/is temporarily down.
              • The app is linked to a database that stores information on customers, taxi
                  drivers and routes. This includes Passengers’ and drivers’ personal
                  information, including passenger payment preferences, is saved on the
                  app to a database.
                                     –8–                                 8823 – 5513/5514M


• Rates might change based on the demand in real time, surge can
  change quickly.
• App informs passenger arrived safely.
• Even if passengers disable their phone GPS during a trip, the driver will
  still be linked to the passenger’s account, which informs the location to
  the passenger’s app.
• The app can determine the best drivers using the rating system and can
  assign them to the most frequent passengers.
• The app calculates the total fee according to the rate and the distance of the
  trip.
                                                  –9–                                  8823 – 5513/5514M



(b)   Explain the relationship between the IT system and the social/ethical concern described in
      Criterion A.

      Note to examiners:
      Explaining the link between the concern and specific parts, or whole, of the IT system means the
      candidate must include how or why the concern has arisen from the use of the IT system. The
      concern identified in Criterion A may be implicit.
      There must be a link to the concern identified/described in Q1(a).

      Award [1] If the relationship between the concern and the IT system is identified. This may be a
      repeat, or rewording, of the response to Q1(a) or lack of detail for the how or why.
      If there is more than one concern identified in Q1(a) accept any concern (i.e., preventing a follow
      through error).

      Award [2] if how or why the concern that has arisen is described. Appropriate IT or ITGS
      terminology is used.

      For example, using a privacy concern, responses need to explain:
         •   HOW the data can be accessed (e.g., interception of the WiFi signal is achieved)
             OR
         •   WHY it is possible to access the data (e.g., lack of encryption of the WiFi signal)

      Answers may include the following:
           • Reliability – (what) passenger cannot share the trip (why/how) because the
              phone has no battery/no data plan / forgot to charge phone, forgot to buy
              credit.
           • Reliability – (what) data may not arrive in real time, (why/how) which
              means the app may not be providing the service required to track the
              passenger.
           • Reliability – (what) drivers turn off their phones (why/how) not to be tracked
              so the app server cannot locate driver because it uses a mobile-based GPS.
           • Surveillance – (what) Red Dragon Taxi Company knows the exact movement
              of drivers (why/how) therefore the driver may feel his/her professional
              integrity is being compromised.
           • Privacy – (what) data collected and stored about passengers (why/how)
              meaning they feel they are being surveilled/data accessed and used without
              permission/3rd parties view the data.
           • Authenticity – (what) the passenger riding the taxi may not be the person who
              booked the taxi (why/how) and the app does not require a proof of identity to
              ride the taxi.
           • Digital divide – (what) Older people may not be able to / be confident in
              having their location shared (why/how) so they are not gaining all the
              possible benefits of using the app.
           • Security – (what) driver and passenger data may not be securely stored / is
              shared with third parties (why/how) therefore the privacy of passengers and
              drivers may be compromised.
           • Policies – (what) drivers must keep their cell (mobile) phone on, (why/how)
              which means they feel they are being surveilled.
           • Policies – (what) drivers turn off their phones to increase the demand for the
              service, (why/how) which may lead to unethical [surge] pricing strategies.
                                            – 10 –                              8823 – 5513/5514M


Candidates are expected to make reference of the relevant stakeholders, information
technologies, data and processes. Candidates will be expected to refer to “how the IT
system works” using appropriate IT terminology.

    Marks                      Level descriptor

        0       The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors
                below.
                There is little or no understanding of the step-by-step process of how the IT
                system works and does not go beyond the information in the article.
      1–2
                The major components of the IT system are identified using minimal
                technical IT terminology.

                There is a description of the step-by-step process of how the IT system
                works that goes beyond the information in the article.
                Most of the major components of the IT system are identified using
      3–4       some technical IT terminology.
                The relationship between the IT system referred to in the article and the
                concern presented in criterion A is identified, with some use of ITGS
                terminology.


                There is a detailed description of the step-by-step process that shows a
                clear understanding of how the IT system works that goes beyond the
                information in the article.

      5–6       The major components of the IT system are identified using appropriate
                technical IT terminology.
                The relationship between the IT system referred to in the article and the
                concern presented in criterion A is explained using appropriate ITGS
                terminology.
                                                     – 11 –                            8823 – 5513/5514M


Criterion C — The impact of the social/ethical issue(s) on stakeholders                                      [8]

3.   Evaluate the impact of the social/ethical issues on the relevant stakeholders.

     Note to examiners:
     Mark holistically using a two-step process:
      1. Determine the markband the response falls into.
      2. Determine the level within the markband using the guidelines below.

     Impact - result/consequence/effect/outcome on stakeholder which can be positive or
     negative.

     The evaluation should focus on the overall impact on the stakeholders. Evaluative comments may
     be within the body of the analysis or as a final summary.

     Band 1 - 2
     Award [1] for at least one impact identified.
     Award [2] for at least one impact described or more than one impact identified.

     Band 3 - 5
     Award [3] for a limited analysis (such as the division into groups (privacy issues, security issues),
     or the impact on different stakeholders).
     Award [4] for an incomplete analysis (such as mainly positives or mainly negatives).
     Award [5] for a balanced analysis that includes connections (such as between positive and
     negatives or between impacts on different stakeholders). There may be limited evaluative
     statements.

     Band 6 - 8
     At least two stakeholders are required.
     Award [6] for a balanced analysis of the impacts that includes substantiated evaluative
     comments.
     Award [7–8] for an overall evaluation supported by explicit references to the analysis of the
     impacts (this is not a repetition or summary of the analysis). The evaluation shows evidence of
     insightful thinking.
                                                 – 12 –                             8823 – 5513/5514M


Answers may include the following:

Red Dragon Taxi Company
     Positive impacts
 • Security of passengers, as their location is monitored and they can communicate with
     driver prior to arrival.
 • Security of drivers, as their location is monitored and they can communicate with
     passenger prior to arrival.
 • Able to offer more perks/offers/discounts based on the passenger’s use of the app.
 • Able to predict the need for more cars in one area according to the data provided by
     passengers.
 • More affordable, as Red Dragon Taxi Company can offer better prices by reducing the
     time drivers take to get to the passengers.
 • More efficient and cost saving for the company, as fewer staff members are needed in the
     office once the system runs alone (predictions; locating drivers, GPS triangulation, etc).
 • Pooled/shared may lead to more passengers on a single journey, cheaper fares than the
     competition.
 • May be easier to manage the taxis if the location-finding software works as intended.
 • Gathers passenger data to help optimize route selection in the future.

Negative impacts
 • Lack of reliability of the app may be harmful for Red Dragon Taxi Company’s reputation.
 • May create a complaint culture that will work against the drivers.
 • Passengers can give a low rate due to drivers racial, religious, gender bias.
 • The overreliance on the phone may be an issue in case it malfunctions, the battery dies,
     etc.
 • App development costs may be high and it may take a while to profit from it.
 • Price may be set at the start of the journey, so a journey that takes longer than normal
     may be cost more than originally thought but Red Dragon Taxi Company cannot change
     the price of the trip.
 • Responsible for the security of passenger data, which may be expensive. Hire staff to
     develop and secure the database, access to suitable expertise.

Passengers
Positive impacts
 • Saves time, as no need to queue for a taxi.
 • Might lead to cheaper fares, as no staff are required at Red Dragon Taxi Company
 • to manage the bookings.
 • More security for passengers, as they can share where they are going with family and
      friends.
 • Reassurance for families of passengers of a personalized service based on the data
      provided by app database.
 • More convenience to customers, as they can book anytime / anywhere.
 • Pooled/shared may lead to more passengers on a single journey and more affordable
      fares.
 • Increases efficiency, as more than one car may be directed to the passenger (rather than
      them having to wait for the one car that has been assigned to them).
 • Possibility to accept, or not, a driver according to his/her reviews in the app.
 • Cleaner cars, more polite drivers, better service due to the rating system.
 • May rate a driver according to the service offered.
 • Possibility to accept or reject the driver based in the app reviews.
 • Could reject the ride based on the cost/surge pricing (can also be negative).
                                                  – 13 –                              8823 – 5513/5514M


Negative impacts
 • International tourists may not have internet access and may not be able to retrieve the
     SMS (for initial set up/authentication) or open the app. May not be able to fully utilize the
     functionality of the app or set up the account.
 • Surveillance – passengers may feel surveilled knowing that Red Dragon Taxi Company
     know their location (can also be seen as a positive).
 • Privacy/security – data collected and stored in the cloud could be used by staff or hackers
     if password access to data or reports is weak or online security is weak.
 • Loss of personalized service – lack of interaction with the taxi driver, for example, making
     up a route on the spot rather than following a pre-determined one.
 • Digital divide – may be problematic if passengers have problems using the app.
 • Information provided by the app may not be reliable, so passengers may find this may
     lead to unintended problems (of this overreliance on the app).
 • Drivers may not be available in certain areas of the city (poor and risky areas).
 • Data sharing, who has access to the passenger’s data, and does this infringe the privacy /
     anonymity of the passenger.
 • May get a negative rating from a driver due to his/her racial, religious, gender bias.
 • Exposure of data may allow a third party to build up detailed information about the
     passenger.

Driver
Positive impacts
 • Can choose their working hours.
 • Safety, as their location is always known.
 • May be able to increase their income as a result of receiving high customer ratings.
 • Can pick up passengers from anywhere. No need to wait in a taxi stand. The driver may
      choose to accept or decline the trip.
 • May be able to select where they are able to drive to improve their chances of being
      chosen.
 • May accept, or not, a passenger based on personal preferences, passenger rating or
      passenger’s location.
 • May rate the passenger (as a + or – based on passenger’s behaviour etc).

Negative impacts
 • Intrusion of privacy for drivers, as the app knows their car movement 24/7 as long as their
     mobile phone is on (Could also be a positive).
 • Loss of autonomy, as the app is providing constant information about their location.
 • May over-rely on the app, and if it crashes may not know how to get to the destination.
 • May find their ability to choose where they work is determined by an algorithm (which may
     not meet their preferred way of working).
 • May be harder to get tips / gratuities due to online payments.
 • May not be allowed to reject a fare as it may contradict company policies.
 • Their ability to perform their job may be largely outside of their control / unsatisfying /
     based solely on customer ratings.
 • May get a negative rating from a passenger due to racial, religious, gender bias.
                                      – 14 –                              8823 – 5513/5514M


Marks                   Level descriptor
   0    The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
        The impact of the social/ethical issues on stakeholders is described but not
 1–2    evaluated. Material is either copied directly from the article or implicit
        references are made to it.

        The impact of the social/ethical issues on stakeholders is partially analysed,
 3–5    with some evaluative comment. Explicit references to the information in the
        article are partially developed in the response. There is some use of
        appropriate ITGS terminology.

        The impact of the social/ethical issues on stakeholders is fully analysed and
 6–8    evaluated. Explicit, well developed references to information in the article are
        made appropriately throughout the response. There is use of appropriate ITGS
        terminology.
                                                    – 15 –                               8823 – 5513/5514M




Criterion D — A solution to a problem arising from the article                                                [8]

4.   Evaluate one possible solution that addresses at least one problem identified in Criterion C.

     Note to examiners:
     The problem should be stated in the box above the response. However, if this is not done, a
     solution can be evaluated that addresses any problem identified in Criterion C.
     The solution must be feasible.

     If there is more than one solution, mark the first solution only.

     Mark holistically using a two-step process:
      1. Determine the markband the response falls into.
      2. Determine the level within the markband using the guidelines attached.
     The solution may be a series of related measures that address the problem identified. For
     example, if the candidate identifies a problem such as security and then includes a range of
     security measures that are grouped together, this is acceptable.
     If there are more than one solution, and there is no explicit connection between them, only
     mark the first solution.

     Band 1 - 2
     The link to the problem may be implicit.
     Award [1] if a solution is identified.
     Award [2] if a solution is described.

     Band 3 - 5
     The solution is explicitly linked to the problem. (apply best fit if solution identified not described
     and reduce overall mark by 1)
     Award [3] if the solution described and there is at least one evaluative statement.
     Award [4] if the solution described has limited evaluative comments about the strengths and
     weaknesses of the solution.
     Award [5] if the solution described has evaluative comments that address a range of strengths
     and weaknesses.

     Band 6 - 8
     There are explicit references to the article throughout the response.
     Award [6] for an overall judgement about the effectiveness of the solution.
     Award [7-8] for an overall judgement about the effectiveness of the solution that is supported
     by the evaluation of its strengths and weaknesses. Future developments, clearly linked to the
     solution being proposed, may be proposed and/or insightful thinking demonstrated.
                                                     – 16 –                             8823 – 5513/5514M


      Answers may include the following:
       • Policy to ensure the passenger’s or driver’s data will not be shared
         with unauthorized third parties.
       • Policy to ensure the rating system used by Red Dragon Taxi Company is fair.
       • Provide smartphones in the taxi that enable international passengers to utilize
         the functionality of the app. Red Dragon Taxi Company provides facilities at
         airports to assist with bookings using the airport’s WiFi.
       • Policy to identify drivers who are using unethical practices to increase their
         income, such as the use of cameras recording the driver at all times they are
         working for Red Dragon Taxi Company.
       • Robust and transparent feedback system to ensure ratings are as accurate
         as possible.
       • Use open-source app development which can reduce the costs to Red Dragon
         Taxi Company and allow them to reduce their fares.
       • Policy to allow the right of drivers and passengers to be forgotten / to turn off
         the GPS on their phones. To ensure their privacy when they are out of
         service.
       • The app could include a safety mechanism to alert passengers if the taxi goes off
         a pre-determined route.
       • The app could be developed to enable real-time changes to be made to the
         route (which may lead to a recalculation of the fares) / car breaks down /
         favorite driver can be selected by the passenger.
       • Policy to enforce notification to the passengers in cases of delay in arrival due
         to traffic jams, vehicle break down, diverted route, etc.
       • Encryption must be linked to the database and the information stored (could
         also add authentication of access using 2 factor authentication)
       • Reliability – patches, updates, repairs to app
       • Protection for the driver and passenger – having audio recordings of the
         drive/ride.
       • Payment of the fare before entry into the taxi.

If the evaluation does not provide any additional information to that in the article, the candidate
will be awarded a maximum of [2].


     Marks                        Level descriptor

        0      The response does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
               One feasible solution to at least one problem is proposed and described.
      1–2      No evaluative comment is offered. Material is either copied directly from the article
               or implicit references are made to it.

               One appropriate solution to at least one problem is proposed and partially evaluated.
      3–5      The response contains explicit references to information in the article that are partially
               developed. There is some use of appropriate ITGS terminology.
               One appropriate solution to at least one problem is proposed and fully evaluated,
               addressing both its strengths and potential weaknesses. Areas for future development
      6–8      may also be identified. Explicit, fully developed references to the information in the
               article are made appropriately throughout the response. There is use of appropriate
               ITGS terminology.
