8823 – 5706M




               Markscheme


               November 2023


                Psychology


               Standard level


                  Paper 1




12 pages
                                            –2–                                        8823 – 5706M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                               –3–                                     8823 – 5706M


Section A markbands

 Marks                                        Level descriptor

   0     • The answer does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

         • The response is of limited relevance to or only rephrases the question.
         • Knowledge and understanding is mostly inaccurate or not relevant to the question.
  1–3
         • The research supporting the response is mostly not relevant to the question and if
           relevant only listed.

         • The response is relevant to the question, but does not meet the command
           term requirements.
  4–6
         • Knowledge and understanding is accurate but limited.
         • The response is supported by appropriate research which is described.

         • The response is fully focused on the question and meets the command term
           requirements.
         • Knowledge and understanding is accurate and addresses the main topics/problems
  7–9
           identified in the question.
         • The response is supported by appropriate research which is described and explicitly
           linked to the question.
                                                  –4–                                        8823 – 5706M


                                                Section A

Biological approach to understanding behaviour

1.   Describe the role of one hormone in the study of human behaviour, with reference to one
     relevant study.                                                                                    [9]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands when awarding marks.

     The command term “describe” requires candidates to give a detailed account of the role
     of one hormone in human behaviour.

     Responses should make a clear link between the role of the hormone(s) and human behaviour.

     Examples of how hormones influence human behaviour could include, but are not limited
     to:
      • Radke et al.’s (2015) study investigating the effects of testosterone on aggression
      • McGaugh and Cahill’s (1995) study on adrenaline and memory
      • Newcomer et al.’s (1999) study on cortisol and memory
      • Baumgartner et al.’s (2008) study on the role of oxytocin on trust
      • Ronay and von Hippel’s (2010) study on testosterone and risk taking.

     If a candidate describes the role of more than one hormone, credit should be given only to the first
     hormone described.

     If a candidate refers to more than one study credit should be given only to the first study.

     If a candidate describes the role of one hormone without making reference to a study, up to a
     maximum of [5] should be awarded.

     If a candidate only describes a relevant study without describing the role of the hormone in the
     study of human behaviour, up to a maximum of [4] should be awarded.

     Responses referring to research conducted on animals are acceptable as long as they are
     linked to human behaviour.
                                                   –5–                                       8823 – 5706M


Cognitive approach to understanding behaviour

2.   With reference to one relevant study, describe the effect of emotion on one cognitive
     process.                                                                                        [9]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands when awarding marks.

     The command term “describe” requires candidates to give a detailed account of the effect of
     emotion on one cognitive process with reference to one relevant study.

     Responses may focus on any cognitive process that is affected by emotion, for example, memory
     or decision-making.

     Relevant studies may include, but are not limited to:
     • Brown and Kulik’s (1977), Neisser and Harsh’s (1992) studies related to flashbulb memory
     • Yuille and Cutshall’s (1986) study on emotion and accuracy of flashbulb memories
     • Nutt and Lam’s (2011), Fisher and Craik’s (1977) studies of state-dependent memory
     • Bechara et al.’s (1999); Denes-Raj and Epstein’s (1994) studies of emotion and decision-
       making
     • McGaugh and Cahill’s (1995) study on the role of emotion in the creation of memories.

     If a candidate addresses more than one cognitive process, credit should be given only to
     the first cognitive process described.

     If a candidate refers to more than one study, credit should be given only to the first study.

     If a candidate addresses the effect of emotion on one cognitive process without including
     a relevant study, a maximum of [5] should be awarded for the response.

     If a candidate describes a relevant study but does not describe the effect of emotion on
     one cognitive process, up to a maximum of [4] should be awarded.
                                                   –6–                                       8823 – 5706M


Sociocultural approach to understanding behaviour

3.   Describe one research method used in one study related to cultural origins of behaviour
     and/or cultural origins of cognition.                                                              [9]

     Refer to the paper 1 section A markbands when awarding marks.

     The command term “describe" requires candidates to give a detailed account of one
     research method used in one study related to cultural origins of behaviour and/or cultural
     origins of cognition.

     In order to address the cultural origins of behaviour and/or cognition, candidates may describe
     research on cultural dimensions, enculturation, acculturation, or globalization.

     Relevant research methods may include, but are not limited to:
     • Naturalistic observations: Fagot (1974)
     • Quasi-experiments: Berry (1967) on conformity; Cole & Scribner (1974) on chunking in
       memory; Kearins (1981) on memory
     • Questionnaires: Parker et al (2001) on abnormal behaviour; Kulkofsky et al. (2011) on
       flashbulb memory.

     If a candidate refers to more than one research method, credit should be given only to the first
     research method.

     If a candidate refers to more than one study, credit should be given only to the first study.

     If a candidate describes a research method without making reference to a study, up to a
     maximum of [5] should be awarded.

     If a candidate only describes an appropriate study without describing a research method,
     up to a maximum of [4] should be awarded.
                                                  –7–                                     8823 – 5706M


Section B assessment criteria
A — Focus on the question

To understand the requirements of the question students must identify the problem or issue being raised
by the question. Students may simply identify the problem by restating the question or breaking down the
question. Students who go beyond this by explaining the problem are showing that they understand the
issues or problems.

 Marks     Level descriptor

    0      Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.

    1      Identifies the problem/issue raised in the question.

    2      Explains the problem/issue raised in the question.

B — Knowledge and understanding

This criterion rewards students for demonstrating their knowledge and understanding of specific areas of
psychology. It is important to credit relevant knowledge and understanding that is targeted at
addressing the question and explained in sufficient detail.

 Marks    Level descriptor

    0     Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.

          The response demonstrates limited relevant knowledge and understanding.
   1–2
          Psychological terminology is used but with errors that hamper understanding.

          The response demonstrates relevant knowledge and understanding but lacks detail.
   3–4
          Psychological terminology is used but with errors that do not hamper understanding.

          The response demonstrates relevant, detailed knowledge and understanding.
   5–6
          Psychological terminology is used appropriately
                                                   –8–                                       8823 – 5706M


C — Use of research to support answer

Psychology is evidence based so it is expected that students will use their knowledge of research to
support their argument. There is no prescription as to which or how many pieces of research are
appropriate for their response. As such it becomes important that the research selected is relevant and
useful in supporting the response. One piece of research that makes the points relevant to the answer
is better than several pieces that repeat the same point over and over.

 Marks    Level descriptor

    0     Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.

          Limited relevant psychological research is used in the response. Research selected serves
   1–2
          to repeat points already made.

          Relevant psychological research is used in support of the response, and is partly explained.
   3–4
          Research selected partially develops the argument.

          Relevant psychological research is used in support of the response and is thoroughly
   5–6
          explained. Research selected is effectively used to develop the argument.

D — Critical thinking

This criterion credits students who demonstrate an inquiring and reflective attitude to their understanding
of psychology. There are a number of areas where students may demonstrate critical thinking about the
knowledge and understanding used in their responses and the research used to support that knowledge
and understanding.

The areas of critical thinking are:
• research design and methodologies
• triangulation
• assumptions and biases
• contradictory evidence or alternative theories or explanations
• areas of uncertainty.

These areas are not hierarchical and not all areas will be relevant in a response. In addition, students
could demonstrate a very limited critique of methodologies, for example, and a well-developed
evaluation of areas of uncertainty in the same response. As a result, a holistic judgement of their
achievement in this criterion should be made when awarding marks.
                                                  –9–                                        8823 – 5706M



 Marks    Level descriptor

    0     Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.

          There is limited critical thinking and the response is mainly descriptive. Evaluation or
  1–2
          discussion, if present, is superficial.

          The response contains critical thinking, but lacks development. Evaluation or discussion of
  3–4
          most relevant areas is attempted but is not developed.

          The response consistently demonstrates well developed critical thinking. Evaluation
  5–6
          and/or discussion of relevant areas is consistently well developed.

E — Clarity and organisation

This criterion credits students for presenting their response in a clear and organized manner. A good
response would require no re-reading to understand the points made or the train of thought underpinning
the argument.

 Marks    Level descriptor

    0     Does not reach the standard described by the descriptors below.

          The answer demonstrates some organization and clarity, but this is not sustained throughout
    1
          the response.

    2     The answer demonstrates organization and clarity throughout the response.
                                                 – 10 –                                   8823 – 5706M


                                              Section B

4.   Discuss one or more techniques used to study the brain in relation to behaviour.             [22]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered review of the
     way in which techniques are used to study the brain in relation to behaviour.

     Techniques used to study the brain include, but are not limited to:
     • fMRI
     • MRI
     • EEG
     • CAT/CT
     • PET.

     Relevant studies include, but are not limited to:
     • Corkin (1997) using MRI to investigate the effect of damage to HM’s medial temporal
       lobes and the effect on memory
     • Draganski et al. (2004) using MRI to investigate the effects of learning juggling
       on the brain
     • Maguire et al. (2000) using MRI to investigate neuroplasticity in taxi drivers
     • Gilbertson et al.’s (2002) study using MRI to compare hippocampal volume in twins in
       relation to PTSD
     • Brefczynski-Lewis et al. (2007) using fMRI to investigate the effect of meditation
       on the brain
     • Sharot (2007) using fMRI to investigate the neural basis of flashbulb memories
     • Ogden (2005) using CT to investigate the effect of brain damage on hemineglect
     • Bert et al. (2011) using PET/CT in diagnosis of dementia
     • Dement and Kleitman (1957) using EEG to measure stages of sleep.

     Discussion may include, but is not limited to:
     • how brain imaging has changed the way we study the brain – eg improved ethical
        standards
     • the reasons why different techniques are used
     • evaluation of the techniques
     • ethical considerations in the use of the techniques
     • applications of the research – eg the limitations of correlational research
     • researcher biases in the interpretation of brain scans.

     The focus of the response should be on the discussion of how the techniques are used to
     study the brain.

     Candidates may discuss one brain imaging technique in order to demonstrate depth of
     knowledge, or may discuss more than one brain imaging technique in order to demonstrate
     breadth of knowledge. Both approaches are equally acceptable.
                                                – 11 –                                    8823 – 5706M


5.   Discuss one or more biases in thinking and/or decision-making.                              [22]

     Refer to the paper 1 section B assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered review of the
     influence of biases in thinking and/or decision-making.

     Thinking and decision-making are closely related cognitive processes and candidates do
     not need to make a distinction between the two.

     Candidates may address examples of biased thinking and/or decision-making in relation
     to specific aspects of human behaviour or address behaviour in general. Both approaches
     are equally acceptable.

     Examples of biased thinking and/or decision-making may include, but are not limited to:
     • specific biases (eg confirmation, optimism, selective attention)
     • illusory correlation
     • effects of framing
     • heuristics (eg anchoring, availability, representativeness).

     Relevant studies may include, but are not limited to:
     • studies on heuristics: Strack and Mussweiler (1997) and Englisch and Mussweiler
       (2001) on anchoring bias; Tversky and Kahneman (1981) on framing effects; Tversky
       and Kahneman (1973) on availability heuristic; Tversky and Kahneman (1973) on
       representativeness heuristic.
     • confirmation bias: Chapman (1969), Stone (1997), Darley and Gross (1983),
       Wason (1960).
     • halo effect: Dion et al (1972), Zebrowitz and McDonald (1991)
     • illusory correlation: Hamilton and Gifford (1976), Snyder and Schwann (1978)
     • matching bias: Wason (1968), Cox and Griggs (1982) – participants use the
       language of the rule to choose which cards to turn over.

     Discussion may include, but is not limited to:
     • Applications of findings – for example, in marketing or in understanding health-related
        behaviour
     • Cultural and gender considerations
     • Difficulties in studying cognitive processes – for example isolation of variables and
        measuring cognition; artificial nature of experimental research
     • Explanations of why cognitive biases occur – for example linking to Dual Process
        Theory
     • Implications of the findings
     • Methodological and ethical considerations.

     Candidates may discuss one bias in thinking or decision making in order to demonstrate depth of
     knowledge, or may discuss more than one bias in thinking and/or decision making in order to
     demonstrate breadth of knowledge. Both approaches are equally acceptable.
                                                – 12 –                                    8823 – 5706M


6.   Discuss the formation of stereotypes and/or the effect(s) of stereotypes on human behaviour. [22]
     Refer to the paper 1 section B assessment criteria when awarding marks.

     The command term “discuss” requires candidates to offer a considered review of the
     formation of stereotypes and/or the effect(s) of stereotypes on human behaviour.

     Candidates may address the effect of stereotypes in relation to specific aspects of human
     behaviour or address the effect of stereotypes on behaviour in general. Both approaches
     are equally acceptable.

     Explanations for the formation of stereotypes may include, but are not limited to:
     • Grain of truth hypothesis (Campbell, 1967)
     • Illusory correlation: Hamilton and Gifford (1976)
     • Social Identity Theory: Hilliard and Liben (2010); Johnson, Schaller and Mullen (2000),
       Park and Rothbart (1982).

     Effects of stereotypes on human behaviour may include, but are not limited to:
     • Memory distortion (eg Allport and Postman, 1947; Martin and Halvorson, 1983)
     • Misdiagnosis in mental health (eg Zhang, 1998; Van Ryn and Burke, 2000)
     • Stereotype threat (eg Steele and Aronson, 1995; Spencer et al., 1999; Shih et al., 1999)
     • Prejudice and discrimination against individuals (eg Duncan, 1976; Buckhout, 1974;
        Gibbins, 1969).

     Relevant discussion points may include, but are not limited to:
     • methodological considerations
     • cultural considerations
     • ethical considerations, including the social sensitivity of this research
     • implications of the findings, including how these may be used in an ethical way
     • contrasting explanations.

     Candidates may discuss only the formation of stereotypes or only the effect(s) of stereotypes.
     Both approaches are equally acceptable. If a candidate addresses both formation and effect(s)
     of stereotypes, the response does not need to be equally balanced in order to access marks
     in the top bands.
