© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Psychology
Higher level
Paper 3

8 November 2023

Zone A afternoon   Zone B afternoon   Zone C afternoon


1 hour

Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y Read the passage carefully and then answer all the questions.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [24 marks].




                                                                                             8823 – 5705
      3 pages                                            © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
                                                  –2–                                          8823 – 5705


The stimulus material below is based on a qualitative study that investigates adolescents’ experiences of
a school-based mental health programme.

        Supporting positive mental health development in adolescents is a major public health focus
        worldwide. Preventing adolescent depression is important because it is associated with
        a diminished quality of life. The need for early prevention of depression in adolescence is
        the background for the development of a specific school-based programme targeting 13 to
    5   15 year olds.

        The aim of this study was to explore adolescents’ subjective opinions of this specific
        school-based mental health programme. Two researchers recruited participants from eight
        schools offering the programme. The researchers used a purposive sample of sixty-four
        adolescents aged 13 to 15 years old (25 % males) who had completed the programme.

   10   The study was approved by an ethics committee. The participants and their parents were fully
        informed about the study and signed consent forms. They were also told that their data would
        be kept confidential.

        The researchers decided to meet with adolescents in the groups that had completed the
        programme together. Males and females were in separate groups of eight on average. The
   15   group interviews took place in the school and lasted between 30 to 50 minutes. One researcher
        facilitated the discussions. Each session was recorded and the other researcher made a
        verbatim transcription. Both researchers analysed, coded and interpreted transcripts and notes.
        A third researcher checked the results.

        The analysis of the transcripts revealed the following themes related to perceived benefits of
   20   the programme:
        • learning to identify negative thoughts and turning them into positive thoughts
        • realizing that thoughts, emotions and behaviour can be linked together and help change
           behaviour and reduce stress.
        • discovering that others also have negative thoughts and doubts about themselves makes it
   25      easier to manage negative thoughts.

        The findings of this study suggested that participation in the school-based mental health
        programme was generally perceived as beneficial. However, participants did not like that the
        programme focused more on problems than opportunities. This was perceived as negative
        expectations. The researchers concluded that this programme would be more widely accepted
   30   by adolescents if it focused less on problems and more on promoting positive mental health.
                                                   –3–                                            8823 – 5705


Answer all of the following three questions, referring to the stimulus material in your answers. Marks will
be awarded for demonstration of knowledge and understanding of research methodology.

1.    (a)	Identify the research method used and outline two characteristics of the method.              [3]

      (b)   Describe the sampling method used in the study.                                              [3]

      (c)   Suggest one alternative or one additional research method that could be used to
            investigate the aim of the original study, giving one reason for your choice.                [3]


2.    Describe the ethical considerations that were applied in the study and explain if further
      ethical considerations could be applied.                                                           [6]


3.    Discuss how a researcher in this study could ensure that the results of the study are credible.    [9]




