8823 – 5801M




                   Markscheme


                   November 2023


           Social and cultural anthropology


                     Higher level


                       Paper 1




12 pages
                                            –2–                                         8823 – 5801M




© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
                                                 –3–                                      8823 – 5801M


The following interpretation of the markscheme is offered as an example of the types of responses we
may expect, however it is not prescriptive or exhaustive, and other possible answers should be
appropriately rewarded if relevant.

                                              Section A
1.   Define the term cultural relativism and describe how it can be understood and applied in the
     context of the passage.                                                                           [4]

     This question requires candidates to demonstrate conceptual knowledge and understanding
     of the term cultural relativism and apply it in relation to the text. Candidates may write in
     terms of any of the following guidelines, but other definitions or applications will also be
     acceptable if made relevant to the context of the passage.

     Possible ways of defining the term:
     • As the assumption that each culture has its own internal logic
     • As the understanding of meaning in context
     • Not making value judgments about cultural difference
     • Making reference to Franz Boas' notion of cultural relativism.

     Other appropriate definitions should be credited.

     Possible examples of description and application:
     • The ethnographer’s acceptance of religious conservatism
     • The ethnographer’s value judgments regarding marriage offers
     • Assumptions regarding ethnicity and language
     • The reflexivity of the ethnographer regarding her reactions.

     Other appropriate applications should be credited.

         Marks      Level descriptor
           0        The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
          1–2       The response demonstrates a basic knowledge and understanding of the
                      concept.
                    There is a partial application of the concept in relation to the text.
          3–4       The response demonstrates sound knowledge and understanding of the
                      concept; the concept is described in detail.
                    The concept is clearly applied in relation to the text.
                                                 –4–                                       8823 – 5801M


2.   Explain how the key concept of power helps you understand the ethnographic data presented in
     the passage.                                                                                [6]

     This question requires candidates to develop an analysis and explanation of this ethnographic text
     using the key concept power to help make sense of the ethnographic data. In order to do this,
     candidates are required to demonstrate an understanding of the key concept and use it to
     illuminate certain issues within the context of the passage, developing an analysis with reference to
     the ethnographic data of the extract.

     Possible ways of defining the key concept:
     • Power is an essential part of social relations and can be considered as a person's or
       group's capacity to influence, manipulate or control others and resources
     • In its broadest sense, power can be understood as involving distinctions and
       inequalities between members of a social group
     • Some approaches to power focus on structural power or the capacity of power to
       produce subjectivities.

     Other appropriate definitions should be credited.

     Possible examples and ways of analyzing:
     • State power
     • Structural violence
     • Resistance
     • Power dynamics in the field
     • The (western) researcher transcending local gender norms
     • Religious authority

     Other appropriate examples and ways of analyzing should be credited.

        Marks       Level descriptor
          0         The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
         1–2        The response offers a common-sense or superficial understanding of the
                       key concept.
                    There is an attempt to relate the key concept to the text, and some
                       ethnographic examples are presented but these are only partially
                       relevant.
          3–4       The response demonstrates an understanding of the key concept and
                       establishes its relevance to the text.
                    There is an analysis of the text using the key concept, although there are
                       some inconsistencies.
                    Relevant ethnographic examples from the text are presented to support the
                       analysis.
          5–6       The response demonstrates a clear understanding of the key concept,
                       discussing this in the context of the text.
                    There is a clearly explained analysis of the text using the key concept and a
                       detailed interpretation of the ethnographic data.
                    Clear and explicit ethnographic examples from the text support the analysis.
                                                  –5–                                        8823 – 5801M


3.   Compare and contrast the way in which the key concept of social relations or identity is
     evident in this passage with how it is evident in one other ethnographic example you have
     studied. Make reference to theory in your answer.                                               [10]

     Candidates are expected to show an ability to think about the text in relation to other
     contexts and to draw explicit comparisons. In order to do this, responses must demonstrate
     an understanding of how either the key concept of social relations or identity relates to
     this ethnographic context. Either of the key concepts on which such comparison may be
     drawn should be made explicit and clearly linked to any anthropological issues raised by
     the text.

     The target societies for this comparative question are varied and many. Candidates should
     be able to establish a relevant comparison with any other group or society based on either
     of these concepts. The response should be structured as a comparison, highlighting
     similarities and differences. Candidates must situate the comparative case in terms of
     place, author, and fieldwork context.

     For social relations, possible ways of defining the key concept include the following:
     • Any relationship between two or more individuals in a network of relationships
     • Social relations involve an element of individual agency as well as group
       expectations and form the basis of social organization and social structure
     • They pervade every aspect of human life and are extensive, complex, and diverse.

     Other appropriate definitions should be credited.

     Possible examples from the text about social relations may include the following:
     • Social relations and religious groups
     • Marriage and kinship
     • Field relations
     • Socialization/acculturation into social groups

     Any other relevant point of comparison used from the text should be credited.


     For identity, possible ways of defining the key concept include the following:

     • Identity can refer either to the individual’s private and personal view of the self—this
       is sometimes referred to as the “moi”—or the view of an individual in the eyes of the
       social group.
     • Identity also refers to group identity, which may take the form of religious identity,
       ethnic identity, or national identity for example.

     Other appropriate definitions should be credited.
                                            –6–                                    8823 – 5801M


Possible examples from the text about identity may include:
• Religious identity
• Secular identity
• National identity
• Gender
• Insider/outsider
• Fieldworker identity and how it is conceptualized by participants

Any other relevant point of comparison used from the text should be credited.

Possible examples of theory in relation to identity may include:
At HL candidates need to use theory in the response in order to achieve more than [4]
marks.
• Post-structuralism
• Practice theory
• Feminist theory
• Post-colonial theories

Any other relevant theory.

OR
                                                 –7–                                       8823 – 5801M


4.   Compare and contrast the approaches to research adopted by the anthropologist in
     this passage with the approaches to research used by one other anthropologist you
     have studied. Make reference to concepts, ethnographic material and theory in your
     answer.                                                                                        [10]

     Here, candidates are expected to show an ability to think about the text with emphasis on
     the methodological and theoretical perspectives of the ethnographer as the focus on which
     such comparisons should be established.

     By “approaches to research” the question essentially refers to the research methods used
     by the anthropologist to gather data. However, as theory is required for level 5–6 and
     above, it is expected that candidates will also discuss theory with reference to approaches.

     Possible comparative examples regarding approaches to research and
     methodological terms may include:

     •   Participant observation
     •   informal/ethnographic interviews
     •   gender
     •   tensions between ethnographer and the state
     •   qualitative methods
     •   insider/outsider
     •   access to the field
     •   local categories/analytical categories
     •   positionality
     •   field relationships
     •   reflexivity
     •   representation.

     Possible examples of theory in relation to approaches may include the following:
     • Post-colonial theories
     • Feminist theory

     Any other relevant theory.
                                     –8–                                      8823 – 5801M


Marks    Level descriptor
  0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
 1–2     Comparative ethnography or approaches are presented but in limited detail;
         relevance is only partially established.
         The response is not structured as a compare and contrast.
         The identification of ethnographic material is missing.
 3–4     Comparative ethnography or approaches are presented and although this is
         in limited detail, its relevance is established.
         The response is structured as a compare and contrast, but this is not
         balanced and lacks detail.
         The identification of ethnographic material is partially complete.
 5–6     Comparative ethnography or approaches are presented; relevance is
         established and explained.
         The response is clearly structured as a compare and contrast; however,
         either comparison (similarities) or contrasts (differences) are explained in
         detail, but not both.
         Anthropological theory has been identified although this may not be relevant
         or the application is limited.
         The identification of ethnographic material is mostly complete.
 7–8     Comparative ethnography or approaches are presented; relevance is clearly
         established and explained in detail.
         The response is clearly structured as a compare and contrast with
         comparisons (similarities) and contrasts (differences) being discussed in
         detail, although this is not balanced.
         Relevant anthropological theory has been identified and used as part of the
         analysis although there are some inconsistencies.
         The response demonstrates anthropological understanding.
         The identification of ethnographic material is mostly complete.
Capped   If fieldwork location(s), fieldwork context(s), group(s) studied and
 marks   ethnographer(s) have not been fully identified, no more than 8 marks will be
         awarded.
 9–10    Comparative ethnography or approaches are presented; relevance is clearly
         established and discussed in detail.
         The response is clearly structured as a compare and contrast with
         comparisons (similarities) and contrasts (differences) discussed critically.
         Relevant anthropological theory has been identified and used as part of the
         analysis.
         The response demonstrates anthropological understanding.
         The identification of the ethnographic material is complete.
                                                 –9–                                        8823 – 5801M


5.   To what extent is knowing others possible? Discuss with reference to at least two sources of
     ethnographic material and examples from the passage.                                         [10]

     This question requires candidates to develop an argument that is built on an
     understanding of the following “big anthropological question”: To what extent is
     knowing others possible? This response should include argumentative discussion and
     analysis and should be supported by making reference to the passage and by relevant,
     detailed ethnographic material that gives evidence of the understanding of this big
     question in different cultural contexts. This big anthropological question should be the
     very backbone of the response.

     In the development of their response, candidates may make reference to a number of
     ideas or propositions connected to the question. For this reason, below are some ideas
     that may appear in candidates’ responses. However, any other relevant lines of thought
     should be rewarded.

     Possible issues to develop an argument may be:
     There are many different ways that candidates can approach this question, and any
     valid discussion of similarities and differences underpinned by anthropological
     knowledge and understanding should be considered.

     While it is not possible to predict how candidates will use any additional ethnographies,
     in relation to the passage they may focus on:

     •   Gender
     •   Religion
     •   Secularization
     •   Cultural Relativism
     •   Change
     •   Power
     •   Memory and history

     Other appropriate discussion and arguments should be credited.
                                     – 10 –                                     8823 – 5801M


Marks    Level descriptor
  0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
 1–2     There is limited understanding of the big anthropological question.
         The response refers to ethnographic material; relevance to the question is
         superficial or not established. There is no reference to the passage.
         The identification of ethnographic material is missing.
 3–4     There is partial understanding of the big anthropological question.
         The response presents some ethnographic material and establishes its
         relevance to the question, but this lacks detail. There is no or limited
         reference to the passage.
         There is an attempt to analyse and interpret the ethnographic material in
         relation to the big anthropological question, but this lacks clarity and
         coherence.
         The identification of ethnographic material is partially complete.
 5–6     There is an understanding of the big anthropological question.
         The response presents a range of relevant ethnographic material and
         establishes its relevance to the question. There is some reference to the
         passage.
         There is some analysis and interpretation of the ethnographic material and
         passage in relation to the big anthropological question but there is a limited
         or an undeveloped argument.
         The identification of ethnographic material is mostly complete.
 7–8     There is clear understanding of the big anthropological question in different
         cultural contexts.
         The response presents detailed comparative ethnographic material and
         establishes its relevance to the question. There is clear reference to the
         passage.
         The analysis and interpretation of the ethnographic material and passage
         support the development of an argument; however minor inconsistencies
         hinder from the strength of the overall argument.
         The identification of ethnographic material is mostly complete.
Capped   If fieldwork location(s), fieldwork context(s), group(s) studied and
 marks   ethnographer(s) have not been fully identified, no more than 8 marks will be
         awarded.
 9–10    There is clear understanding of the big anthropological question in different
         cultural contexts.
         The response presents detailed comparative ethnographic material and
         establishes its relevance to the question. There is clear reference to the
         passage.
         The analysis and interpretation of the ethnographic material and passage in
         relation to the big anthropological question support the development of a
         reasoned argument; any minor inconsistencies do not hinder from the
         strength of the overall argument.
         The identification of ethnographic material is complete.
                                                  – 11 –                                      8823 – 5801M


                                               Section B
6.   With reference to either stimulus A or stimulus B and your own knowledge, discuss the defining
     features of anthropological ethics.                                                          [10]

     This question requires candidates to develop a response in which they demonstrate an
     understanding of the anthropological ethical issues raised by the stimulus material, and
     an ability to engage in a critical discussion applying their own knowledge.

     If stimulus A is used:

     This extract is based on an academic paper in which an anthropologist comments on
     ethical issues regarding fieldwork. More specifically, it relates to a researcher obtaining
     informed consent from a vulnerable participant group; consent which is mediated by third
     parties.

     Candidates are expected to demonstrate –with reference to the passage- their
     knowledge about informed consent as a key plank in ethnographers conducting research
     ethically as professional practitioners. These principles dictate that the ethnographer
     respects the dignity of the members of the group being studied. The stimulus allows for
     a wide range of responses.

     Candidates may develop a discussion based on:
     • The nature of interaction between fieldworkers and research participants, in
       particular regard to honesty and informed consent
     • The right of individuals to be given the possibility to accept or refuse to take part in a
       research study
     • The relationship between fieldworkers and gatekeepers
     • The importance of giving voice to people such as separated migrant children
     • The moral dilemmas associated to the tensions between the responsibility of the
       anthropologist towards the research participants, to the complexities of parties at
       play and the difficult decisions to take among competing ethical obligations
     • Asymmetries of power
     • Anthropologists working with vulnerable groups
     • Any relevant principle of anthropological codes of ethics
     • Other relevant cases in the history of the discipline.

     Other possible relevant lines of thought should be credited.
                                               – 12 –                                       8823 – 5801M


If stimulus B is used:

This stimulus relates to the ethical issues involved in participant observation. In this case, it is likely
candidates will discuss anthropological ethics stressing the importance of field relations.

Candidates may develop a discussion based on the following:
• Issues of representation
• Access to participants
• Power relations
• Collaborative research and inclusion
• Reputation of anthropology as a discipline
• the ways in which fieldwork is conducted and to what end
• the changes of the ethical anthropological practices over time
• How people use anthropological work to understand themselves.

Other possible relevant lines of thought should be credited.

    Marks       Level descriptor
      0         The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
     1–2        The response identifies one or more ethical concerns but their relevance to
                anthropology is not established.
                There is little or no reference to the stimulus.
     3–4        The response identifies one or more ethical concerns and partially
                establishes their relevance to anthropology.
                There is an attempt to engage with the stimulus but understanding of the
                ethical issue presented is superficial or limited.
     5–6        The response develops an analysis of one or more ethical concerns and
                establishes their relevance to anthropology.
                There is clear understanding of the ethical issues presented in the stimulus.
                An argument is presented that indicates the student’s perspective on the
                relative importance of the ethical issue(s) in relation to anthropological
                practice, but this is only partially developed.
     7–8        The response discusses one or more ethical concerns, is anthropologically
                informed, and incorporates the student’s own knowledge of the defining
                features of anthropological ethics.
                There is clear and relevant engagement with the stimulus, and the ethical
                issues presented are explained demonstrating sound understanding.
                An argument is presented that indicates the student’s perspective on the
                relative importance of the ethical issue(s) in relation to anthropological
                practice; however, there are inconsistencies that hinder the overall strength
                of the argument.
    9–10        The response critically discusses one or more ethical concerns, is
                anthropologically informed, and integrates the student’s own knowledge of
                the defining features of anthropological ethics.
                There is relevant and thorough engagement with the stimulus, and the
                ethical issue(s) presented are fully explained demonstrating excellent
                understanding.
                A reasoned argument is presented that indicates the student’s perspective
                on the relative importance of the ethical issue(s) in relation to
                anthropological practice; any minor inconsistencies do not hinder the overall
                strength of the argument.
