M18/1/AYENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                   May / Mai / Mayo de 2018


                  English / Anglais / Inglés A:
                   language and literature /
                     langue et littérature /
                       lengua y literatura


                         Standard level
                         Niveau moyen
                          Nivel medio

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1


6 pages/páginas
                              –2–           M18/1/AYENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use
of examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Global Centre, Cardiff.



Ces remarques pour la notation sont confidentielles. Leur
usage est réservé exclusivement aux examinateurs participant
à cette session.

Ces remarques sont la propriété du Baccalauréat International.
Toute reproduction ou distribution à de tierces personnes sans
l’autorisation préalable du centre mondial de l’IB à Cardiff
est interdite.



Estas notas para la corrección son confidenciales y para el uso
exclusivo de los examinadores en esta convocatoria de
exámenes.

Son propiedad del Bachillerato Internacional y no deben
reproducirse ni distribuirse a ninguna otra persona sin la
autorización del centro global del IB en Cardiff.
                                               –3–              M18/1/AYENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The following are the annotations available to use when marking responses.

                                                                                Associated
        Annotation                          Explanation
                                                                                 shortcut

                         Caret – indicates omission.

                         Incorrect point – indicates factual inaccuracies or
                         misinterpretations.

                         Ellipse that can be expanded.

                         Horizontal wavy line that can be expanded –
                         indicates language errors / incoherence.

                         Highlight tool that can be expanded.

                         On page comment – justifies application of
                         assessment criteria.

                         Unclear content or language.

                         SEEN - every scanned page must be annotated
                         or marked as SEEN.

                         Good Response/Good Point.

                         Vertical wavy line that can be expanded –
                         indicates irrelevance / going off the point.

You must make sure you have looked at all pages. Please put the           annotation on any blank
page, to indicate that you have seen it.

When using the On Page Comments annotation, please keep the following in mind:
  • Avoid covering the candidate’s own writing. This can be done by writing your comments in
    the margins then running the arrow attached to the ‘on-page comment’ annotation to the
    appropriate place.
  • Provide all comments in the target language.
  • You may provide summative comments at the end of the script, but please do NOT record
    numerical marks on the scripts.
                                                –4–             M18/1/AYENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


General marking instructions

 These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking. They are not
 offered as an exhaustive and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must
 rigidly adhere.
 Good ideas or angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate.
 Similarly, answers which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here should be
 rewarded appropriately.

 Of course, some of the points listed will appear in weaker papers, but are unlikely to be
 developed.


Instructions générales pour la notation

 Ces remarques sont de simples lignes directrices destinées à aider les examinateurs lors de la
 notation. Elles ne peuvent en aucun cas être considérées comme un ensemble fixe et exhaustif
 de réponses ou d’approches de notation auxquelles les réponses doivent strictement
 correspondre.
 Les idées ou angles valables qui n’ont pas été proposés ici doivent être reconnus et
 récompensés de manière appropriée.
 De même, les réponses qui ne comprennent pas toutes les idées ou approches mentionnées ici
 doivent être récompensées de manière appropriée.

 Naturellement, certains des points mentionnés apparaîtront dans les épreuves les moins bonnes
 mais n’y seront probablement pas développés.


Instrucciones generales para la corrección

 El objetivo de estas notas para los examinadores es servir de directrices para ayudar en la
 corrección. Por lo tanto, no deben considerarse una colección fija y exhaustiva de respuestas y
 enfoques por la que deban regirse estrictamente todas las respuestas.
 Los buenos enfoques e ideas que no se mencionen en las notas para la corrección deben recibir
 el reconocimiento y la valoración que les corresponda.
 De igual manera, las respuestas que no incluyan todas las ideas o los enfoques que se sugieren
 en las notas deben valorarse en su justa medida.

 Por supuesto, algunos de los puntos que se incluyen en las notas aparecerán en exámenes
 más flojos, pero probablemente no se habrán desarrollado.
                                                –5–             M18/1/AYENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Text 1

The text is an editorial from the online Washington Times, July 15 in response to recent shark
attacks on the east coast of the USA coinciding with “Shark Week” on the Discovery Channel.

An adequate to good analysis will:

• identify that the text type is an editorial (or opinion) on a website and show knowledge of some
  of its conventions
• identify the target audience as, for example, readers of the Washington Times or web-users
  interested in shark attacks, “Shark Week” or sharks generally
• recognize that the context and the reason the editorial was written is the coincidence of shark
  attacks on bathers with the transmission of a series of TV programmes about sharks
• show a general understanding of the key purpose: to persuade readers that the fear of sharks is
  irrational and due to media coverage of shark attacks and to human attitudes to sharks
  generally
• make some comments about the way the editorial is structured
• give some examples of the type of arguments the editorial uses to persuade readers to agree
  with its point of view. Perhaps refer to the way the editorialist takes the side of the shark and
  tries to put the phenomenon of human reactions to shark attacks into historical perspective
• comment on how the diction and tone lends a persuasive edge to the piece, for example: the
  statistical arguments, the references to historical context, the assertions (“nobody’s fault”), the
  criticism of the media’s obsession with blood
• comment on the critical yet humorous tone of the editorial, referring, for example to cultural
  allusions, pathos, hyperbole, parenthetical remarks, use of slang
• include some comment about the layout and design, for example: the title, tabs, social media
  logo as well as the image and its caption


A good to very good analysis may also:

• demonstrate greater familiarity with the text type and some of its conventions (for example:
  impersonal style, link to current news of concern to readers, clear exposition of the problem,
  arguments supported by facts, unequivocal expression of opinion, criticism)
• demonstrate deeper insight into the target audience, for example, an educated reader, as
  indicated by the level of language and with some awareness of pop culture, etc.
• show understanding of wider aspects of the context, for example, awareness of the ecological
  impact, the internet context, the historical context, the modern need for entertainment
• show understanding of how the editorial combines news of recent shark attacks with a criticism
  of sensationalist media coverage as well as of the attitudes of television viewers
• comment more perceptively on the structure of the text in terms of the conventions of editorials
• make more detailed comments on the type of arguments the editorial uses to persuade readers,
  with particular emphasis perhaps on the way it relativizes the current news by putting the
  phenomenon of shark attacks into historical perspective; its mockery of human folly; its defence
  of the shark
• analyse in greater depth the way diction and tone is used, particularly humour, to make the
  opinion of the Washington Times clear to the reader and to entertain, for example, commenting
  perhaps on the use of hyperbole and its effects on the reader
• comment further on the title, noticing, for example both the use of alliteration, of wordplay and
  irony, and perhaps on the odd choice of illustration and caption used.
                                                –6–              M18/1/AYENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Text 2

The text, in the form of an “insider’s guide”, is taken from a Tasmanian tourist website advertising
adventure holidays to young people.

An adequate to good analysis will:

• identify type of website, its general promotional purpose and target audience (people looking to
  escape from their busy/stressful lives; possibly young professionals seeking adventure)
• analyse the interplay of image, layout and language, for example, how the images support the
  purpose, contribute to the sense of wonder and mystery conveyed
• recognise that the writer’s tone is both awestruck and reassuring, and that the text seeks to
  convey wonder to readers about the world inside (for example, through the use of superlatives,
  statistics, historical perspective), in contrast with the assumptions made about the hectic lives
  they lead in the world outside (for example, through comic exaggeration and contrast)
• comment on the effect of the use of pronouns (you, we) and on other features of persuasive
  writing (hyperbole, simile, alliteration)
• comment on the way language is used to inform as well as to persuade (facts, explanations)
• comment on the headline, banner, tabs, including the first image, the writing on it and how these
  features support the purpose


A good to very good analysis may also:

• make more detailed comments about the type of website, its participative nature (“map your
  story”, “insider’s guide”) and the audience it seeks to appeal to
• comment on the context, for example, the internet context, the ecological, the socio-historical
• give more detailed consideration to the interplay of text and image, paying particular attention
  perhaps to analysis of the first image and its invitation to “Enter Tasmania’s Labyrinth”, to the
  use of colours, to the contrast within and between images as well as to the contrasts used in the
  text itself (for example, between the modern world and the world of nature, between present
  and distant past, outside and inside, surface and depth, dark and light)
• make more detailed comments about the structure, layout and visual features of the guide and
  the way they attract the reader
• make more detailed comments on the writer’s diction and style, including tone, that clearly show
  the assumptions she is making about the target audience and their expectations
• analyse in more detail the stylistic features and persuasive devices used by the writer, for
  example: the address used; enumeration; the metaphor of medicine; references to Australian
  culture; historical allusions, the connotations of “labyrinth”.
