M18/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




            Marking notes
       Remarques pour la notation
        Notas para la corrección

                   May / Mai / Mayo de 2018


                  English / Anglais / Inglés A:
                   language and literature /
                     langue et littérature /
                       lengua y literatura


                         Higher level
                       Niveau supérieur
                        Nivel superior

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1


6 pages/páginas
                              –2–           M18/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use
of examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Global Centre, Cardiff.



Ces remarques pour la notation sont confidentielles. Leur
usage est réservé exclusivement aux examinateurs participant
à cette session.

Ces remarques sont la propriété du Baccalauréat International.
Toute reproduction ou distribution à de tierces personnes sans
l’autorisation préalable du centre mondial de l’IB à Cardiff
est interdite.



Estas notas para la corrección son confidenciales y para el uso
exclusivo de los examinadores en esta convocatoria de
exámenes.

Son propiedad del Bachillerato Internacional y no deben
reproducirse ni distribuirse a ninguna otra persona sin la
autorización del centro global del IB en Cardiff.
                                               –3–              M18/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The following are the annotations available to use when marking responses.

                                                                                Associated
        Annotation                          Explanation
                                                                                 shortcut

                         Caret – indicates omission.

                         Incorrect point – indicates factual inaccuracies or
                         misinterpretations.

                         Ellipse that can be expanded.

                         Horizontal wavy line that can be expanded –
                         indicates language errors / incoherence.

                         Highlight tool that can be expanded.

                         On page comment – justifies application of
                         assessment criteria.

                         Unclear content or language.

                         SEEN - every scanned page must be annotated
                         or marked as SEEN.

                         Good Response/Good Point.

                         Vertical wavy line that can be expanded –
                         indicates irrelevance / going off the point.

You must make sure you have looked at all pages. Please put the           annotation on any blank
page, to indicate that you have seen it.

When using the On Page Comments annotation, please keep the following in mind:
  • Avoid covering the candidate’s own writing. This can be done by writing your comments in
    the margins then running the arrow attached to the ‘on-page comment’ annotation to the
    appropriate place.
  • Provide all comments in the target language.
  • You may provide summative comments at the end of the script, but please do NOT record
    numerical marks on the scripts.
                                                –4–             M18/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


General marking instructions

 These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking. They are not
 offered as an exhaustive and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must
 rigidly adhere.
 Good ideas or angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate.
 Similarly, answers which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here should be
 rewarded appropriately.

 Of course, some of the points listed will appear in weaker papers, but are unlikely to be
 developed.


Instructions générales pour la notation

 Ces remarques sont de simples lignes directrices destinées à aider les examinateurs lors de la
 notation. Elles ne peuvent en aucun cas être considérées comme un ensemble fixe et exhaustif
 de réponses ou d’approches de notation auxquelles les réponses doivent strictement
 correspondre.
 Les idées ou angles valables qui n’ont pas été proposés ici doivent être reconnus et
 récompensés de manière appropriée.
 De même, les réponses qui ne comprennent pas toutes les idées ou approches mentionnées ici
 doivent être récompensées de manière appropriée.

 Naturellement, certains des points mentionnés apparaîtront dans les épreuves les moins bonnes
 mais n’y seront probablement pas développés.


Instrucciones generales para la corrección

 El objetivo de estas notas para los examinadores es servir de directrices para ayudar en la
 corrección. Por lo tanto, no deben considerarse una colección fija y exhaustiva de respuestas y
 enfoques por la que deban regirse estrictamente todas las respuestas.
 Los buenos enfoques e ideas que no se mencionen en las notas para la corrección deben recibir
 el reconocimiento y la valoración que les corresponda.
 De igual manera, las respuestas que no incluyan todas las ideas o los enfoques que se sugieren
 en las notas deben valorarse en su justa medida.

 Por supuesto, algunos de los puntos que se incluyen en las notas aparecerán en exámenes
 más flojos, pero probablemente no se habrán desarrollado.
                                                –5–              M18/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.    Text A and text B

The pair contrasts two very different views of robots. Text A is a feature article on robotics in the
online magazine Science News, Text B one of the Wizard of Oz stories for children about a robot,
written a century earlier.

An adequate to good analysis will:

• identify that the common theme is robots and that the texts are written at very different times
• identify the text types and make some observations about the different purposes of the texts
  and the audiences they were written for
• make some comment about the context of the development of electronics and artificial
  intelligence with respect to Text A in comparison with the imaginary mechanical “clockwork”
  technology to which Text B refers
• give examples of some of the ways in which the robots described in the two texts are different
• make comments about the differences in the language of the texts, referring perhaps to the
  different epochs in which they are written, the different purposes and the audiences they target
• comment on some of the formal and stylistic features of both texts. In Text A, for example: use
  of expository style, quotation, colloquialisms, use of descriptive adjectives, detailed scientific
  explanation, jargon, similes; in Text B, for example: use of narrative, dialogue, exposition, some
  similes, the implied moral(s)
• make some observations about what the illustrations contribute to the content of both texts and
  how they are received.


A good to excellent analysis may also:

• comment more fully on how, in the last 100 years, the topic of robots has progressed from being
  a theoretical concept to a scientific and technological reality
• comment more fully on the nature of the texts and the audiences they were written for
• make further observations comparing the technology imagined in 1913 and that of today,
  observing perhaps that in both cases, robots are at a “fledgling” stage but are far less human in
  appearance today than how writers in the pre-electronic era imagined them to be
• comment on the collaborative nature of the interaction between humans and robots in Text A
  and the antagonism, conflict and eventual destruction of the robot described in Text B
• further compare and contrast the formal and stylistic features of the two texts, possibly
  commenting on what appears innovative in Text A, stereotypical in Text B
• make a more detailed analysis of how illustrations contribute to what is conveyed by both texts.
                                                –6–             M18/1/AYENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   Text C and text D

The common theme of the two texts is the current plight of bees. Text C is an extract of an article
from a magazine that covers “the important issues and stories that define the American West”,
High Country News, written in 2007. Text D is a 2016 online appeal by Friends of the Earth in their
campaign to “save Britain’s bees”.

An adequate to good analysis will:

• recognize that both texts address the issue of the declining bee population
• recognize that Text C refers to the United States, whilst Text B refers to the UK and that the
  texts are of a different nature and address different local audiences
• make some observations about the different text types (for example, an article in online version
  of a regional print magazine and an appeal for donations on the UK webpage of an international
  organization) or about their similarities and differences of purpose
• comment on the differences in the point of view adopted by the journalist in Text C and the
  approach taken by the appeal, for example, that the first presents the issue as it affects the bee
  pollination industry through the comments and historical background of one commercial
  beekeeper, whilst Text D focuses on the importance of bees and what ordinary citizens can
  concretely do to ameliorate their habitat, or that the latter identifies both problem and solution,
  whilst the first only identifies the problem
• make some comment on the language and style used by both texts to persuade readers of the
  seriousness of the issue, for example, facts, personal testimony, exposition in Text C, summary
  of the problem, slogans, the offer of a kit in exchange for a donation in Text D and draw
  attention to some of the stylistic features (for example: enumeration, imperatives, bullet points,
  alliteration, onomatopoeia, statistics, quotation)
• make some comment on visual and layout features, notably those that serve the didactic
  function of text D as well as its humorous features, the banners of Texts C and D and what both
  indicate about the target audiences (for example, older readers in C, younger people, including
  children in D).


A good to excellent analysis may also:

• recognize that the bee problem identified in Text C is different from the problems enumerated in
  Text D and suggest some reasons for this (for example, different country, different date,
  different perspective/audience)
• comment more fully on the different text types and their purposes in relation to the different
  audiences and on the very different approaches taken to alerting readers to the issue of
  declining bee populations, for example, the ways in which Text C appeals to history (or the past
  generations), Text D to the present and future generations, or Text C’s appeal to the intellectual,
  Text D to the pragmatist, etc.
• comment perhaps on the fatalism of Text C in contrast with the optimism and urgency of Text D
• comment on the differences of emphasis between the texts, for example, on commercial
  interests in Text C, on the ecological in Text D
• provide further examples and analysis of the use of language, style and tone in the two texts,
  noting, for example, a contrast between the literary style of Text C and the more straightforward
  prose of Text D
• comment in more detail on layout and graphic features (including colour) particularly in Text D.
