M18/1/TEXTP/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Marking notes


                                 May 2018


                  Literature and performance


                               Standard level


                                  Paper 2




7 pages/páginas
                             –2–           M18/1/TEXTP/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use
of examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorization of the IB Global Centre, Cardiff.
                                               –3–              M18/1/TEXTP/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The following are the annotations available to use when marking responses.

                                                                                Associated
        Annotation                          Explanation
                                                                                 shortcut

                         Caret – indicates omission.

                         Incorrect point – indicates factual inaccuracies or
                         misinterpretations.

                         Ellipse that can be expanded.

                         Horizontal wavy line that can be expanded –
                         indicates language errors / incoherence.

                         Highlight tool that can be expanded.

                         On page comment – justifies application of
                         assessment criteria.

                         Unclear content or language.

                         SEEN - every scanned page must be annotated
                         or marked as SEEN.

                         Good Response/Good Point.

                         Vertical wavy line that can be expanded –
                         indicates irrelevance / going off the point.

You must make sure you have looked at all pages. Please put the           annotation on any blank
page, to indicate that you have seen it.

When using the On page comment annotation, please keep the following in mind:
  • Avoid covering the candidate’s own writing. This can be done by writing your comments in
    the margins then running the arrow attached to the “On page comment” annotation to the
    appropriate place.
  • Provide all comments in the target language.
  • You may provide summative comments at the end of the script, but please do NOT record
    numerical marks on the scripts.
                                                 –4–              M18/1/TEXTP/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                        Assessment criteria

These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking and as a supplement
to the published external assessment criteria for written paper 2. They are not offered as an
exhaustive and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must rigidly adhere.
Good ideas or angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate.
Similarly, answers which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here should not be
so heavily penalized as to distort appreciation of individuality.

With reference to criterion C, the better answers will contain examples that show an adequate
sense of stylistic features with some awareness of their effects, using critical analysis and pertinent
detail.

The best answers will show a strong sense of the stylistic and comparable features of the works,
as well as the effects of these features.

Of course, some of the points listed below will appear in weaker papers, but are unlikely to
be developed.

These apply to all answers below.

A maximum of [5 marks] may be awarded for each of the five criteria.

Criteria A and B

The danger of rewarding or penalizing the use of illustration/references/quotations twice in both
these categories should be avoided.

Criterion B

“Personal response” and “independence of thought” appear as the levels of the descriptors
increase. What is sought is an engaged and individual treatment of the chosen topic. Engaged
and individual essays will usually make themselves clear by showing insight into the implications of
the question and the quality and interest of the details cited in support.

The first person singular does not automatically constitute a personal response and conversely an
impersonal academic style does not necessarily indicate a lack of personal response.

Criterion C

It is expected that every question set will provide candidates with ample opportunities to
demonstrate their awareness of the demands of this criterion. However, where a question does
not explicitly offer such opportunities, examiners should interpret criterion C broadly, to ensure that
candidates are not unfairly disadvantaged. In such cases it would be sufficient for candidates
to show, as appropriate to the question, an awareness of how elements such as plot, character,
setting, structure, voice, etc, are used by writers to meet their purposes. No matter how the
question is phrased, candidates must also address related matters of style and technique.

“Awareness” and “appreciation” of literary features are the key elements under this criterion.
The mere labelling, without appreciation, of literary features will not score the highest marks.
On the other hand, the candidate who is attentive to literary features and deals with them in a
meaningful way, but who does not consistently use the vocabulary of literary criticism, can still be
awarded the higher achievement levels.

Reminder: the term “literary features” is broad and includes elements as basic as plot, character
etc, attention to which is valid and must be rewarded as appropriate.
                                                –5–               M18/1/TEXTP/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion D

Any form of structuring to the essay will be rewarded if it is effective and appropriate.
Different conventions are in operation and therefore all approaches are acceptable and will be
judged on the basis of their effectiveness. Examiners should remember that structure does not
exist by itself, but any structure must be measured by appropriate reference to the terms of the
question and by its capacity to integrate these towards the development of an organized and
coherent essay.

Reminder: in this criterion, supporting examples must be evaluated in terms of how fluently they
are incorporated/integrated to shape/advance the argument, not in terms of their appropriateness
or accuracy.

Criterion E

If you have reservations about awarding a 4, you should ensure that these are well founded before
awarding a 3. The broadness of achievement in level three sometimes makes examiners reluctant
to award 4.

Judgment needs to be used when dealing with lapses in grammar, spelling and punctuation;
therefore do not unduly penalize.

Mechanical accuracy is only part of this criterion. Ensure that all the other elements are
considered.

Examiners should be careful to avoid being prejudiced in their application of this criterion by
achievement levels in other criteria. It is possible to score highly on this criterion even if
candidates have scored in the lower levels on other criteria, and vice versa.
                                                 –6–              M18/1/TEXTP/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


1.

     •   An adequate to good answer will make material on death the centre of the answer,
         establishing its presence in poems by two different writers. The second aspect of the
         question that must be addressed is the ‘treatment’ of the subject. This will first require
         showing how death constitutes the centre or is included in the poems and then devoting
         sufficient attention to how, stylistically, the poet has presented death through varying
         approaches.

     •   A very good to excellent response may, beyond the demands described above, offer more
         subtle explorations of how poets may manifest their attitudes by word choice and other
         stylistic features. Another possibility is that the candidate will engage in some relevant
         comparison of the way the poets work with the subject.


2.

     •   Much will depend in an adequate to good answer on how convincingly or accurately the
         candidate defines this somewhat elusive term, ‘imagery’. Once that has been established,
         the candidate will need to cite valid instances of imagery in the work of two poets and, as
         the question requests, speak about how these examples work in conjunction with content.

     •   Very good to excellent answers should pursue the same course of action as good answers,
         but may also cite more compelling examples from the poems. Such responses may also
         see patterns of imagery and their power to provide cumulative effects, or note different or
         similar handling of imagery by the two poets.


3.

     •   An adequate to good answer will be able to speak about the nature of voice in the chosen
         poems by describing the nature of the voice and how it functions to deliver the matter of the
         poems. Identifying and citing examples of tone will be important; something more integral
         than mere description or listing will distinguish adequate from good responses.

     •   Because voice has many clear but also subtle effects on poems, very good to excellent
         answers may be more able to distinguish those and identify their causes, in addition to
         fulfilling the demands of adequate and good answers. Depending on the ways the poems
         have been treated in their classes, answers in this category may diverge into many paths.
         Candidates may also want to compare how voice is handled in relation to different or similar
         subjects.


4.

     •   This question should allow many different avenues for producing adequate to good
         answers. No matter which angle candidates choose to treat gender, they should follow a
         path that includes concrete evidence to support their assertions. They are also required to
         have something to say about ‘how’ poets have treated these materials in the genre of
         poetry, how the materials have been shaped by stylistic choices.

     •   A very good to excellent answer may also include many different angles, and may produce
         a convincing argument about the treatment of gender that shows how stylistic choices, in
         more subtle and particular ways, have shaped the poems. Given the breadth of the
         question, examiners should reward multiple approaches as long as these consider, in
         persuasive ways, both content and form.
                                                 –7–              M18/1/TEXTP/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


5.

     •   An adequate to good answer will have good options for offering a comparison of the topics
         and the style of the two poets they have studied. A good answer will go beyond a simple
         description of similarities and differences in subjects and style of the two poets they have
         studied and will show that the candidate has decided on some frame which focuses and
         restricts, to some degree, the treatment of the poetry, making a coherent presentation of
         selected features of meaning and style.

     •   Very good to excellent answers will even more clearly select comparable and differing
         aspects and rather than multiple features, will focus on some matters of subject and style
         that can form a coherent response to the wide possibilities of this question. The distinction
         between matter and form will also characterize the exploration of the two poets and their
         work.


6.

     •   An adequate to good answer will need to make clear an understanding of the terms
         ‘emotion’ and ‘reason’. Building on that, such a response will need to make clear how
         these aspects appear in the poems, with regard to the tension between the needs and
         inclinations of both elements. The way different poets handle these both in terms of
         attitude and other stylistic features should make some appearance in the better responses.

     •   Very good to excellent answers may want to move into consideration of the prompt, seeing
         how it can be made to frame the essay. The conditions necessary in adequate to good
         should be fulfilled, but where the students may go with the possibilities of this question is
         uncertain as the prompt raises some intriguing philosophical possibilities; still, these will
         need to be handled judiciously with attention to the construction and effect of poetry.
