No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de
tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris,
sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de
tutorat ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement
supérieur, des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes
d’études, des gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des
développeurs d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la
procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse suivante :
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios
de apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores
de aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u
ofrezcan recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este
enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia:
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.
Business management
Higher level
Paper 2

Tuesday 27 October 2020 (morning)


2 hours 15 minutes


Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y A clean copy of the business management formulae sheet is required for this examination
  paper.
y Section A: a
              nswer one question.
y Section B: a
              nswer two questions.
y Section C: answer one question.
y A calculator is required for this examination paper.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [70 marks].




                                                                                           8820 – 5012
     7 pages                                           © International Baccalaureate Organization 2020
                                                   –2–                                           8820 – 5012


                                              Section A

Answer one question from this section.

1.   Jill’s Jeans (JJ)

     Jill created Jill’s Jeans, which operates as a sole trader. JJ makes custom-design jeans.
     Jill designs all the jeans and sells them online and at local markets.

     Because of increasing demand in 2020, JJ has benefitted from economies of scale.

             Table 1: Budgeted and actual figures for the year ending 31 October 2020

                                         Budgeted figure ($)        Actual figure ($)

                  Cost of goods sold               3000                   2500

                  Expenses                         1000                    800

                  Sales revenue                    5000                   4000

     (a)   State two features of a sole trader.                                                         [2]

     (b)   Using information in Table 1, for JJ, prepare:

           (i)    a profit and loss account for the budgeted figures and the actual figures
                  (show all your working);[3]

           (ii)   a variance analysis (show all your working).[3]

     (c)   Explain one possible economy of scale from which JJ has benefitted.                          [2]
                                                   –3–                                             8820 – 5012


2.   Beautiful Benches (BB)

     Dan, a young entrepreneur, is planning to start his own small business making hand-made
     wooden garden benches – Beautiful Benches (BB).

                   Table 2: Forecasted sales revenue for BB for the first four months
                         of operation, starting 1 January 2021 (all figures in $)

                                         January         2000

                                         February        1000

                                         March           2500

                                         April           3000

     To be competitive, BB offers its customers credit. They pay 50 % when they buy a bench and
     50 % one month later.

                   Table 3: Selected forecasted financial information for BB for 2021
                        (all figures in $ and per month unless stated otherwise)

                                                       400 per month, payable in advance every
       Rent
                                                       three months, starting 1 January 2021

       Administration/Dan’s salary                     1500

       Marketing                                       200

                                                       60 % of the same month’s sales
       Cost of sales                                   revenues. BB will receive one month of
                                                       credit from the suppliers

       Support for young entrepreneurs provided
                                                       150
       by the local government

       Utilities                                       180

       Agreed loan                                     3000 in the fourth month of operation only

       Tools/machinery                                 1000 in the first month of operation only

     Dan was advised to pay close attention to BB’s working capital cycle.

     (a)   Define the term working capital cycle.[2]

     (b)   Prepare a monthly cash flow forecast for BB for the first four months of operation.            [6]

     (c)   Explain one strategy that BB could use to significantly improve its forecasted cash flow
           for January 2021.                                                                              [2]




                                                                                                   Turn over
                                                  –4–                                           8820 – 5012


                                              Section B
Answer two questions from this section.

3.   MusiCology

     MusiCology (MC) is a private limited company. Rob, the chief executive officer (CEO),
     founded it to encourage young people to play musical instruments, believing that too many
     young people either prefer to just listen to music or are abandoning traditional methods
     of making music in favour of generating it on computers. MC’s mission statement is:
     “MusiCology supports the playing of real music by real musicians on real instruments.”
     The business relies heavily on social media.

     MC offers downloadable online lessons and demonstrations prepared by professional
     musicians. Some of the lessons and demonstrations are free and some are paid for.

     Because MC has not been profitable, Rob asked Abbi, a technology specialist and successful
     provider of venture capital, for financial support. Abbi agreed, but insisted that MC organize a
     live music concert in six months that would be broadcast globally. She also thinks that MC’s
     mission statement needs updating.

     Abbi is confident that, with her social media connections and influence, the concert will be
     successful. She has contacted several artists, asking them to play, and their responses have
     been positive. The concert will also be pay-per-view*. Some artists have agreed to play for
     free, and several musical instrument manufacturers will sponsor the event. Abbi predicts
     significant profits.

     Rob likes the idea of the concert, but he doubts MC has the ability and resources to organize
     such an event. He is also concerned that some musicians will play computer-generated
     music, and fears a negative reaction on social media.

                Table 4: Selected financial information for MC for 31 October 2020

       Current ratio                                       0.8

       Forecasted net loss for year ending May 2021        $8 million

       Gearing ratio                                       75 %

       Forecasted profit for MusiCology if concert goes
                                                           $24 million
       ahead in May 2021



* pay-per-view: a system that allows businesses to charge for premium content that
  otherwise might be shown for free

     (a)   Describe one feature of a private limited company.                                           [2]

     (b)   Explain one advantage and one disadvantage for MC of having a mission statement.             [4]

     (c)   Explain one advantage and one disadvantage for MC of using venture capital to
           provide financial support.                                                                   [4]

     (d)   Discuss whether MC should organize the live concert.                                        [10]
                                                  –5–                                           8820 – 5012


4.   ExotIce

     ExotIce (EI) is a private limited company producing and selling ice cream from a centrally
     located shop in a large capital city. Lena, the founder and chief executive officer (CEO), owns
     80 % of the shares. Her two daughters, who travel the world to find new and exotic natural
     ingredients for new flavours, each own 10 % of the shares. The family value their freedom in
     the decision-making process and the collaborative and supportive nature of EI’s culture.

     EI’s unique selling point/proposition (USP) is based on:
     y outstanding quality and a variety of exotic flavours made from fat-free natural ingredients
     y excellent service provided by highly trained, committed and efficient employees
     y customer involvement – with the use of sophisticated technology and staff support, customers
        can experiment to create their own flavours of ice cream.

     A strong brand name and brand loyalty has led to rapid growth in EI’s market share.
     However, long queues (lines) are forming and the number of customer complaints is
     increasing. Lena is worried about the negative impact on EI.

     Lena is considering two strategic growth options:
     y Option 1: Opening eight new shops locally and nationally over the next four years. To finance
       this internal growth, EI will sell new shares. After the sale, Lena will own 51 % of the shares.
     y Option 2: Franchising EI nationally. A small focus group conducted by one of Lena’s daughters
       and made up of local entrepreneurs revealed a strong interest in EI’s USP. Ten franchises will
       open each year for the next five years throughout the country.

     (a)   Define the term unique selling point/proposition (USP).[2]

     (b)   Explain the importance of people and processes in EI’s extended marketing mix.              [4]

     (c)   Explain one advantage and one disadvantage for EI of using a focus group.                   [4]

     (d)   Recommend which of the two strategic growth options, Option 1 or Option 2,
           EI should implement.                                                                       [10]




                                                                                               Turn over
                                                   –6–                                             8820 – 5012


5.   Fort Industries (FI)

     Fort Industries (FI) manufactures aircraft. Jacques Fort founded the business in 1957 as a
     private limited company. He owned 100 % of the shares and managed the company strictly,
     making most of the decisions himself. FI grew through both internal and external growth.
     Later, it began to manufacture aircraft parts for other manufacturers.

     Jacques led his workforce by using Taylor’s motivation theory. He regularly set clear
     objectives and monitored his employees carefully. Employees had to meet international
     quality and safety standards. Although Jacques was controlling, employees had job security
     and believed that he had their best interests at heart.

     FI became a public limited company in 1988 and grew. Jacques found this transition difficult.
     He liked privacy and rarely spoke to the media. This had to change. Employees also began
     to ask for less supervision, wider spans of control and greater control over quality standards.
     Jacques retired in 2000 and his son, Henri, took over as CEO. Henri consults widely with his
     executive team and line managers on all decisions.

     Recently, FI has been struggling with liquidity. Henri implemented strict cost controls and
     analysed the following ratios (see Table 5).

           Table 5: Liquidity ratios for FI for 2019 and 2020 and industry averages for 2020

                                                     FI                        Industry averages

     Ratio                             2019                    2020                    2020

     Current ratio                      1.2                     0.9                     1.5

     Acid test (quick) ratio            0.9                     0.5                     1.2

     Often, FI has to delay payment to creditors. Employees are concerned that by saving money,
     safety standards at FI have been reduced.

     Henri is considering two options to solve the liquidity problem:
     y Option 1: A long-term loan.
     y Option 2: Issuing and selling additional shares in FI.

     (a)    State two types of external growth.                                                           [2]

     (b)    Explain one advantage and one disadvantage for FI of motivating its employees using
            Taylor’s motivation theory.                                                                   [4]

     (c)    Explain two reasons why Jacques may have found the transition difficult when FI
            became a public limited company.                                                              [4]

     (d)    Recommend whether Henri should choose Option 1 or Option 2.[10]
                                                 –7–                                          8820 – 5012


                                             Section C

Answer one question from this section. The organizations featured in sections A and B and in the
paper 1 case study may not be used as a basis to your answer.

6.   With reference to an organization of your choice, examine the impact of culture on
     organizational ethics.[20]


7.   With reference to an organization of your choice, discuss the ways in which innovation can
     influence organizational change.[20]


8.   With reference to an organization of your choice, examine the impact of globalization on
     marketing strategy.[20]
References:

2.       Emporioconceito, n.d. [Wooden bench]. [online] Available at: https://pixabay.com/photos/emporium-bank-rustic-
         concept-1061889/ [Accessed 30 April 2020].
