No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de
tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris,
sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de
tutorat ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement
supérieur, des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes
d’études, des gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des
développeurs d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la
procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse suivante :
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios
de apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores
de aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u
ofrezcan recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este
enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia:
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.
Business management
Standard level
Paper 1

Monday 26 October 2020 (afternoon)


1 hour 15 minutes


Instructions to candidates
y   Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y   A clean copy of the business management case study is required for this examination paper.
y   Read the case study carefully.
y   A clean copy of the business management formulae sheet is required for this examination
    paper.
y   Section A: a
                nswer two questions.
y   Section B: a
                nswer question 4.
y   A calculator is required for this examination paper.
y   The maximum mark for this examination paper is [40 marks].




                                                                                             8820 – 5013
      5 pages                                            © International Baccalaureate Organization 2020
  –2–        8820 – 5013




Blank page
                                                 –3–                                           8820 – 5013


                                             Section A

Answer two questions from this section.

1.   (a)   With reference to DA, outline two suitable methods of sampling (lines 112–113).            [4]

     (b)   Explain the factors that DA would need to consider before deciding to outsource some
           of its production (line 110).                                                              [6]


2.   (a)   Outline two STEEPLE factors that have influenced DA’s business strategy.                   [4]

     (b)   Explain how knowledge of the product life cycle may have influenced DA’s product range.    [6]


3.   (a)	Outline one benefit of Viv’s leadership style and one benefit of Salah’s leadership style
          (lines 82–84).                                                                              [4]

     (b)   Explain suitable sources of finance for Option B.                                          [6]




                                                                                               Turn over
                                                  –4–                                            8820 – 5013


                                              Section B
Answer the following question.

4.   DA’s board must make two major decisions.

     Decision 1: DA needs to reduce employment costs. A new system of pay and benefits is
     under consideration. This includes:
     y changing from an annual salary to low basic wages with profit-related bonuses
     y reducing social benefits for employees, such as paying market rents for the housing in Ville
       d’Ablet and having to pay for the use of the leisure facilities
     y offering generous compensation payments to employees who are prepared to leave the
       business.

     Decision 2: The three options from DA directors (lines 105–143) must be considered.
     Immediately prior to the board meeting, Mia withdrew her proposal (Option C).
     There is now additional information available on the remaining options.

     Option A: Louise’s proposal – market development
     Louise plans to target the mass market and proposes using the brand name DuLow for the
     redesigned products. She is planning for DA to outsource production to Star Electrics (SE).
     SE uses mass production together with some customization of products. SE keeps costs low
     by importing cheap raw materials and paying low wages.

     Ben, the human resource management director, is concerned about the impact this change
     would have on DA’s employees.

     Option B: Salah’s proposal – product development
     Salah’s plan requires new production lines, one for each product. Salah proposes using
     cellular manufacturing. The investment cost is estimated to be €500 million. Salah estimates
     the following net cash inflows (excluding the initial investment cost).

            Table 1: Forecast financial information for Option B (figures in € millions)

                                          Net cash inflow (excluding
                                 Year      initial investment cost of
                                                   €500 million)

                                 1                     50

                                 2                    150

                                 3                    200

                                 4                    300

                                 5                    400

     Louise thinks the option is expensive. Dodi, the finance director, thinks that the investment is
     too large and he believes that some shareholders are also concerned about the size of future
     dividends. Salah believes that shareholders will be pleased about the revenues that this
     investment will generate. Mia is worried that the products would be expensive to produce and
     that demand might fall in five to seven years.
                                           –5–                                8820 – 5013


(a)   Define the term retained profit.[2]

(b)   Using Table 1, calculate for Option B:

      (i)    the average rate of return (ARR) (show all your working).[3]

      (ii)   the payback period (no working required).[1]

(c)   Explain one advantage and one disadvantage for DA of replacing the current pay
      system and benefits with the proposed employment package (Decision 1).[4]

(d)   Using the case study and additional information from Section B, recommend whether
      DA should choose Option A or Option B (Decision 2).[10]
