No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de
tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris,
sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de
tutorat ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement
supérieur, des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes
d’études, des gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des
développeurs d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la
procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse suivante :
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios
de apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores
de aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u
ofrezcan recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este
enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia:
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.
Business management
Case study: Ducal Aspirateurs

For use in November 2020




Instructions to candidates
y Case study booklet required for higher level paper 1 and standard level paper 1 business
  management examinations.




                                                                                             8820 – 5001
     5 pages                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2020
                                                 –2–                                            8820 – 5001


                                          Ducal Aspirateurs

        Ducal Aspirateurs (DA) is a French private limited company operating in the secondary sector.
        It was founded in 1912 by Jean and Marie Ablet and remains a family business. It is currently
        owned by two of the founders’ grandchildren – Pierre, the chief executive officer (CEO), and
        Louise, the marketing director. Although DA originally only manufactured electric vacuum
    5   cleaners, sold under the brand name DuVac, it now manufactures a wide range of electrical
        household goods.

        Pierre’s leadership style was very different to that of his mother, Viv, the previous CEO.
        She was mostly autocratic and had strict control of the business. She demanded that
        directors made decisions without consulting their subordinates. Pierre, however, believes
   10   in consulting employees and managers and listening carefully to their views before making
        strategic decisions.

        Pierre and Louise are preparing for a difficult board meeting with the other directors, who are
        not members of the Ablet family. Pierre knows that the other directors have different plans for
        the business and wonders how he should resolve their differences given present difficulties at
   15   the business and recent financial losses in 2018 and 2019. He decided to research DA’s past
        for some inspiration, hoping it would help him see the way forward.

        The nature of the business

        The business grew slowly, targeting niche markets. The DuVac vacuum cleaner started as – and
        remained – a niche, luxury item. As only the wealthiest families could afford electric vacuum
   20   cleaners, DA grew slowly for the first 20 years. In the 1930s, sales remained at only 10 000 units
        per annum. Today, DA still targets high-end niche markets for all its products.

        DA was founded on the principle of caring for the wellbeing of its employees (social values).
        Jean and Marie were committed to social values. In 1911, they visited Port Sunlight in England,
        a model village* built by the Lever Brothers, and New Lanark, a similar development in
   25   Scotland. Jean and Marie used what they had learned from these visits when they founded DA,
        building Ville d’Ablet, a similar village, to ensure the welfare of their employees. This village
        had 300 houses for DA’s employees, a hospital, a school and an open-air swimming pool.
        Employees were not charged rent. DA continues to maintain this village, which still has a
        hospital, school and leisure facilities, and employees continue to live there paying subsidized
   30   rent. However, they now also have the option to buy the houses.

        Jean and Marie knew how to keep the business going while still maintaining its social values.
        The 1930s was a difficult time for many businesses, and for DA the demand for DuVac vacuum
        cleaners fell significantly. However, the business remained committed to its employees and
        no employees lost their jobs. Employee numbers fell only through natural wastage. Today, DA
   35   continues to maintain a social commitment to its employees.

        The business also successfully diversified in the 1930s. Viv, Marie’s daughter, attended
        university in the United States, where, having seen how it transformed the lives of rich
        Americans, she purchased an electric washing machine. When she returned to France, she
        joined DA as a director. She convinced the board of directors that DA should manufacture
   40   electric washing machines for sale in France. In 1937, DA opened a factory to produce them
        and was the first company to sell them in France. They were sold in up-market department
        stores under the brand name DuWash.


* model village: a type of mostly self-contained community built by landowners and
  business owners to house their workers in ideal conditions
                                               –3–                                           8820 – 5001


     Jean and Marie’s crisis management strategies did not help when they were forced to flee
     from France in 1940, taking with them what little they could, including all of DA’s cash. They
45   were able to return to France in 1945, and they rebuilt DA from almost nothing. Jean and
     Marie decided that Viv should become the chairperson and CEO, and Viv re-established DA
     as a manufacturer of vacuum cleaners and electric washing machines. She spent 10 years
     consolidating the position of the business, using marketing to rebuild the brands. Viv used an
     autocratic style of management to re-establish the business. Later, DA survived the global
50   recession that started in 2008. Its profits fell to almost zero in 2014, but DA continued to
     maintain its social values.

     Since the 1950s, when it was discovered that sales of vacuum cleaners and washing machines
     were not improving even though the French economy was growing rapidly, DA has managed
     successful diversification and product development. Viv saw an opportunity to expand DA’s
55   product range, to which the board of directors agreed. The business began manufacturing
     electric kettles, toasters, microwaves and food mixers. Viv’s initial vision was ambitious: she
     wanted every family in Europe to own at least one of DA’s electrical products. However, after
     consulting with DA’s managers, Viv decided to remain in French niche markets. Between 1990
     and 2000, DA purchased three delivery lorries. It then expanded the fleet of lorries to form a
60   transport business that delivers products for DA as well as several other companies.

     DA minimizes risk where possible. It has generally kept to markets it knows with a family of
     related products, has financed growth internally and has no long-term borrowing.

     Developments in the 1990s

     By the end of the 20th century, sales of DuVac and DuWash products had declined. However,
65   overall profits continued to grow as sales of other electrical products increased. Market research
     showed that customers regarded DA products as safe, well made and reliable.

     The 21st century

     Since 2000, DA’s expansion throughout Europe has been rapid. It is now one of the largest and,
     until recently, one of the most profitable producers of luxury consumer electrical products in
70   Europe. Costs are carefully controlled.

     Viv retired in 2005 and Pierre took over as chairperson/CEO. His first changes were to create
     a corporate social responsibility (CSR) division, led by Mia, and an innovation division, led
     by Salah.

     The CSR division has several aims:
75   y To monitor, review and – where necessary – recommend changes to DA’s CSR practices,
       as well as those of other businesses, to ensure that DA is a leader in CSR for both its
       employees and the wider community.
     y To explore ways for DA to reduce its carbon footprint.

     The innovation division has two main aims:
80   y To continuously review existing products in order to improve them.
     y To develop new products.




                                                                                            Turn over
                                                –4–                                           8820 – 5001


      Salah has created a working atmosphere that is conducive to innovation. Employees in his
      division are given autonomy to complete product development, and can decide when and how
      they work. Even after the global recession in 2008, he redeployed and retrained staff from the
 85   production division and provided roles for them within the innovation division. Based on the work
      of this division, DA:
      y became the first French company in the industry to use robots in its factories
      y became one of the first French manufacturers to use rechargeable battery technology for
          cordless products.

 90   In 2018 and 2019, DA had to absorb large cost increases and falling demand for its products
      due to economic uncertainties, which resulted in losses in 2018 and 2019. Dodi, DA’s finance
      director, warned that another bad year would mean the business will need significant cash
      injections. That is why Pierre, and the board, are searching for a way forward.

      The future

 95   The board meeting will discuss a proposal from a firm of management consultants on ways to
      improve profits by reducing employment costs.

      The meeting will also discuss three proposals from DA directors to help the business recover:
      y Louise’s proposal (marketing director): Leave the niche market and become a mass producer
         for the household market.
100   y Salah’s proposal (innovation director): Change DA’s product range to incorporate a
        “click and fix” model.
      y Mia’s proposal (CSR director): Redesign all products to contain less plastic and provide
         incentives to customers to recycle old appliances.

      Pierre has made notes on these three proposals prior to the board meeting.

105   Option A: Louise’s proposal – market development

      Louise thinks that DA relies too much on niche markets and wants to target the mass market
      instead. Louise’s plan to relaunch DA’s products into mass markets would require investment
      in product redesign, with the aim of using cheaper raw materials. Additional investment would
      be needed for mass production and mass marketing of the redesigned products. Some of the
110   production would have to be outsourced.

      Secondary market research has identified a large market for electrical products in some
      European countries. Using various techniques of primary market research and sampling
      methods, Louise found that DA’s brand name is instantly recognizable and that consumers
      would buy cheaper DA products if the business could produce them. DA used both focus groups
115   and surveys in its primary research.

      Salah and Mia objected to outsourcing production.

      Option B: Salah’s proposal – product development

      Salah’s innovation division has been working on a new design for DA’s products that allows
      consumers to easily replace broken or worn-out parts. Products will be designed with all key
120   components as separate, interchangeable modules that can be easily removed and replaced by
      anybody. The modules “click” into place without the need for special skills or tools. All products
      would be equipped with an LED screen and sensors, which would identify faults by a code
      number. With the code and one click, the replacement part could be ordered online. This idea,
      to be called “click and fix”, was tested by DA focus groups in five European countries and the
125   responses were very positive. The marketing department already has a slogan: “No tools, no
      repair bills, one click – just click and it’s fixed”.
                                                   –5–                                           8820 – 5001


        Salah believes that the modular design would increase sales and strengthen brand loyalty.
        The sales of spare parts would also become an important new income stream. However, Dodi
        objects to the plan because of high investment costs. He is also concerned that DA has limited
  130   sources of finance. Mia objects because the higher costs will lead to higher prices. Louise thinks
        that this approach is only a limited extension to the product life cycle.

        Option C: Mia’s proposal – improving the environment

        Mia does not like the impact that DA has on the environment. There is a growing worldwide
        problem with plastic pollution, such as the Great Pacific garbage patch, an area of pollution
  135   at least the size of France. Mia is concerned that DA’s products contain a lot of plastic and
        consumers just throw products away to get a new model. She thinks that Salah’s “click
        and fix” idea is too expensive and very risky and has proposed a simpler and cheaper
        solution: DA could manufacture its products with recyclable plastics and provide facilities at
        shops selling DA products to enable customers to return old products for recycling. Customers
  140   who used these facilities would get a 5 % discount on a replacement DA product. A DA factory
        facility would sort the returned product materials for recycling and send them to a third-party
        recycling centre. Mia is sure that DA would benefit from the green credentials it gained from
        this recycling programme.

        Having briefly reviewed his notes on the three proposals, Pierre started the board meeting
  145   prepared for some strong arguments.


Companies, products, or individuals named in this case study are fictitious and any similarities with
actual entities are purely coincidental.
