N20/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                         Markscheme


                         November 2020


                  Business management


                               Higher level


                                 Paper 2




23 pages
                                           –2–                N20/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de
tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris,
sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de
tutorat ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement
supérieur, des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes
d’études, des gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des
développeurs d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la
procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse suivante :
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios
de apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores
de aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u
ofrezcan recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este
enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia:
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.
                                         –3–               N20/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


The markbands and assessment criteria on pages 3–5 should be used where indicated
in the markscheme.

    Marks     Level descriptor

      0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

     1–2         Little understanding of the demands of the question.
                 Few business management tools (where applicable), techniques and
                  theories are explained or applied, and business management
                  terminology is lacking.
                 Little reference to the stimulus material.

     3–4         Some understanding of the demands of the question.
                 Some relevant business management tools (where applicable),
                  techniques and theories are explained or applied, and some
                  appropriate terminology is used.
                 Some reference to the stimulus material but often not going beyond
                  the name of a person(s) and/or the name of the organization.

     5–6         Understanding of most of the demands of the question.
                 Relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques
                  and theories are explained and applied, and appropriate terminology
                  is used most of the time.
                 Some reference to the stimulus material that goes beyond the name
                  of a person(s) and/or the name of the organization.
                 Some evidence of a balanced response.
                 Some judgments are relevant but not substantiated.

     7–8         Good understanding of the demands of the question.
                 Relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques
                  and theories are explained and applied well, and appropriate
                  terminology is used.
                 Good reference to the stimulus material.
                 Good evidence of a balanced response.
                 The judgments are relevant but not always well substantiated.

     9–10        Good understanding of the demands of the question, including
                  implications, where relevant.
                 Relevant business management tools (where applicable), techniques
                  and theories are explained clearly and applied purposefully, and
                  appropriate terminology is used throughout the response.
                 Effective use of the stimulus material in a way that significantly
                  strengthens the response.
                 Evidence of balance is consistent throughout the response.
                 The judgments are relevant and well substantiated.
                                                   –4–                N20/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Assessment criteria for Section C

Criterion A: Knowledge and conceptual understanding
This criterion addresses the extent to which the candidate demonstrates knowledge and
understanding of the given concepts and relevant business management content (theories,
techniques or tools, depending on the requirements of the question).

 Marks    Level descriptor
   0      The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
   1      Superficial knowledge of the given concepts is demonstrated. Business
          management content is not selected or the content selected is irrelevant.
    2     Satisfactory understanding of one or both of the given concepts is demonstrated.
          Some business management content selected is relevant. The relevant content is
          satisfactorily explained.
    3     Good understanding of one or both of the given concepts is demonstrated.
          The business management content selected is relevant, though it may not be
          sufficient. The relevant content is generally well explained, though the explanation
          may lack some depth or breadth.
    4     Good understanding of both of the given concepts is demonstrated. The business
          management content selected is relevant, sufficient and well explained.


Criterion B: Application
This criterion addresses the extent to which the candidate is able to apply the given concepts
and the relevant business management content (theories, techniques or tools, depending on
the requirements of the question) to his or her chosen real-world organization(s). The real-
world organization(s) must not be the organization featured in the prescribed case study
for paper 1.

 Marks     Level descriptor
   0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
   1       The given concepts and/or any relevant business management content are
           connected to the real-world organization(s), but this connection is inappropriate or
           superficial.
    2      The given concepts and/or relevant business management content are connected
           appropriately to the real-world organization(s), but this connection is not developed.
    3      The given concepts and relevant business management content are generally well
           applied to explain the situation and issues of the real-world organization(s), though
           the explanation may lack some depth or breadth. Examples are provided.
    4      The given concepts and relevant business management content are well applied to
           explain the situation and issues of the real-world organization(s). Examples are
           appropriate and illustrative.
                                                    –5–                N20/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion C: Reasoned arguments
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate makes reasoned arguments. This
includes making relevant and balanced arguments by, for example, exploring different
practices, weighing up their strengths and weaknesses, comparing and contrasting them or
considering their implications, depending on the requirements of the question. It also
includes justifying the arguments by presenting reasonable evidence or other support for the
claims made.

    Marks   Level descriptor
      0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
      1     Statements are made but these are superficial.
      2     Relevant arguments are made but these are mostly unjustified.
      3     Relevant arguments are made and these are mostly justified.
      4     Relevant, balanced arguments are made and these are well justified.


Criterion D: Structure
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate organizes his or her ideas with
clarity, and presents a structured piece of writing comprised of:

    an introduction
    a body
    a conclusion
    fit-for-purpose paragraphs.

    Marks   Level descriptor
      0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
      1     Two or fewer of the structural elements are present, and few ideas are clearly
            organized.
      2     Three of the structural elements are present, or most ideas are clearly organized.
      3     Three or four of the structural elements are present, and most ideas are clearly
            organized.
      4     All of the structural elements are present, and ideas are clearly organized.


Criterion E: Individuals and societies
This criterion assesses the extent to which the candidate is able to give balanced
consideration to the perspectives of a range of relevant stakeholders, including individuals
and groups internal and external to the organization.

    Marks   Level descriptor
      0     The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.
      1     One individual or group perspective is considered superficially or inappropriately.
      2     One relevant individual or group perspective is considered appropriately, or two
            relevant individual or group perspectives are considered superficially or
            inappropriately.
      3     At least two relevant individual or group perspectives are considered appropriately.
      4     Balanced consideration is given to relevant individual and group perspectives.
                                                  –6–                 N20/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                              Section A
1.   (a)   State two features of a sole trader.                                                   [2]

           Features include:
            Easy to set up – no legal formalities
            Owner has complete control – not answerable to anyone else
            Owner keeps all profits
            Able to choose times and patterns of working
            Able to establish close personal relationships with staff (if any are employed)
             and customers
            The business can be based on the interests or skills of the owner – rather than
             working as an employee for a larger firm
            Unlimited liability – all of owner’s assets are potentially at risk
            Often faces intense competition from bigger firms, e.g. food retailing
            Owner is unable to specialise in areas of the business that are most
             interesting – is responsible for all aspects of management
            Difficult to raise additional capital
            Long hours often necessary to make business pay
            Lack of continuity – as the business does not have separate legal status, when
             the owner dies the business ends too

           Accept any other relevant feature. However, do not credit ‘unincorporated’ and
           ‘unlimited liability’ as two features. They are the same thing.

           Award [1] for each relevant characteristic stated to a maximum of [2].

           Application to the organization is not required

     (b)   Using information in Table 1, for JJ, prepare:

           (i)   a profit and loss account for the budgeted figures and the actual figures
                 (show all your working); [3]


                                           Budgeted figure ($)       Actual figure ($)
                  Sales revenues           5000                      4000
                  Cost of goods sold       3000                      2500
                  Gross profit             2000                      1500
                  Expenses                 1000                      800
                  Net profit               1000                      700

           If the profit and loss account is constructed following a generally accepted format
           and is correct in all respects, award [3].

           Award [2] if the candidate produces a correct net profit but does not follow a
           generally accepted format. Award [1] if the candidate shows some understanding
           of what a profit and loss account is, but the actual account constructed is not in a
           generally accepted format and has numerous errors.

           We need to be consistent with previous years where the format required is
           consistent with the guide – as 3 of the headings already given, then marks are for
           2 headings and 4 calculations.
                                              –7–                N20/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


      (ii)   a variance analysis (show all your working). [3]


                               Budgeted figure ($)     Actual figure ($)   Variance
      Sales revenues           5000                    4000                1000 adverse
      Cost of goods sold       3000                    2500                500 favourable
      Gross profit             2000                    1500                500 adverse
      Expenses/overheads       1000                    800                 200 favourable
      Net profit               1000                    700                 300 adverse


      For a perfect understanding of variances award [3]. There must be calculations
      and explicit reference to variances that are favourable or adverse.

      For variance analysis that has 1 calculation error and/or makes no reference to
      variances as favourable or adverse award [2].

      For a vague understanding of variances award or more than one calculation error
      and no reference to favourable/adverse [1].


(c)   Explain one possible economy of scale from which JJ has benefitted. [2]

       Purchasing economies of scale. Bulk buying of her raw materials such as the
        material for jeans, stitching and sowing needles. Unit costs may fall
       Technical economies of scale through the purchase of machines to help her
        produce jeans in larger quantities. Over the long run, unit costs will fall as the
        scale of production increases.
       Given rising demand, marketing economies of scale are possible for JJ as unit
        costs per jean falls as advertising costs may be constant over a larger range
        of output.

      Accept any other relevant answer

      Mark 1 + 1.

      Award [1] for a relevant economy of scale explained and [1] for appropriate
      application to JJ to a maximum of [2].

      N.B As there is limited stimulus information application must necessarily be in the
      form of reference to jeans, tailoring machinery or tailoring supplies. Do not reward
      generic references simply to ‘machinery or supplies’
                                                    –8–               N20/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   (a)   Define the term working capital cycle.                                                [2]

           Working capital cycle is the period of time/interval between the actual cash paid
           for costs of production and the actual cash received from customers. It is the time
           period when net current assets is converted into cash. [2]

           N.B.: no application required. Do not credit examples.

           Award [1] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and understanding
           but omits reference to’ time period’ or ‘cash’

           Award [2] for a full definition that conveys knowledge and understanding similar
           to the answer above.

     (b)   Prepare a monthly cash flow forecast for BB for the first four months of operation.
           [6]

                                      January       February   March        April
                  Opening             0             (2930)     (4360)       (4940)
                  Balance
                  Cash inflows:
                  Cash Revenue        1000          500        1250         1500
                  Credit cash                       1000       500          1250
                  revenue
                  Support for         150           150        150          150
                  young
                  entrepreneurs
                  Bank loan                                                 3000
                  Total cash          1150          1650       1900         5900
                  inflows
                  Cash outflows:
                  Rent                1200                                  1200
                  Admin/own           1500          1500       1500         1500
                  salary
                  Marketing           200           200        200          200
                  Tools/machinery     1000
                  Cost of sales       0             1200       600          1500
                  payments
                  Utilities           180           180        180          180
                  Total cash          4080          3080       2480         4580
                  outflows
                  Net cash inflow     (2930)        (1430)     (580)        1320
                  Closing             (2930)        (4360)     (4940)       (3620)
                  balance

           Please note: Candidates do not have to split “cash revenue” and “credit cash
           revenue” or cost of sales and costs of sales on credit.

           N.B. Allow candidate own figure rule (OFR): if a candidate makes an error in one
           row and carries it through the remainder of the forecast that is only one error.
           This provision includes both mathematical errors and conceptual errors (for
           example, if a candidate has the rent in the incorrect month then candidates
           should only lose [1] for that error.
                                              –9–                  N20/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


      Award [1] if the candidate conveys some understanding of what a cash flow
      forecast is, but otherwise the forecast is largely inaccurate, incomplete, or
      illegible.

      Award [2–3] if a cash flow forecast is drawn, but either it is not in a generally
      accepted format or it is untidy, and/or the forecast contains three or more errors,
      which could include, in addition to number placement problems and mathematical
      errors, conceptual errors (using the word “profit” rather than “net cash flow”) or
      omissions, such as not having a line like “closing balance” or totals.

      Award [4–5] if the cash flow forecast is drawn essentially correctly and neatly in a
      generally accepted format, but there is one error for [5] or two errors for [4].
      Award [6] if the cash flow forecast is drawn accurately and neatly in a generally
      accepted format and is error free.
      If the candidate provided a heading of total inflow/outflow without using another
      heading above of inflow or outflow – do not penalize as an omission.

      If the candidate omitted both headings of outflow/inflow but does include ‘Total’
      Cash Outflow/Inflow headings do not penalize.
      Missing any of highlighted headings = one error

      Substituting the term “net profit in the cash flow forecast for “net cash flow” is
      inaccurate and [1] should be deducted.

      If the candidate has only one row for all cash outflows or inflows, subtract [1]
      from the total mark awarded.

      Full working is not expected.

(c)   Explain one strategy that BB could use to significantly improve its forecasted
      cash flow for January 2021. [2]

      It is expected that candidates identify the main figures/categories that contributed
      to the negative cash flow. Clearly the options are either to reduce the cash
      outflow or increase the cash inflow. Candidates should provide concrete
      examples as application. There is no need to reproduce a new cash flow. It is
      expected the relevant terminology is used. As generally total revenue is
      increasing, apart from February, it is not expected that candidates suggest to
      increase total revenue inflow using marketing etc.

      Increase inflows:
      Candidates may suggest that BB should not give credit for the first months of
      operation. This will increase the inflow by a $1000.

      Dan can possibly ask the bank to give a loan in the first months of operation
      instead of the 4th months. $3000 will help BB to significantly reduce the initial
      negative cash flow.
      Increasing the price of benches will increase inflows. However, this may reduce
      competitiveness.

      Reduce outflows:
      Dan can reduce his own salary of 1500, especially in the first month or so. Own
      salaries and admin are the most excessive/large outflow that contributes to the
      negative cash inflow. A smaller self-reward can significantly reduce the outflow
      and therefore the net cash flow.
                                       – 10 –              N20/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Dan can also negotiate his rental payments. Instead of paying a large sum of
1200 in January, monthly instalments of $400 will significantly reduce the outflow
in January Dan can also ask for at least one month’s credit from his landlord.
Do not accept an option of not buying the machinery/tools.
Accept lease the machinery for a considerably lower fee per months.
Generic comments like reduce donation, utilities etc will not make a significant
impact. Hence not really applicable.

Award [1] for a relevant generic strategy identified or described and [1] for any
additional explanation in context to BB.

[2] cannot be awarded for the strategy if the response lacks either explanation
and/or application. Explanation needs to cover the effect the strategy is designed
to produce. It is not enough just to say ‘reduce Dan’s salary’

For example: For an identification or a description of the strategy like reduce cash
outflow/ increase cash inflow without explanation or application [1].

For explanation of the strategy with no application [1].

For explanation of the strategy and application [2].
                                                  – 11 –               N20/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



                                               Section B
3.   (a)   Describe one feature of a private limited company. [2]

           One feature of a private limited company is that
            The number of shareholders may be limited to 20 depending on the country in
             which the business is owned.
            Shareholders have to be invited to join the board of directors as shares cannot
             be advertised
            Owners of the business will enjoy limited liability, which indicates that if a
             business experiences a financial collapse then the owners will only be liable
             for the capital contributed.
            There is normally no legal requirement to publish detailed financial accounts
             for the public or provide quarterly forecasts to an exchange or supervisory
             committee unless it is for corporate tax purposes.

           Award [1] for a partial description and an additional mark for a full description
           similar but not exact to one of the above bullet points.

     (b)   Explain one advantage and one disadvantage for MC of having a mission
           statement. [4]

           Theoretical answer – award [1] for each advantage and disadvantage:
            A mission statement allows a business to state its current purpose and can be
             used to position the organisation in the minds of its stakeholders.
            It can be a motivating force for employees and also provide a goal/purpose
             which potential investors may be attracted to
            However, some mission statements can only provide a vague goal or objective
             and a mission statement does not indicate how this objective will be achieved
             which could make them misleading or have little value.
            Focussed mission statements do require management time and resources to
             be effective.

           MC’s mission allows a clear differentiation for its business model away from
           rivals. Given that the number of young people eschewing musical instruments is
           rising, the mission could allow MC to create a USP. Clearly, musical instrument
           companies favour the mission and are willing to sponsor the potential concert
           adding a vital source of funds to allow it to proceed.

           However, the mission seems to preclude the use of technology to a degree by
           artists. It is accepted that even real musicians will use technology but if
           participants who play in the concert use only technology then MC runs the risk of
           being “hypocritical”. There is evidence of a clear backlash (negative reaction) on
           social media, which could undermine MC’s perception. Of course, it is accepted
           that organising the concert will require some use of the latest technology but the
           mission runs the risk of confusing its stakeholders.

           Award [1] for application to MC for both the advantage or disadvantage
           N.B[2] cannot be awarded if the response lacks either explanation and / or application.

           Mark as [2+2]
                                                 – 12 –              N20/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


    (c)   Explain one advantage and one disadvantage for MC of using venture capital to
          provide financial support. [4]

          Theoretical advantage and disadvantage – award [1] for each.
          Advantages:
.         Venture capital provides the company with an opportunity to expand. This would
          not have been possible through other methods like bank loans. Bank loans
           require collateral and there is an obligation to repay the loan. However, in
           venture capital, the investors themselves are ready to take the risk as they believe
           in the company’s long-term success. Therefore, venture capital financing is
          beneficial for start-ups with high initial cost and limited operating history.

          Venture capitalists are often people with significant experience in their respective
          industries and this can be extremely helpful for those starting out in these industries.
          They can help with building strategies, technical assistance, resources, etc. in order
           to make a business successful.

          Venture capitalists have a huge network of connections in the business community.
          These connections could be advantageous for the start-ups to grow and become
          successful. They can help the start-up to enter into alliances with potential customers
          or business houses.

          Disadvantages:

          Venture capitalist provides huge capital to the start-ups in return for a stake in the
          equity of the company. If the start-up succeeds, then it helps them earn tremendous
          amounts of profit. VC’s usually become a part of the Board. They actively participate
          in the company’s decision-making. VC’s will want to protect their investments. If there
          is a difference of opinion between the VC and the start-up founder, then things can get
          chaotic. Any major decision requires the consent of investors.

          A venture capitalist may decide to redeem the investment within 3 to 5 years. Their primary
          focus is to earn capital gains. Venture capital may not be suitable for an entrepreneur whose
          business plan will take a longer time to provide liquidity.

          Venutre capital investors are taking high risks, hence take time in making decisions to invest.
          It can therefore be a lengthy process and not suitable when quick funding required.


          Application (award [1] for application to MC for both the advantage or
          disadvantage).

          Without the support of Abbi, MC would probably not be still able to carry out its
          mission. She is also able to provide some technological assistance on operations
          away from the playing of real instruments which will support MC in organising the
          concert. Rob clearly feels that MC does not have sufficient resources to do this
          on their own. The global concert may also attract other venture capitalists or
          other possible sources of finance from business angels for example.

          The disadvantage, however, is that Abbi being a venture capitalist may see the
          concert as the only solution to MC’s current financial predicament and if not
          successful may decide to seek other ventures. The financial situation at MC could
          deteriorate further. She thinks the mission needs updating and any social media
          backlash could hit MC hard. There is a considerable risk here given the nature of
          venture capital. Rob may have to look for new investors.
                                             – 13 –               N20/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


      Mark as [2+2]

(d)   Discuss whether MC should organize the live concert.          [10]

      There is a considerable tension between the need for financial sustainability
      outlined in the stimulus and the table and a violation of the mission statement if
      they decide to go ahead with the concert. There is no quick fix to MC’s problems.

      The financial figures provide some ammunition for evaluation both positively and
      negatively. Musicology’s solvency is at risk if they do nothing. But if they host the
      concert, they will use up valuable resources and the CEO doubts that the
      business will be able to cope. There is a forecast profit of 24million but what if
      budgets are exceeded or forecasts not met? Musicology is going beyond its
      normal operational ability and costs will be difficult to forecast. Even with pay per
      view it will be difficult to judge how many will actually pay.

      Musicology is being kept “alive by venture capital”. Will other potential investors
      tolerate a concert where musicians do not play real instruments? The mission
      statement is at risk and the gearing ratio is currently 75 %. They will not be able
      to borrow their way out of any financial difficulties.

      A great deal of trust is being placed in Abbi. Her confidence may be a positive
      thing, but can MC have faith in her social media connections? It can be very
      difficult to measure exactly how many people will be willing to pay. Cash flow
      forecasting at a time of variable cash inflows and outflows may be very hard to
      do.

      However, the global concert will spread the mission of MC. The reach could be
      considerable and new investors will probably come forward. The pay for view and
      sponsorship from the musical instrument manufacturers will offset revenue lost to
      illegal downloaded sites. If this concert goes well the future benefits to MC could
      be considerable. There may be future concerts and or other extension strategy
      possibilities. Angel investors may see the ethical approach MC is taking and bring
      forth newer investors reducing the dependence on venture capitalists.

      It would seem that if MC wish to remain economically sustainable the concert will
      have to proceed. It is a risky strategy but one which could have longer term
      benefits if the exposure of the business via the pay per view model to a global
      audience generates significant funds and publicity. Abbie seems confident and
      well connected and this is important for MC who do most of their promotion and
      brand building through the internet and social media.

      Marks according to generic markbands.

      Candidates will not be able to proceed to the highest mark bands without using
      the quantitative data in the table. [max award [6]

      Balanced analysis will imply two arguments in favour with two against.
      Judgements should be substantiated to move beyond the 5–6 band.
                                                  – 14 –               N20/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   (a)   Define the term unique selling point/proposition (USP). [2]

           A unique selling point is any aspect of the organization, brand or product that
           enables differentiation in consumers’ minds from competitors.

           N.B. no application required. Do not credit examples.

           Award [1] for a basic definition that conveys partial knowledge and
           understanding.

           Award [2] for a full definition that conveys knowledge and understanding similar
           to the answer above. There should be some reference to differentiation from
           competition.

           Candidates may refer to either the product or brand aspect of the organisation
           only.

     (b)   Explain the importance of people and processes in the EI’s extended marketing
           mix. [4]

           People and process are two out of the three extended marketing mix which that
           are highly relevant for an organisation that operates in the service sector like EI.

           The stimulus refers to people, in this case the employees, who are highly
           motived, skills, committed and interested. They serve the customers efficiently
           and interact well with the customers. The characteristics of the employees
           enhance the lack of some tangibility of the service on top of the actual ice cream
           of EI. People help to create USP.

           Candidates can refer to the daughter as people, who are successfully searching
           and finding exotics flavours to enhance customers’ satisfaction and create a
           USP. Do not penalize if candidates refer to employees or staff instead of ‘people’

           Processes
           The employees of EI do not only serve the ice cream but constantly interact with
           those who wish to create their own flavours. Creative freedom and professional
           employees’ support enable customers to try and create their own flavour. This
           adds significantly to the quality of their experience and is the basis for EI’s USP.
           The opportunities given for creativity and testing, enhances customers
           experience and as stated, create a USP/ clear basis for differentiation.

           Candidates can also refer to the process of serving customers efficiently.
           However, the long queues reported also suggest that process is not always
           efficient.

           Mark as 2 + 2.

           Award [1] for each relevant feature – P – explained and [1] for appropriate
           application to the organization/type of products to a maximum of [2].

           [2] cannot be awarded for the importance if the response lacks either explanation
           and / or application.

           For example:
            For an identification or a description of one P with or without application [1].
            For explanation of a P with no application [1].
                                            – 15 –               N20/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


       For explanation of a P and application [2].

(c)   Explain one advantage and one disadvantage for EI of using a focus group. [4]

      Focus group, a primary research method, involve creating small discussion
      groups to gain insight into and information about opinion, attitudes and behaviour
      of the respondents.

      The possible advantages:
      Lena’s daughter can engage in meaningful discussion with the participants and
      ask probing questions regarding their willingness/ motivation to open an EI’s
      franchise, their expectations, experience, reservations and so on. Lena should be
      more aware of the support that might be needed to ensure that the brand is not
      damage. A thorough research using a focus group can reduce the risk of failure.

      Asking local entrepreneurs may be a good starting point to get some initial
      responses about the level of interests, motivation, expectations, reservations and
      so on before a major strategic decision is made.

      However:
      The use of local entrepreneurs is unlikely to provide the right sample as EI is
      interested in local as well as national franchising. Moreover, local entrepreneurs
      are more likely to presume their own business ideas rather than using EI’s. The
      sampling/targeted group can be seen as inappropriate and might give Lena
      inappropriate information.
      One may doubt Lena’s daughter ability to conduct a focus group. She has no
      qualification and experience as she travels the world to find exotic flavours. Lack
      of knowledge and experience can result in inappropriate/ leading questions and
      hence inappropriate information for Lena to base her decision upon.

      Accept any other relevant/ applicable advantage/ disadvantage.
      N.B Allow responses that may attempt to cite COVID as a disadvantage of focus
      groups since they rely heavily on the interaction between participants. Can
      ‘virtual’ focus groups e.g Zoom, be as effective.

      Mark as 2 + 2.
      Award [1] for each relevant advantage/disadvantage- explained and [1] for
      appropriate application to the organization to a maximum of [2].

      [2] cannot be awarded for the importance if the response lacks either explanation
      and / or application.

      For example:
       For an identification or a description of one advantage/disadvantage with or
        without application [1].
       For explanation of an advantage/disadvantage with no application [1].
       For explanation of an advantage/disadvantage and application [2].

(d)   Recommend which of the two strategic growth options, Option 1 or Option 2, EI
      should implement. [10]

      The two suggested options should enable EI to take advantage of its own
      strengths and reduce the main weakness of queues forming which can negatively
      impacted on EI’s main USP.

      More specifically:
                                        – 16 –               N20/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




Option 1: Internal growth – Issuing shares to open eight shops locally and
nationally

By reducing her holding to 51 % Lena can potentially raise enough capital for EI
to pursue the organic internal growth option.

Pursuing an internal growth strategy, the nature and the pace of the growth can
be fully controlled by Lena/the family especially in the short run. Lena will have
full control of the process and the future operation of all of the shops as Lena/the
family will still have the majority shares to retain the much-desired ownership,
power, control and to make a major strategic decision. The collaborative culture
of EI will be maintained. These issues are of high importance for the current
owner.

Still Lena will have to get some approval of other shareholders. One may judge
this argument as less significant in the short run as the family will have the
controlling interest in the business. In addition the only other shareholders are her
daughters

Still, if EI is to grow further, more shares will have to be issued and Lena and the
family control will be eroded as it only takes 2 % for the family to lose control.
Still, as shares are only sold to friends and family, one may judge this issue as
less significant.

EI might also not raise all of the desired finance but this is unlikely as the targeted
growth of 8 shops does not seem over ambitious.

Having more shareholders might generate useful strategic input but it appears
that Lena is not after shareholders inputs/ involvement – only finance.

However, internal growth is a slower process than franchising and Lena is
worried about the queues forming and its potential negative impact on the brand.
N.B do not credit candidates that wrongly assume shares can be sold publicly on
a stock market – this is a Private Limited Company.

Option 2: Franchising – External growth/Non-organic growth

Some of the arguments in favour:

The issue of ownership of the business is of no significance. No ownership will be
lost.

One may argue EI will be able to expand further with 50 outlets over 5 years. This
growth is a much more significant growth and enables EI to build on its strong
brand name and enable the brand to spread quickly throughout the country. The
issue of the queues and its potential negative impact perhaps be solved quicker.
Moreover, a success might attract other franchises.

EI will receive royalty regardless if the franchise is making a profit or not.
However, this is not really a n important argument as the motivation is not
financial.

However, this method of growth relies on the skills, motivation, the quality of
management of the franchises.
                                        – 17 –               N20/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



Despite some damage to EI’s USP if the franchisees do not follow the exact
concept, Lena can terminate the agreement after few years. Still, some of
potential damage to EI’s current strong brand/USP may be difficult to correct. It is
however less likely as market research revealed that there are interested
franchisees.

Still EI’s USP cannot be protected and franchises can get experience and support
from EI and start a similar business in the medium term. One may judge this
argument as a very significant one as it is easy to open an ice cream shop, it is
more difficult to come up and implement EI processes that can be copied.

EI will have to spend money on training costs and to ensure that the same
ingredients are sold to each of the franchises.to ensure consistency and high
standards. El is currently a ‘local’ brand. If franchising is to go ‘national’ then
investment in the brand name will be needed.

Control will be remained in the family but EI will have to ensure that each
franchisee adheres fully to EI’s format. Poor service as well as poor quality ice
cream will result in a major damage to the brand name.

Accept any relevant/ applicable argument for and against each option.

To sum up:
Candidates can recommend any option provided is well substantiated. For
example:
Making more profit is not really a significant argument for EI. The issue power/
control and EI’s USP are of higher significance perhaps more than the speed.

Arguments for and against that simply mirror each other, cannot be judged as
balanced/ or as two arguments.

Accept any other relevant argument for each option.

It is expected that candidates provide a conclusion with a substantiated
judgment.

Accept any substantiated judgment.

Marks should be allocated according to the mark-bands on page 3.

For one relevant issue that is one-sided, award up to [3]. For more than one
relevant issue that is one-sided, award up to a maximum of [4].

If a candidate evaluates / addresses only one option, award a maximum of [5].

A balanced response is one that provides at least one argument for and one
argument against each option. A balanced argument for Option 1 must consider
both the financing as well as the growth aspect

Candidates may contrast one option with another for a balance as long as at
least two arguments are given for each option.

Award a maximum of [6] if the answer is of a standard that shows balanced
analysis and understanding throughout the response with reference to the
stimulus material but there is no judgment/conclusion.
                                         – 18 –              N20/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



     Candidates cannot reach the [7–8] markband if they give judgment/conclusions
     that are not based on analysis/explanation already given in their response.


Maximum              Option 1                     Option 2         Judgments/conclusion
Mark award
         3              One argument,             N/A                       N/A
                         unbalanced
        4               One argument,        One argument,                  N/A
                         unbalanced           unbalanced
        5                One balanced and one unbalanced                     N/A
        6                         Both balanced                              No
                                                                   judgments/conclusions
       7-8                            Balanced                     Judgments/conclusions
                                                                   based upon analysis
                                                                   and explanation in the
                                                                   body of the response

       9-10                           Balanced                     Judgments/conclusions
                                                                   based upon analysis
                                                                   and explanation in the
                                                                   body of the response
                                                 – 19 –               N20/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


5.   (a)   State two types of external growth. [2]

           Types of external growth include:
            Mergers
            Acquisitions
            Strategic alliances
            Joint ventures
            Franchising

           Award [1] for each type of external growth up to [2]. Maximum award: [2].

     (b)   Explain one advantage and one disadvantage for FI of motivating its employees
           using Taylor’s motivation theory. [4]


           Taylor’s motivation theory will clearly have advantages for FI.

           Advantages:

                 Setting ‘specific targets’ enhances production levels for FI
                 Having ‘close monitoring’ enables better control for FI
                 Due to the ‘close monitoring’ quality standards can be maintained and
                  errors reduced
                 Limited consultation enables quicker decisions by management
                 Careful planning of tasks allow optimal use of resources for FI.

           Disadvantages:

                 The need to ‘monitor closely’ requires more management/supervisory
                  time
                 Reducing all tasks to fixed routines reduces flexibility
                 Using Taylor does not allow team working which might otherwise give
                  efficiency benefits
                  Does not encourage creativity and new ideas for production methods
                 There is clearly potential stress under this motivational regime. Pressure
                  to perform and meet international quality and safety standards. This could
                  be demotivating for some workers and it could increase staff turnover at
                  FI.

           Award [1] for a theoretical response with an additional mark for application to FI.

           Do not reward candidates who argue the advantages/disadvantages from the
           point of view of the worker and NOT the company.

           Mark as a [2+2].

     (c)   Explain two reasons why Jacques may have found the transition difficult when FI
           became a public limited company. [4]

           When FI became a public company, Jacques’s situation changed. As a largely
           autocratic leader, he had not ever had to explain his decisions to anyone. He was
           in control. Now that he is the head of a public limited company with many
           shareholders, he had to explain his decisions to a board of directors that he had
           not personally selected.
                                             – 20 –              N20/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


      As head of a privately held company, Jacques could use company resources as
      he saw fit. If he made a poor decision and it hurt the finances of the company, he
      was only hurting himself. Now, as head of a publicly traded company, he has a
      fiduciary responsibility with the resources of the company. All resources should
      be used judiciously with the aim of improving the return to shareholders.

      As a public limited company, FI was subject to greater media scrutiny, which
      meant that any issue or problem was potentially subject to public viewing through
      the press. Jacques had always valued privacy. He largely controlled what
      information got to the press. Now as head of a publicly traded company, FI had to
      adopt an aggressive public relations strategy as a way to minimize informational
      risk and maximize shareholder value.

      Accept any other valid and relevant reason Jacques may have found the
      transition difficult.

      Mark as [2 +2].

      Award [1] for identification of a reason he may have found the transition difficult
      and an additional [1] for explanation and application.

(d)   Recommend whether Henri should choose Option 1 or Option 2. [10]

      The advantages of long-term debt are that FI gets money now and the repayment
      is over many years. Ownership is not affected by long-term debt, and, for a
      company as old and established as FI, financing from banks or other financial
      institutions would probably not be that hard to obtain.

      The disadvantages of long-term debt are that interests costs will rise, which
      increases outflows and liquidity will decrease. Additionally, the bank may put
      some restrictions on FI in the loan agreement which might limit future liquidity
      solutions in the future.

      The alternative method, issuing and selling additional shares of stock, has the
      advantage that it would raise equity, which has no interest payments. Thus, FI
      could raise money and invest it in current assets such that it could start taking
      trade and other discounts. Liquidity through increased cash inflow would improve.

      The main disadvantage is that the ownership of FI would be diluted. The Fort
      family would own a lesser percentage of the company than they currently do.
      Further, with greater equity, return on capital employed ratios would probably
      initially go down. Stakeholders will be concerned by this perceived fall in
      profitability.

      Any other strategies probably would not be appropriate or enough to fix the
      problems. Tinkering around with the composition of current assets is unlikely to
      make much of a difference. Presumably, FI turns its inventory as fast it can.
      Making debtors pay more quickly is not very likely to occur, as they will resist.
      This move could give FI’s competitors a competitive advantage if competitors do
      not alter payment terms.
                                          – 21 –             N20/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Maximum              Debt                           Equity           Judgments/conclusion
Mark award
         3               One argument,             N/A                        N/A
                          unbalanced
        4                One argument,        One argument,                   N/A
                          unbalanced           unbalanced
        5                 One balanced and one unbalanced                     N/A
        6                          Both balanced                              No
                                                                    judgments/conclusions
       7-8                             Balanced                     Judgments/conclusions
                                                                    based upon analysis
                                                                    and explanation in the
                                                                    body of the response

       9-10                            Balanced                     Judgments/conclusions
                                                                    based upon analysis
                                                                    and explanation in the
                                                                    body of the response

     “Balanced” means that the candidate has provided at least one argument for and
     one arguments against for each option.

     Award marks according to the markbands on page 3.

     Candidates may contrast one option with another for a balance as long as at
     least two arguments are given for each option.

     Award a maximum of [6] if the answer is of a standard that shows balanced
     analysis and understanding throughout the response with reference to the
     stimulus material but there is no judgment/conclusion.

     Award a maximum of [6] if the answer makes no reference to the quantitative
     data in the question.

     Candidates cannot reach the [7–8] markband if they give judgment/conclusions
     that are not based on analysis/explanation already given in their response.
                                                   – 22 –              N20/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                               Section C

6.    With reference to an organization of your choice, examine the impact of culture on
      organizational ethics.                                                                         [20]

7.    With reference to an organization of your choice, discuss the ways in which innovation
      can influence organizational change.                                                           [20]

8.    With reference to an organization of your choice, examine the impact of globalization
      on marketing strategy.                                                                         [20]

N.B. Although the question asks for the application of one concept on another, it is still
expected that Business Management content will be aligned with the concepts especially the
second concept (the one being acted on).

Please note that candidates can conclude that there was a minimal impact, however it has to
be based on balanced arguments and evaluation.

Additional guidance in relation to the assessment criteria
For each criterion, the aim is to find the descriptor that conveys most accurately the level
attained by the candidate, using the best-fit model. It is not necessary for every single aspect
of a level descriptor to be met for that mark to be awarded.

 The highest level descriptors do not imply faultless performance and should be achievable by a
  candidate.
 A candidate who attains a high level of achievement for one criterion will not necessarily reach high
  levels of achievement for the other criteria and vice versa.

If only one concept is addressed:
 Criteria A, B, C and E: award up to a maximum [3].
 Criterion D: full marks can be awarded.

Where the question asks for impacts of two concepts on content, examiners must allow for
unbalanced treatment of the two concepts throughout a candidate’s response. One concept may be
more significant than the other.

Criterion B
For [2]: “…connection is not developed” should be treated the same as superficial.

Criterion C
1+1 arguments are expected per concepts.
 Questions 6 to 8 require consideration of the impact of one concept on a second concept – therefore
   accept 2+2 arguments for a balanced response.
 Justification is through logic or data.
 For [2] there is no balance as there are no counter arguments at all, or the arguments are all one-
   sided then this would be unjustified.
 For [3] there are some balanced arguments – some of which are justified.

Criterion D
 Introductions need to be concise and related to the question.
 The candidate’s response does not to have explicit headings for each structural element.
 A body is the area in which the substance of arguments occurs. It is usually located between the
   introduction and the conclusion.
                                                    – 23 –        N20/3/BUSMT/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


 Fit-for-purpose paragraph means that ideas are presented in a clear academic way. For example, one
  idea per paragraph.

Criterion E
 One example of an “individual” could be an individual consumer or an individual manager. However,
   this cannot be considered with a “group” of consumers or a management team.
 For [4], a balanced response: look at the perspectives of both individual and group(s).
 The chosen individual, group needs to be applicable and relevant to the question with specific
   explanation.
 Candidates need to go beyond stating the stakeholder.

Candidates need not explicitly say “stakeholder”.
