No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de
tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris,
sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de
tutorat ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement
supérieur, des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes
d’études, des gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des
développeurs d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la
procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse suivante :
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios
de apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores
de aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u
ofrezcan recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este
enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia:
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.
Economics
Higher level
Paper 2

Friday 13 November 2020 (morning)


1 hour 30 minutes


Instructions to candidates
y   Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y   You are not permitted access to any calculator for this paper.
y   Section A: a nswer one question.
y   Section B: a nswer one question.
y   Use fully labelled diagrams and references to the text/data where appropriate.
y   The maximum mark for this examination paper is [40 marks].




                                                                                                8820 – 5104
      9 pages                                               © International Baccalaureate Organization 2020
                                                     –2–                                          8820 – 5104


                                                 Section A

Answer one question from this section.

1.       Study the following extract and answer the questions that follow.

                                       South Korea’s current account surplus

     1     South Korea, Asia’s fourth-largest economy, has experienced a current account surplus since
           2012. South Korea’s large working-age population, which tends to save a large portion of its
           income for retirement, contributes to the surplus. The South Korean government has expressed
           concerns about the impact of the high savings on domestic demand and the level of imports.
           However, it has been predicted that as the population ages the surplus will gradually disappear
           by 2042.

     2     The South Korean won (South Korea’s currency) recorded the second highest appreciation
           against the United States dollar (US$) in 2017 among currencies of the G20* nations. The
           current account surplus, the improved economic conditions and the expectations of an
           interest rate rise have all helped increase the South Korean won’s value.

     3     The South Korean won officially operates under a floating exchange rate system, but the central
           bank would intervene if there were major fluctuations in the market that needed to be managed.
           The US is monitoring the exchange rate policy of South Korea due to the significant trade
           imbalance between the two countries. If the US identifies that a major trading partner like South
           Korea tries to limit an appreciation of its currency, then the US may consider tariffs to reduce
           the imbalance.

     4     South Korea’s financial account in the balance of payments recorded a deficit of US$13 billion
           in 2018, as Koreans have invested extensively in other countries. Furthermore, foreigners have
           been reluctant to invest in South Korea due to the trade disputes and the potential of a trade
           war erupting between the US and China. The US and China are South Korea’s largest trading
           partners, and South Korea, with its export-oriented economy (exports amount to 43 % of gross
           domestic product [GDP]), is sensitive to external demand shocks.

     5     South Korea’s domestic investment in key areas (such as manufacturing, construction and
           machinery) fell during 2018, and GDP grew by less than expected. Additionally, private
           consumption increased only by 0.3 % in 2018, the slowest growth for 4 years. There is also
           concern about the level of unemployment, especially the high rates of youth unemployment.

     6      Normally, in a situation of low growth, the central bank would implement expansionary monetary
            policy. However, the US Federal Reserve (the central bank of the US) and the European central
            bank are considering monetary tightening. If the South Korean central bank does not raise
            interest rates in line with the US and the European Union it runs the risk that the South Korean
            won may depreciate. Therefore, the South Korean government has begun discussions on using
            fiscal policy to help revive the job market and support domestic demand.

* G20 members include: Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, France,
  Germany, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea (South Korea), Mexico,
  Russia, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Turkey, the United Kingdom, the US and the EU

(This question continues on the following page)
                                                –3–                                            8820 – 5104


(Question 1 continued)

     (a)   (i)	Define the term interest rate indicated in bold in the text (paragraph 2).[2]

           (ii)   List two components of the financial account (paragraph 4).[2]

     (b)   Using an exchange rate diagram, explain how South Korea’s current account surplus
           could have “helped increase the South Korean won’s value” (paragraph 2).[4]

     (c)   Using an AD/AS diagram, explain how the use of fiscal policy could lower “the high
           rates of youth unemployment” in South Korea (paragraph 5).[4]

     (d)   Using information from the text/data and your knowledge of economics, discuss the
           possible implications on South Korea’s economy of a current account surplus.               [8]




                                                                                           Turn over
                                                      –4–                                            8820 – 5104


2.       Study the following extract and answer the questions that follow.

                        The Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific
                                  Partnership (CPTPP), Australia and Japan

     1     In 2018, Australia signed the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific
           Partnership (CPTPP)*. The agreement creates the third largest free trade area in the world,
           covers nearly 500 million people and is worth more than US$12 trillion. The members of the
           agreement have stated that economic integration and free trade is important to help foster good
           political relations and inclusive growth for all nations.

     2     The trade agreement will aim to gradually eliminate most trade protection within the member
           countries. The agreement will see tariffs eliminated for Australian cheese and beef exports to
           Japan, and increased quotas for the export of rice to Japan from 4400 to 8400 tonnes. Nikkei
           Asian Review reported that “Fast-food restaurants in particular are embracing the import as
           a way to cut costs to cope with rising wages.” Additionally, Japanese food manufacturers will
           be able to lower production costs for rice-based meals and benefit from increased stability of
           input prices. The benefits from the agreement for Japan’s economy are projected to exceed
           US$70 billion, but some industries would be negatively affected.

     3     Japanese farmers are worried about the increase in imported food from Australia. Furthermore,
           the Japanese government is concerned about the effects of the CPTPP on Japan’s food
           self-sufficiency—Japan relies on other countries for over 60 % of its food. In response to these
           concerns the Japanese government has offered support for domestic farmers to diversify
           production into other crops. The government also plans to subsidize the rice farmers through
           the initial phase of lowering trade barriers.

     4     The agreement is said to be worth more than US$37 billion to Australian agricultural exports. It
           is hoped that CPTPP and the falling value of the Australian dollar will help Australia to reduce
           its current account deficit, but some economists have argued that this can take a long time.
           According to some estimations, the short-run price elasticity of demand (PED) for Australian
           exports is 0.2 and the short-run PED for imports in Australia is 0.4. However, the long-run PED
           for Australian exports is 1.1 and the long-run PED for imports in Australia is 1.3.

     5     There have also been concerns about the CPTPP from trade unions in Australia. They argue
           that it deregulates the labour markets and gives corporations from other countries an ability to
           take legal action against governments for implementing laws that raise wages or protect the
           environment, if the foreign corporation can prove that the law hurt their commercial interests.
           One university lecturer said that the future costs to the taxpayer could be significant if foreign
           companies take the Australian government to court.

     6     The trade agreement would allow workers from other countries to work in Australia without
           employers being required to check if Australian citizens are available to fill the jobs before
           the migrant workers are employed. It is estimated this may risk 39 000 jobs in Australia.
           Furthermore, environmental activists have expressed concerns that the negative environmental
           and social effects of the agreement have not been well considered. This may lead to conflicts
           with Australia’s commitment to the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals.

* The CPTPP includes eleven member countries: Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile,
  Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam.

(This question continues on the following page)
                                                 –5–                                          8820 – 5104


(Question 2 continued)

     (a)   (i)	Define the term free trade area indicated in bold in the text (paragraph 1).[2]

           (ii)   Define the term quotas indicated in bold in the text (paragraph 2).[2]

     (b)   Using price elasticity of demand (PED) data from the text and the J-curve effect,
           explain the most likely impact of “the falling value of the Australian dollar” on Australia’s
           current account (paragraph 4).[4]

     (c)   Using an international trade diagram, explain how “increased quotas for the export of
           rice to Japan” will affect the price of rice in Japan (paragraph 2).[4]

     (d)   Using information from the text/data and your knowledge of economics,
           evaluate the view that free trade is beneficial to Japan’s economy.                       [8]




                                                                                             Turn over
                                                  –6–                                            8820 – 5104


                                              Section B

Answer one question from this section.

3.   Study the following extract and answer the questions that follow.

                         São Tomé and Príncipe Economic Development Challenges



                                                                                             Príncipe
                                                                 

                                                             
                                                                 
                                            Nigeria
                                            Cameroon                                 São Tomé
                                            Equatorial Guinea
                                            Gabon



     1   São Tomé and Príncipe (STP) is an island nation and is one of the smallest economies in
         Africa. STP faces many economic development challenges including: a limited range of export
         products (mostly commodities) and markets, limited human capital, insufficient infrastructure,
         vulnerability to supply-side shocks due to climate change, limited access to credit, political
         instability and poor governance. All these challenges have led to a high dependence on
         foreign aid.

     2   International organizations estimate that approximately 50 % of STP’s population is living in
         relative poverty. Its economic growth rate has been consistent at 4–5 % between 2013 and
         2018, but the International Monetary Fund (IMF) suggests that STP will need an economic
         growth rate of 6 % to have an impact on the poverty rate.

     3   To increase economic growth and reduce its dependence on foreign aid and cocoa exports
         (80 % of its total exports), STP is planning to extract offshore oil and develop the comparative
         advantage it has in tourism. Over 50 % of its exports go to the European Union. It is hoped that
         diversifying STP’s exports will increase the number of its potential trading partners. To achieve
         this aim, STP is seeking membership with the World Trade Organization (WTO) and the Central
         African Economic and Monetary Community. Developing export markets could help STP benefit
         from economies of scale and overcome the restrictions of its geographical remoteness and
         high transport costs. However, STP will need help from multinational oil companies to exploit its
         oil reserves, and the government needs to improve transparency to ensure that oil revenues are
         used to support economic development.

(This question continues on the following page)
                                                     –7–                                           8820 – 5104


(Question 3 continued)

   4         In STP, foreign aid accounts for 57 % of gross domestic product (GDP) and 93 % of public
             investments, including a significant portion of health and education spending. In addition,
             concessional loans have been provided by the IMF. However, STP had to agree to decrease the
             budget deficit as a condition of the loan from the IMF.

   5         There are some government officials who believe that aid will not solve the economic
             development challenges in STP. It did not meet the nutrition targets set by the Millennium
             Development Goals and continues to struggle with providing adequate clean water and
             nutritional intake for its population. Clean water is becoming scarce in STP due to business
             pollution and poor household sanitation, which is also spreading diseases. Other environmental
             concerns are climate change, deforestation and erosion of coastal areas due to the sand
             extracted for the construction of roads and buildings.

     (a)       (i)	Define the term relative poverty indicated in bold in the text (paragraph 2).[2]

               (ii)   Define the term economies of scale indicated in bold in the text (paragraph 3).[2]

       (b)     Question removed for copyright reasons                                                    [4]

       (c)     Using an externalities diagram, explain why “business pollution” is leading to market
               failure in STP (paragraph 5).[4]

       (d)     Using information from the text/data and your knowledge of economics, discuss the
               role of aid in achieving economic development in STP.                                      [8]




                                                                                                 Turn over
                                                      –8–                                            8820 – 5104


4.       Study the following extract and answer the questions that follow.

                                         Fiji’s challenges and opportunities

     1     In 2016, the island nation of Fiji suffered from cyclone Winston (a tropical storm), costing more
           than 40 lives and damaging its infrastructure. One of the country’s four sugar mills was severely
           damaged, harming raw sugar processing. Processed sugar is, in addition to bottled water and
           tourism, a major export in Fiji. A recent study found that the damage from the cyclone continues
           to have a lasting effect on communities as fisherwomen report fewer and smaller crabs and
           fishes. The social safety net is limited and there are calls for the government to help the citizens
           who have been affected by the cyclone. However, the government had to use its budget to
           rebuild infrastructure.

     2     The government has prepared several strategies to strengthen the economy. These include
           financial support for sugar cane producers, diversification of its agricultural produce, better
           access to finance and encouragement of investment. The government has committed to provide
           equal opportunities for all: promoting the participation of women in education and political
           leadership, because Fiji has one of the lowest female participation rates in politics in the world.

     3     To support its sugar cane farmers, the government provides a 55 % subsidy on pesticides
           (products that kill weeds) used in farming. However, small farmers are complaining about the
           excessive paperwork that needs to be completed to receive the subsidy and there is potential
           for corruption. Fiji competes with Brazil, which has an absolute advantage, in the world market
           for sugar.

     4     To diversify, the government plans to expand the ginger and coconut industries. Both industries
           are economically and environmentally sustainable. The industries provide an increased
           number of Fijians with a worthwhile income. Coconut production plays a very important role in
           Fiji’s economy, particularly in the more isolated rural communities, where formal employment
           is scarce and where alternative cash crops (crops grown to be sold for profit) do not exist.
           Coconut is a staple food and is vital for food security (ensuring that people have access to
           enough food), but is also important for health, economic and cultural reasons. New market
           opportunities have emerged in high-value products – green coconut products, such as coconut
           water, are becoming increasingly popular throughout the world.

     5     The Asian Development Bank encourages Fijian farmers to access “green finance”. These
           financial investments support economic development through sustainable development
           initiatives and policies. Under the government’s new reforms, farmers are able to use assets
           such as crops and contracts as collateral for loans, creating improved access to finance.
           However, to increase incomes, farmers will also need to improve their financial knowledge.

     6     To create an investment-friendly environment, the government must develop more
           infrastructure, create market access through greater economic integration and reduce
           asymmetric information between farmers and wholesale buyers. Australia has decided to help
           Fiji by financing infrastructure through grants and concessional loans.

(This question continues on the following page)
                                               –9–                                         8820 – 5104


(Question 4 continued)

     (a)   (i)	Define the term absolute advantage indicated in bold in the text (paragraph 3).[2]

           (ii)   Define the term asymmetric information indicated in bold in the text
                  (paragraph 6).[2]

     (b)   Using a costs diagram, explain how the expansion of the coconut industry could lead to
           economies of scale (paragraph 4).[4]

     (c)   Using a production possibility curve (PPC) diagram, explain how damage to Fiji’s
           infrastructure has affected its production possibilities (paragraph 1).[4]

     (d)   Using information from the text/data and your knowledge of economics, discuss the
           view that government intervention is the best way to achieve economic development
           in Fiji.                                                                               [8]




References:

1.       Adapted from: South Korea Current Account, Trading Economics, https://tradingeconomics.com/south-korea/current-
         account; and Anon, 2018. S. Korean Won’s Appreciation 2nd Highest in G20 Last Year. KBS World Radio,
         http://world.kbs.co.kr/service/news_view.htm?lang=e&Seq_Code=133432.

2.       Adapted from Karp, P., 2017. Revived Trans-Pacific trade deal undercuts Australian jobs market, unions say. The
         Guardian, Copyright Guardian News & Media Ltd 2021, https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/dec/19/
         revived-trans-pacific-trade-deal-undercuts-australian-jobs-market-unions-say; Kodachi, H., 2019. Australian rice
         finds favor in Japan as cheaper option, Nikkei Asian Review, https://asia.nikkei.com/Business/Markets/Commodities/
         Australian-rice-finds-favor-in-Japan-as-cheaper-option.

3.       Adapted from Jennings, R., 2018. Taiwan cannot compete with China on Aid to keep foreign allies. VOA News.
         Available at: https://www.voanews.com/east-asia-pacific/taiwan-cannot-compete-china-aid-keep-foreign-allies.

4.       Adapted from: Chaudhary, F., 2018. Green finance – Ginger farmers explore funding possibilities.
         The Fiji Times, https://www.fijitimes.com/green-finance-ginger-farmers-explore-funding-possibilities;
         and Chaudhary, F., 2018. Risk mitigation in the Pacific’s coconut sector. The Fiji Times,
         https://www.fijitimes.com/risk-mitigation-in-the-pacifics-coconut-sector.
