N20/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




                        Markscheme


                        November 2020


                         Global politics


          Higher level and standard level


                               Paper 1




8 pages
                                           –2–                 N20/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de
tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris,
sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de
tutorat ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement
supérieur, des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes
d’études, des gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des
développeurs d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la
procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse suivante :
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios
de apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores
de aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u
ofrezcan recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este
enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia:
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.
                                                   –3–                 N20/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Unit 4     Conflict resolution and post-conflict transformation

Bulleted lists in this markscheme indicate likely points that candidates may include in their answer: they
are not exhaustive, and examiners should credit other valid points not listed.

Conflict resolution and post-conflict transformation

1.   Identify three aspects of the issue represented in Source A.                                        [3]

     Answers could include the following:
      The cartoon shows two major concepts associated with post-conflict transformation –
       truth and reconciliation
      The main message is that progress does not seem possible or that there is no clear way
       forward – indicated by the scrutiny of the map and the separation / chasm itself
      The image suggests that truth and reconciliation are equally important and need to be
       attempted together in a “truth and reconciliation process”
      The physical metaphor of the cartoon – a cliff edge with no bridge also suggests the
       immense challenge or risk and high stakes in moving forward
      The image shows that there are many people trying to reach reconciliation who are all at
       the stage or place of “truth”. There is no one in a place of reconciliation suggesting that
       truth precedes reconciliation and also that truth is easier to attain
      The cartoon (from the context of South Africa) shows that this is a challenge that many will
       recognise and illustrates the importance of the media and international community in
       scrutinizing its progress.

     Award [1] for each relevant point up to a maximum of [3]. Other relevant points not listed can
     also be rewarded.
                                                 –4–                 N20/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


2.   With explicit reference to Source B and one example you have studied explain
     what post-conflict transformation might deliver for victims.                                      [4]

     Answers may include, but are not limited to:
      Source B shows that victims will gain peace and security, which should then lead to truth,
       justice and reparation.
      Source B shows that reparation for victims is directly linked to the truth that is made available.
       This shows that the post-conflict phase is crucial for victims who may then benefit in tangible
       ways.
      Source B shows that victims can expect an investigation into the human rights abuses and
       crimes committed during the conflict, however, this is not always possible due to the local or
       domestic justice system.
      Source B specifically shows that victims can gain financial reparation for their suffering.
      Source B specifically shows that female victims and victims of sexual violence can gain specific
       support if their needs are recognized and invested in
      Source B shows that victims might be provided with revelations concerning the human
       rights abuses and crimes committed against themselves and their community through a
       truth commission.

     Valid examples from own knowledge may include, but are not limited to:
      Other examples may show that healing takes place between different, opposing groups
       who can then associate and work freely without fear or stigmatisation.
      Post conflict transformation may benefit victims from all groups who may have been
       forced to break the laws of war.
      Examples may be made of situations where all civilians benefit from the relative stability
       and positive peace that TRCs or legal mechanisms may yield.

     Other relevant points not listed can also be rewarded. Candidates are not expected to make
     four separate points in order to achieve full marks. For each valid point a maximum of [2]
     may be awarded, up to a total of [4]. If there is no reference to another example studied
     award a maximum of [3].
                                                 –5–                 N20/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


3.   Compare the difficulties in post-conflict transformation as indicated in Source C
     and Source D.                                                                                   [8]

     Potential points of comparison:
      Both sources show by their dates that the TRC process is late – or happening many
       years after the cessation of hostilities. They are dated a significant time after the peace
       accord but also illustrate that major work is still underway. Source C Specifies the delay
       and emphasises the impact of this lateness – even after forty years (if the conflict
       started in 1989, it has only been 30 years, or 13 years since the end of the conflict) this
       is the first-time victims will have spoken out. This means that the post conflict period
       has largely failed them. Source D is dated to 2019 and makes reference to
       contemporary developments such as Working groups which evidences a long time-lag.
      Both sources are critical in that they show that transformation is currently inadequate.
       The title of Source C suggests that there is peace in Aceh, but truth or justice has not
       been achieved. Source D clearly shows a lack of ‘economic and political’ support, and
       calls for international monitoring, suggesting less faith in the process by the newly
       “independent” Aceh government.
      Both sources emphasise that political involvement [by a state actor] was significant in
       the conflict and plays a role in the post conflict process. Source C, by an NGO, talks of
       government backed killings by the Indonesian government and the failure of ‘the
       authorities’ to establish the truth or for the state government to back the TRC. Source D
       is an Aceh government source and shows that the conflict involved the Indonesian
       government and the TRC process now faces political obstacles through delays and
       lack of political will at both the Aceh and Indonesian levels of governance.
      Both sources indicate the complex consequences of conflict on society - that different
       groups of surviving or bereaved victims will have different needs. Source C is written by
       an NGO and adds detail about killings, torture and disappearances. Source D
       emphasizes that working groups will assist victims of “Enforced Disappearance” and
       sexual violence.
      Both sources emphasise the importance of the international community. Source C
       mentions the international peace agreement. Source D specifically invites the international
       community to help provide momentum to the process.

     If the view of only one source is discussed award a maximum of [4]. For a response which
     focuses significantly on one source with only minimal reference to the other source, award a
     maximum of [5]. For responses that discuss the sources separately, rather than in a running
     comparison, award a maximum [6].

     Award [2] per effective point of comparison up to a maximum of [8]. For an [8] response
     expect detailed comparison but do not expect all of the points above, and allow other valid
     points.
                                                  –6–                 N20/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


4.   Using all sources and your own knowledge evaluate the claim that it is easier
     to establish truth than justice.                                                                [10]

     Question 4 is assessed according to the markbands that follow, in conjunction with these
     marking notes.

     Source material may include, but is not limited to:

     Source A
      Source A clearly shows a desired progression from truth towards reconciliation. It can be
       assumed that justice involves both, and that truth may emerge but also may not be acted
       upon in terms of the “reconciliation gap” which is illustrated.

     Source B
      Source B emphasizes the importance of the TRC and the collection of testimonies and
       shows that this is not yet being engaged with ten years later.
      As a counter point Source B shows how hard it is for truth telling mechanisms to be
       established in a timely manner suggesting it is not easy to achieve, and possibly no
       less easy than justice.
      Source B shows that justice may yet be impossible to secure through inadequate
       courts and mechanisms.
      Source B shows that truth about war crimes and its consequences can only fully
       emerge through courts and mechanisms of Justice.
      Source B highlights a lack of material assistance for groups affected by violence and
       shows that justice in the form of reparations will not be forthcoming
      Source B shows that international leverage may be needed to help establish justice. It is
       written by a leading NGO / non-profit, suggesting that people’s needs are not being met.

     Source C
      Source C states in its title that justice has not been met. It does not define justice but
       states that truth is not being heard and implies the centrality of truth to the delivery of
       justice.
      Source C makes clear that truth is contingent on survival and safety – and therefore
       intrinsically difficult to secure. Many witnesses are dead or may feel vulnerable as they
       are calling out government sanctioned acts.
      Source C emphasises the political nature of the challenge, in that that the Indonesian
       government is not supporting efforts to achieve truth. Again, this means that truth is not
       easy to achieve, and neither will be justice.

     Source D
      Source D states that a “truth working group” has been established which suggests that
       truth telling is hard to achieve and is only just being appropriately resourced.
      In contrast, Source D shows that many testimonies have been taken already and that
       public hearings are underway.
      Source D shows the need to address urgent reparations which implies that justice is not
       yet realized.
                                              –7–                  N20/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Own knowledge may include, but is not limited to:
 Students may consider the meaning of justice and its individual and societal
  repercussions
 Examples may be given whereby different levels of mechanisms have been sought – ie
  local courts, and well as national TRCs which provide partial truth but provide a powerful
  and symbolic sense of justice
 Emphasis may be given to the immediate psychological and financial needs of many
  victims and how this lack of reparation hinders their ability to participate in truth telling.

Do not expect all of the above, and reward other relevant points not listed.

If only source material or only own knowledge is used, the response can only be awarded a
maximum of [6]. To achieve the maximum [10], responses must refer to all four sources.
                                              –8–                  N20/3/GLPOL/BP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Markbands for question 4

       Marks                                    Level descriptor

          0       The work does not reach a standard described by the descriptors below.

                  There is little relevant knowledge and a very limited awareness of the
                   demands of the question.
                  There is little or no attempt to synthesise own knowledge and source
         1–2
                   material.
                  Responses at this level are often largely descriptive and contain
                   unsupported generalizations.

                  There is limited awareness of the demands of the question or the question is
                   only partially addressed.
         3–4      There is some knowledge demonstrated, but this is not always relevant or
                   accurate, and may not be used appropriately or effectively.
                  Responses at this level are often more descriptive than evaluative.

                  Answers show some awareness of the demands of the question.
                  Knowledge is mostly accurate and relevant, and there is some limited
         5–6
                   synthesis of own knowledge and source material.
                  Counterclaims are implicitly identified but are not explored.

                  Answers are focused and show good awareness of the demands of the
                   question.
         7–8      Relevant and accurate knowledge is demonstrated, there is some synthesis
                   of own knowledge and source material, and appropriate examples are used.
                  The response contains claims and counter claims.

                  Answers are clearly focused and show a high degree of awareness of the
                   demands of the question.
                  Relevant and accurate knowledge is demonstrated, there is effective
        9–10       synthesis of own knowledge and source material, and appropriate examples
                   are used.
                  The response contains clear evaluation, with well-balanced claims and
                   counter claims.
