No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without written
permission from the IB.

Additionally, the license tied with this product prohibits commercial use of any selected
files or extracts from this product. Use by third parties, including but not limited to
publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services, preparatory schools, vendors
operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource digital platforms and app
developers, is not permitted and is subject to the IB’s prior written consent via a license.
More information on how to request a license can be obtained from
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque forme ni par quelque
moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des systèmes de stockage et
de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite de l’IB.

De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation commerciale de
tout fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris,
sans toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de
tutorat ou d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement
supérieur, des fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes
d’études, des gestionnaires de plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des
développeurs d’applications, n’est pas autorisée et est soumise au consentement écrit
préalable de l’IB par l’intermédiaire d’une licence. Pour plus d’informations sur la
procédure à suivre pour demander une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse suivante :
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto de ninguna forma ni por ningún
medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de almacenamiento y
recuperación de información, sin que medie la autorización escrita del IB.

Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso con fines comerciales de
todo archivo o fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros
—lo que incluye, a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios
de apoyo académico o ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores
de aplicaciones y entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u
ofrezcan recursos para docentes mediante plataformas digitales— no está permitido
y estará sujeto al otorgamiento previo de una licencia escrita por parte del IB. En este
enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una licencia:
https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.
Social and cultural anthropology
Standard level
Paper 1

Thursday 12 November 2020 (afternoon)


1 hour 30 minutes


Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y Read the passage and answer questions 1 and 2. Choose either question 3 or 4. Answer
  question 5.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [30 marks].




                                                                                           8820 – 5803
     3 pages                                           © International Baccalaureate Organization 2020
                                                   –2–                                            8820 – 5803


Read the passage.

Passage adapted from Devlieger, C., (2018) “Contractual Dependencies: Disability and the bureaucracy
of begging in Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of Congo”. American Ethnologist, 45(4): 455–469.

        Begging is a prominent economic activity pursued by physically disabled people in Kinshasa,
        Democratic Republic of Congo. Beggars identify three different kinds of begging. Some beggars
        sit, usually alone, because they cannot walk. Others walk alone or in pairs; on holy days they
        seek charity from mosques and businesses belonging to Muslims.

    5   The defining practice of disabled beggars in central Kinshasa today formed the third category:
        those who “do documents” also known as documentaires. In contrast to other beggars, they
        formed groups of up to 15 people. While most beggars approached potential donors with
        pleading looks, extended hands and gestures expressing hunger, documentaires took a
        different track: they presented a potential donor with a photocopied document requesting
   10   contributions for a specific purpose. Documentaires described the system to me as an
        arrangement or “contract” between beggar and donor. Donors who “bought” such a document
        kept it as a receipt and hung it on display. It showed that the giver had donated to disabled
        people and was not obliged to give to other groups. In exchange, the group of beggars would
        not return for another year. However, once when I went out with documentaire women and
   15   shopkeepers told them they had already given, they replied that they had given to men but also
        needed to give to women.

        In many descriptions of begging, the obligation to give is framed in terms of religious charity. For
        documentaires, in contrast, religious charity was not significant. The system instead deliberately
        evoked non-governmental organization (NGO) fund-raising and government tax-collection.
   20   Adapting to Kinshasa’s multicultural makeup, documentaires chose to persuade people to give
        by speaking the secular language of the state and that of international humanitarianism.

        Begging can be described as an interaction that challenges ordinary systems of exchange,
        since beggars bargain from a position of weakness, making claims based not on reciprocity
        but on what they lack. The practice of the documentaires shows the reality of this challenge.
   25   Thus, documentaires try to present their relationship with “donors” as reciprocal. Presenting
        themselves as an NGO, the “receipt” beggars give is meant to represent an understanding
        between the beggars, the donor, and (implicitly) the government. This legitimizes the act of
        begging by imitating the practices of state bureaucracy. The documentaires’ system rests on
        the idea of state social support, which is in tension with a moral logic of dignity derived from
   30   personal independence and “honest” work. This clashes with perceptions of disabled beggars
        as suspect and aggressive.

        Because begging is controversial, beggars present a dependent relationship as “contractual”
        and spread such relationships over wide networks. These are strategies to manage a
        stigmatized occupation and maintain a degree of desired autonomy.

   35   In many societies one becomes a person through multiple attachments to others rather than by
        conceptualizing the self as an independent individual. When personhood is shaped by valuing
        (in)dependence, perceptions of disability are affected. In cultures that place strong emphasis
        on independence, such as the Euro-American West, the dependency of disabled people
        attracts discrimination and stigma. But disability in other cultures can be more associated
   40   with the “socio-centric” value of being part of social networks of dependencies rather than
        individual work capacity, appearance or ability. Dependencies on others, in this perspective, is
        not negative but a valued achievement and a route towards social mobility. If disabled people
        cannot fulfil the ideals of “independent” labor, they may still be able to find value as persons
        through dependent relations with others.
                                                   –3–                                          8820 – 5803


     45   Like other documentaires, Claude made a strong distinction between ordinary beggars and
          himself: “See this paper? This is a contract we sign with them once a year. It’s a document
          you give like a tax of the disabled. You give me money and I leave you the paper. But when
          an individual beggar puts out their hand like this, you give him money, but he won’t give you a
          paper. Our paper is the convention we sign with business owners. Even though we also receive
     50   money, we give a paper receipt and it is only once a year. The difference is large.”

          For Claude, it was a more responsible and organized type of begging, upholding good
          relationships bound by contract. The document symbolized their agreement and formalized their
          dependent relationship.


Answer question 1 and question 2

1.    Define the term exchange and describe how it can be understood and applied in the context
      of the passage.                                                                                  [4]


2.    Analyse the ethnographic data presented in the passage using the concept of identity.[6]


Answer either question 3 or question 4.

3.    Compare and contrast the way in which the key concept of culture or symbolism is evident
      in this passage and how it is evident in one other ethnographic example you have studied.      [10]

OR

4.    Compare and contrast the approaches to research adopted by the anthropologist in this
      passage to the approaches to research used by one other anthropologist you have studied.
      Make reference to concepts and ethnographic material in your answer.                           [10]


Answer question 5.

5.    What does it mean to live in society? Discuss with reference to at least two sources of
      ethnographic material and examples from the passage.                                           [10]
References:

Devlieger, C., 2018. ‘Contractual Dependencies: Disability and the bureaucracy of begging in Kinshasa,
Democratic Republic of Congo’. American Ethnologist, 45(4), pp. 455–469. © Wiley 2018;
https://anthrosource.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/amet.12701 Open Access – CC BY 4.0;
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode.
