N12/2/A2ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




     88122013

ENGLISH A2 – HIGHER LEVEL – PAPER 1
ANGLAIS A2 – NIVEAU SUPÉRIEUR – ÉPREUVE 1
INGLÉS A2 – NIVEL SUPERIOR – PRUEBA 1

Monday 5 November 2012 (morning)
Lundi 5 novembre 2012 (matin)
Lunes 5 de noviembre de 2012 (mañana)

2 hours / 2 heures / 2 horas


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

   Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
   Section A consists of two passages for comparative commentary.
   Section B consists of two passages for comparative commentary.
   Choose either Section A or Section B. Write one comparative commentary.
   The maximum mark for this examination paper is [30 marks].

INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS

   N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
   La section A comporte deux passages à commenter.
   La section B comporte deux passages à commenter.
   Choisissez soit la section A, soit la section B. Écrivez un commentaire comparatif.
   Le nombre maximum de points pour cette épreuve d’examen est [30 points].

INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS

   No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
   En la Sección A hay dos fragmentos para comentar.
   En la Sección B hay dos fragmentos para comentar.
   Elija la Sección A o la Sección B. Escriba un comentario comparativo.
   La puntuación máxima para esta prueba de examen es [30 puntos].




8812-2013                                                                                     5 pages/páginas
                                                               © International Baccalaureate Organization 2012
                                                       –2–                  N12/2/A2ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Choose either Section A or Section B.

                                                  SECTION A

Analyse and compare the following two texts.

Discuss the similarities and differences between the texts and their theme(s). Include comments on the
ways the authors use elements such as structure, tone, images and other stylistic devices to communicate
their purposes.

Text 1

                                           Winter Camping Manual
            Personal Introduction

            Winter camping is an advanced and challenging adventure. The winter camper has a respect
            for nature that the summer camper will never have. But as with most things in life, the most
            rewarding experience is the one that takes the most effort. If it were easy, then the personal reward
            and satisfaction that a winter camp out gives would not be the same. A Boy Scout has a unique
     5      opportunity to experience this first hand. Most adults never get the chance to go on summer camp
            outs, let alone winter camp outs, because they are stuck in the everyday routines of today’s fast
            paced modern world. They don’t have the time for such “dumb” things as a winter camp out.
            For those people, it’s hard to explain the feeling of lying in your tent on a cold winter night,
            with only the sound of the wind howling outside. It is a feeling of solitude, peace and great respect
   10       for nature that will be a memory to treasure. On one such camp out a couple of years ago, a friend
            of mine and I were in the beginning of our two hour walk through deep snow to get back to our
            frozen car, after a long night in sub zero weather, when we stopped for a rest after crossing a small
            stream by crawling over a log. When we sat down, (actually I fell to the ground as the snow was
            very deep and I tripped on a hidden log) to take our rest, (since I was already down) the woods
   15       had an almost haunting silence as the large snowflakes came softly floating down and the world
            seemed to stop and pose for a photograph, which my mind took and will always treasure. That one
            moment made the entire camp out, as exhausting and cold as it was, worth all the effort and more.
            My only hope is that each Scout that tries winter camping, will have the opportunity to take their
            own “photograph” that they alone will be able to view. It will hopefully give them a new outlook
   20       that will enrich their lives. It will make them feel sorry for the person that asks them why in the
            world they would want to go camping in the winter. It’s not a question one can answer with words
            or pictures, but only with the experience itself.

            The most important thing that anyone brings with them on a winter camp out, or any camp out,
            can’t be bought in any store or made at home. It is a positive mental attitude. It’s easy to go on a
   25       camp out and be cold and miserable. A positive attitude is a must, and anyone who doesn’t have
            it should stay home. All the equipment in the world can’t make you have a rewarding camping
            experience without it.

            I hope this Winter Camping Manual will help you get ready for all your winter camp outs.
            Have a safe and fun adventure on all your camp outs and scouting experiences.

                                                                 Brian Tomaszewski, from an on-line manual
                                              http://www.scoutscan.com/resources/winter.html (January 2008)

8812-2013
                                                                 –3–             N12/2/A2ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Text 2

                                                                Snow

                                                  Low clouds hang on the mountain.
                                                  The forest is filled with fog.
                                                  A short distance away the
                                                  Giant trees recede and grow
                                             5    Dim. Two hundred paces and
                                                  They are invisible. All
                                                  Day the fog curdles1 and drifts.
                                                  The cries of the birds are loud.
                                                  They sound frightened and cold. Hour
                                           10     By hour it grows colder.
                                                  Just before sunset the clouds
                                                  Drop down the mountainside. Long
                                                  Shreds and tatters2 of fog flow
                                                  Swiftly away between the
                                           15     Trees. Now the valley below
                                                  Is filled with clouds like clotted
                                                  Cream and over them the sun
                                                  Sets, yellow in a sky full
                                                  Of purple feathers. After dark
                                           20     A wind rises and breaks branches
                                                  From the trees and howls in the
                                                  Treetops and then suddenly
                                                  Is still. Late at night I wake
                                                  And look out of the tent. The
                                           25     Clouds are rushing across the
                                                  Sky and through them is tumbling
                                                  The thin waning3 moon. Later
                                                  All is quiet except for
                                                  A faint whispering. I look
                                           30     Out. Great flakes of wet snow are
                                                  Falling. Snowflakes are falling
                                                  Into the dark flames of the
                                                  Dying fire. In the morning the
                                                  Pine boughs are sagging with snow,
                                           35     And the dogwood blossoms are
                                                  Frozen, and the tender young
                                                  Purple and citron oak leaves.

                  By Kenneth Rexroth, from THE COLLECTED SHORTER POEMS, copyright ©1944 by
              New Directions Publishing Corp. Reprinted by permission of New Directions Publishing Corp.


1
    curdles: thickens or clots, as sour milk will do
2
    shreds and tatters: torn-off pieces, rags
3
    waning: describes the phase of the moon following the full moon


8812-2013                                                              Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                   –4–                  N12/2/A2ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                               SECTION B

Analyse and compare the following two texts.

Discuss the similarities and differences between the texts and their theme(s). Include comments on the
ways the authors use elements such as structure, tone, images and other stylistic devices to communicate
their purposes.

Text 3




                                    Text removed for copyright reasons
                  The extract is from the beginning of the first chapter of the short story
                          The Assistant Murderer (1923) by Dashiell Hammett.
                 From “Gold on the door, edged with black...” to “A man of forty-some-
                        thing, ugly, sitting tilted back in his chair, feet on desk.”




8812-2013
                                                       –5–                  N12/2/A2ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Text 4

In this extract Mma Ramotswe is visiting her fiancé’s home for the first time.

                   “This is a very fine room,” observed Mma Ramotswe.
                   Mr J.L.B. Matekoni beamed with pleasure. “I try to keep this room tidy,” he said. “It is
            important to have a special room for important visitors.”
                   “Do you have any important visitors?” asked Mma Ramotswe.
     5             Mr J.L.B. Matekoni frowned. “There have been none so far,” he said. “But it is
            always possible.”
                   “Yes,” agreed Mma Ramotswe. “One never knows.”
                   She looked over her shoulder, towards a door that led into the rest of the house.
                   “The other rooms are that way?” she asked politely.
   10              Mr J.L.B. Matekoni nodded. “That is the not-so-tidy part of the house,” he said.
            “Perhaps we should look at it some other time.”
                   Mma Ramotswe shook her head and Mr J.L.B. Matekoni realised that there was
            no escape.
                   Mma Ramotswe followed him down the corridor. The first door that they reached was
   15       half open, and she stopped at the doorway and peered in. The room, which had obviously once
            been a bedroom, had its floors covered with newspapers, laid out as if they were a carpet. In the
            middle of the floor sat an engine, its cylinders exposed, while around it on the floor there were
            littered the parts that had been taken from the engine.
                   “That is a very special engine,” said Mr J.L.B. Matekoni, looking at her anxiously.
   20       “There is no other engine like it in Botswana. One day I shall finish fixing it.”
                   Of the remaining rooms, only one was habitable, the dining room, which had a table in the
            middle and a solitary chair. Its floor, however, was dirty, with piles of dust under the furniture and
            in each corner. Whoever was meant to be cleaning this room had clearly not swept it for months.
            What did she do, his maid? Did she stand at the gate and talk to her friends? It was clear to
   25       Mma Ramotswe that the maid was taking gross advantage of Mr J.L.B. Matekoni and relying on
            his good nature to keep her job.
                   The other rooms, although they contained beds, were cluttered with boxes stuffed with spark
            plugs, windscreen-wiper blades, and other curious mechanical pieces. And as for the kitchen, this,
            although clean, was again virtually bare, containing only two pots, several white enamelled plates,
   30       and a small cutlery tray.

                        Alexander McCall Smith, Tears of the Giraffe, Polygon, 2000. Used with permission.




8812-2013
