N12/2/A2ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


  November / novembre / noviembre 2012



        ENGLISH / ANGLAIS / INGLÉS A2


                        Higher Level
                      Niveau Supérieur
                       Nivel Superior

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




4 pages/páginas
                          –2–         N12/2/A2ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive
use of examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate
and must not be reproduced or distributed to any other
person without the authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                                –3–           N12/2/A2ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Higher Level, paper 1

These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking. They are not offered as
an exhaustive and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must rigidly adhere.
Good ideas or angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate.
Similarly, answers which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here should not be so
heavily penalized as to distort appreciation of individuality.

                                             SECTION A

This question invites candidates to compare an on-line manual and a poem about camping in
the snow.

A barely satisfactory comparative commentary will:

      note that both texts involve camping and the experience of a snowstorm or fallen snow
      call attention to the different genres and purposes of the two texts
      make some mention of the stylistic features of each text.

A better comparative commentary may also:

      call attention to key stylistic elements – for instance, images, metaphors, sentence structure
       and poetic form in text 2; description, metaphor and register in text 1 – including some
       mention of how such elements contribute to the texts’ meaning and purpose
      compare the setting described in text 2 with that referred to in text 1
      mention the organization and structure of each text
      identify the probable audience of text 1
      comment on the different tone and perspective of each text: e.g. the combination of personal
       recollection and instruction in text 1, the present-tense description of an experience as it is
       being lived in text 2.

The best comparative commentaries may also:

      compare in some detail the extensive use of imagery and metaphor in text 2 with the
       description in text 1, analysing the different effects in the contexts of the two genres
      note that the manual offers advice on winter camping specifically, while in the case of
       the poem, it is already springtime and the snow may be unexpected
      compare the “photograph” referred to in text 1 with the speaker’s view from the tent in
       text 2
      comment in more detail on the organization and structure of the two texts
      compare and contrast in more detail the tone and perspective of the two texts.
                                                 –4–            N12/2/A2ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


                                              SECTION B

This question invites candidates to compare excerpts from a short story and a novel, one about a
man and his office and the other about the interior of a man’s house.

A barely satisfactory comparative commentary will:

      note that both texts describe a setting: one an office, the other a house
      note that only text 4 includes dialogue
      call attention to the descriptive features of text 3
      make some comment about the characters in the texts.

The better comparative commentary may also:

      call attention to key stylistic devices – for instance, personification, colour and other kinds
       of imagery in text 3; dialogue, rhetorical questions and lists in text 4 – including some
       commentary about how such devices contribute to the overall impression created by
       each text
      comment on the significance of key details mentioned in each text
      mention the structure of each text
      note that text 3 explicitly describes the physical appearance of a character in some detail,
       while text 4 does not
      suggest inferences that might be drawn about the characters in the two texts.

The best comparative commentaries may also:

      discuss the use of key stylistic devices in some detail, including an analysis of how these
       devices contribute to the impact of each text
      suggest inferences that might be drawn about the characters in the two texts and support
       these inferences using specific examples
      comment in more detail on the structure of each text
      compare and contrast the tone and perspective of the two texts.
