N12/2/ABENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T




     88122241

ENGLISH B – STANDARD LEVEL – PAPER 1
ANGLAIS B – NIVEAU MOYEN – ÉPREUVE 1
INGLÉS B – NIVEL MEDIO – PRUEBA 1

Monday 12 November 2012 (afternoon)
Lundi 12 novembre 2012 (après-midi)
Lunes 12 de noviembre de 2012 (tarde)

1 h 30 m


TEXT BOOKLET – INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES
 Do not open this booklet until instructed to do so.
 This booklet contains all of the texts required for Paper 1.
 Answer the questions in the Question and Answer Booklet provided.

LIVRET DE TEXTES – INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS
 N’ouvrez pas ce livret avant d’y être autorisé(e).
 Ce livret contient tous les textes nécessaires à l’Épreuve 1.
 Répondez à toutes les questions dans le livret de questions et réponses fourni.

CUADERNO DE TEXTOS – INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS
 No abra este cuaderno hasta que se lo autoricen.
 Este cuaderno contiene todos los textos para la Prueba 1.
 Conteste todas las preguntas en el cuaderno de preguntas y respuestas.




8812-2241                                                                                       5 pages/páginas
                                                                 © International Baccalaureate Organization 2012
                                               –2–               N12/2/ABENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

TEXT A




       How predictive texting
       aﬀects a child’s brain
       Predictive text messaging changes the way
       children’s brains work and makes them more likely
       to make mistakes in other aspects of life, a study
       has found. Scientists say the system, which involves pressing one key per letter
   5   before the phone works out what word the user wants to type, trains young people
       to be fast but inaccurate. They claim this makes children tend to be impulsive and
       thoughtless in everyday life.

       Modern mobile phones come with a built-in dictionary which enables predictive
       texting. This diﬀers from an older system in which users had to hit keys several times
  10   per letter. But it can lead to embarrassing miscommunications because some words
       use the same keys.

       Professor Michael Abramson, a doctor who carried out the research, said: “The children
       who used their phones a lot were faster on some tests but were less accurate.
       We suspect that using mobile phones, particularly tools like predictive text, causes this.
  15   Their brains are still developing so if there are adverse eﬀects, potentially they could
       have an impact later on. The use of mobile phones is changing the way children learn
       and pushing them to become more impulsive in the way they behave.” He added that
       the eﬀects could have dangerous consequences for a whole generation.

       Professor Abramson believes functions such as predictive texting pose a risk for those
  20   whose brains are still developing. “If you’re used to entering a couple of letters and
       getting the word you want, you expect everything to be like that,” he said.

       Previous research has shown that predictive texting makes people puzzled about
       spelling. This research also says that some of the mistakes due to words sharing the
       same keys have been turned into a slang language by teenagers. They can be heard
  25   describing something as “book” when they mean it is “cool”, for example.




                                             Image: From: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Texting.jpg
                                                           Text: © Daily Mail. Used with permission.




8812-2241
                                              –3–              N12/2/ABENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

TEXT B




            The Helm Wind
      Mr Robert Smith of Somerset, England,            largely exhausted and conditions there
      asked why many local winds in various            can be remarkably calm. It finally stops
      parts of the world have their own special        when it no longer blows from the east.
      names, such as the Mistral in France,
    5 but Britain seems to have none.                  The wind can be seen for miles around
                                                  30   because a telltale bank of clouds,
      In fact, there is one – the Helm Wind.           the Helm Cloud, hugs the top of
      This is a quite spectacular wind that            the hills like a helmet. Many people
      roars down from Cross Fell, the highest          regard this as the origin of the name
      point in the Pennine Hills in the north          “Helm Wind”. Another theory claims
   10 of England. The wind rushes down the        35   that the name comes from “helm” a
      mountain, sometimes for days on end,             local word for the peak of a mountain.
      hitting any walkers who dare to venture          Though the first suggestion is more
      into its path.                                   poetic, the second seems more
                                                       likely. Several miles farther down
      According to legend, the Helm Wind          40   the valley there is another interesting
   15 helped to defeat a French army in the            phenomenon. There is often a long
      days of William the Conqueror, when it           roll of cloud, called the Helm Bar,
      blew the French cavalry off their horses         which gently rotates in the sky as the
      and gave the English an unexpected               air currents take effect. This is created
      victory.                                    45   from turbulence as air rises and sinks
                                                       in a wave to create a rolling cloud,
   20 The Helm Wind originates on the                  rather like the way a fast river sets
      eastern slopes of the Pennine Hills              off high waves when it hits shallows.
      before it rushes down Cross Fell, often          The distance between the Helm Cloud
      reaching extreme force in violent gusts.    50   and the Helm Bar depends on the air
      But by the time the wind reaches the             pressure and temperature.
   25 valley bottom a few miles below, it is




                                                                             © The Times 4/11/2008




8812-2241                                              Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                               –4–       N12/2/ABENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

TEXT C




                                     Mathematician finds                             Image removed for

                                      magic in numbers
                                                                                      copyright reasons



             The 64-year-old shuffling* a pack of cards was five when he discovered a book of magic in
             the attic and started doing tricks. Persi Diaconis is still doing tricks but today they have a
             wider purpose than mere entertainment.

             Now teaching at California’s Stanford University, Diaconis has used maths and playing cards
      5      to produce tricks that have fooled other magicians. Diaconis is hooked mostly, though,
             on randomness and probability, using mathematics to solve such concepts as how often a
             pack of cards must be shuffled before it is truly random.

             As a youngster growing up in Manhattan, Diaconis loved magic. He would hang out
             at cafés where magicians gathered, until along came the chance of a lifetime. One day
    10       Dai Vernon, one of the most respected magicians in the world, saw Diaconis practising
             his shuffling. Vernon was sitting with the other magicians, but he called Diaconis over to
             demonstrate his shuffling, which involved keeping the ace of spades at the top of the pack.
             He said, “This kid can do that, and none of you can do that”. He added, “Now why don’t
             you guys practise like that? Son, from now on you can sit with us”.

    15       The pair became friends and when Diaconis was 14, Vernon invited him on the road.
             Diaconis became the magician’s apprentice. They drove from city to city and Diaconis
             learnt everything he could from the older man. In his 20s, he was accepted into
             Harvard University and has specialised in probability theory and statistics – or the
             mathematics of randomness.

    20       Diaconis often has a go at [ – X – ] the Riemann Hypothesis. It’s one of mathematics’
             so-called $1 million Millennium problems, of which there are seven. If mathematicians
             solved any of these problems, they would win $1 million. He [ – 19 – ] that someone
             will [ – 20 – ] find the answer. “That [ – 21 – ] happening. There is something that’s
             been a [ – 22 – ] since the Greeks, and then somebody figures it out.”




                                     Text: ‘Mathematician ﬁnds magic in numbers’. Author: Catherine Masters
                         Date: Saturday 16 January 2010. Used with the permission of the New Zealand Herald.
                                                         Photo: © New Zealand Herald. Used with permission

* shufﬂing: using your hands to rearrange the order of cards

8812-2241
                                                    –5–                N12/2/ABENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX/T

TEXT D

I JUST GOT MY LICENSE
Congratulations! You’re officially part of the club. Here are a few tips to keep you both sane and safe.

Know Your Limits
As a new driver, the key is to make sure you are extra-careful and fully aware of all of your driving habits.
   • Obey all traffic rules. This includes wearing a seat belt at all times, coming to a complete stop at
     all red lights and obeying speed limits.
   • Keep alert. Keeping alert doesn’t simply mean paying attention, it means eliminating any factors
     that might detract from reaction time. Alcohol has been shown to reduce judgment, driving ability
     and alertness.
Responsible driving can also help you save money. A good driver is less likely to pay money for car repairs
and increased insurance premiums than a risky or bad driver.

Know Other People’s Limits
It’s important to be aware of your surroundings. For instance, when a light turns green, make sure the
intersection is clear before you go; someone may run a red light and be headed for you.
   • Maintain a safe following distance. If you’re too close to someone else you won’t be able to
     react in time if they lose control in front of you or slam on the brakes.
   • See the future. This means recognizing and anticipating potential dangers before they develop.
     If someone three cars ahead of you brakes, know that you’ll probably also have to stop.
Driver training never ends. So consider taking a driving course every few years to keep your knowledge and
safety skills fresh. Not only will this help you sharpen your driving skills, it may save you some money on
car insurance. It could also show your parents you’re serious about being a good driver.

Know Your Car
Taking care of your car ensures that it’s in good condition and functioning properly. Many breakdowns occur
because drivers neglect routine maintenance, and breakdowns are expensive. Try getting familiar with:
   • pumping gas
   • keeping track of maintenance schedules
   • checking and changing oil.
Practice makes perfect. So get out there and drive, keeping safety first.


                          ©1995-2012. The Nemours Foundation/KidsHealth®. Reprinted with permission.




8812-2241
