N12/2/A2ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


  November / novembre / noviembre 2012


        ENGLISH / ANGLAIS / INGLÉS A2


                       Standard Level
                       Niveau Moyen
                        Nivel Medio

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2



5 pages/páginas
                          –2–          N12/2/A2ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive
use of examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate
and must not be reproduced or distributed to any other
person without the authorization of IB Cardiff.
                                               –3–           N12/2/A2ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


Standard Level, paper 2

These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking. They are not offered as
an exhaustive and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must rigidly adhere.
Good ideas or angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate.
Similarly, answers which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here should not be so
heavily penalized as to distort appreciation of individuality.

These questions invite the candidate to consider the Cultural Option “Language and culture”.

1.   A barely satisfactory answer will identify two specific language groups and show that one is
     more dominant than the other.

     A better answer will also explore the ways in which the speakers of one language have
     dominated another.

     The best answers may also consider the question from a sociolinguistic perspective and
     consider for example, language and region or class. The best answers will provide examples
     and illustrations to support their assessment of the ways in which the speakers of one
     language/dialect can dominate another.


2.   A barely satisfactory answer will identify some advantages of being either multilingual or
     monolingual.

     A better answer will explore in more detail the advantages of being either multilingual or
     monolingual.

     The best answers will respond to the terms “communication” and “cultural identity” whilst
     exploring in detail the advantages of being either multilingual or monolingual.
                                                –4–            N12/2/A2ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M


These questions invite the candidate to consider the Cultural Option “Media and culture”.

3.   A barely satisfactory answer will identify the main role of the Internet within the mass media.

     A better answer will provide examples of the ways in which the Internet has changed the
     nature of the mass media.

     The best answers will define the changing and transformative role that the Internet now plays
     and back up ideas with details and relevant examples.


4.   A barely satisfactory answer will take a position on the question of whether censorship of the
     mass media is ever justified or whether the idea of free speech should always be protected.
     One or two examples will be given.

     A better answer will drawn on appropriate examples to craft its argument regarding
     censorship versus free speech, and will show a more detailed awareness of the issue. It will
     have a coherent structure.

     The best answers will demonstrate a range of reasons for the arguments maintained, and will
     support those arguments with examples that are pertinent, precise and varied. The essays will
     be well organized.



This question invites the candidate to consider the Cultural Option “Future issues”.

5.   A barely satisfactory answer will acknowledge an affirmative or negative position and will
     provide some reasons for its argument. One or two examples will be given.

     A better answer will draw on appropriate examples in order to argue that in the next 50 years
     most people’s standards of living will or will not improve. The essay will have a coherent
     structure.

     The best answers will demonstrate a range of reasons for the arguments maintained and will
     support those arguments with examples that are pertinent, precise and varied. The essays will
     be well organized.



This question invites the candidate to consider the Cultural Option “Global issues”.

6.   A barely satisfactory answer will identify and discuss an important global issue.

     A better answer will also explain why the issue should be at the centre of global attention.

     The best answers will provide detailed supporting evidence to show why this global issue
     should be at the centre of global attention.
                                                –5–             N12/2/A2ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ0/XX/M



This question invites the candidate to consider the Cultural Option “Social issues”.

7.    A barely satisfactory answer will identify a social issue and make some connection between
      the social issue and poverty.

      A better answer will also discuss the notion that poverty is at the heart of many global issues
      and show the part that it plays in a particular social issue.

      The best answers will provide detailed evidence to show whether poverty is or is not at the
      heart of the particular social issue identified.



These questions invite the candidate to consider a Literary Option.

8.    A barely satisfactory answer will identify the places where at least two characters live and
      discuss the influence of the places chosen on the characters’ lives.

      A better answer will also provide some detail as to the home, setting or location, and show
      how the place may have influenced the characters’ lives.

      The best answers may show an insightful understanding of the relationship between the events
      of the literary work and the places that they are set.


9.    A barely satisfactory answer will discuss the titles of at least two literary texts and make some
      comments about their significance.

      A better answer will also provide some detail to explain the significance of the titles
      more fully.

      The best answers may include detail and textual evidence to show the significance of the titles
      in a literal sense but perhaps metaphorically as well.


10.   A barely satisfactory answer will identify two characters who could be considered role models
      for young people and make some suggestion as to why.

      A better answer will also provide a more detailed analysis as to why the characters
      chosen could be considered role models for young people.

      The best answers may also discuss what it means to be a role model and what young people in
      particular might look for in a role model and explain with detailed examples why the chosen
      characters can be considered role models for young people.
