M11/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX




     22112239

ENGLISH B – HIGHER LEVEL – PAPER 2
ANGLAIS B – NIVEAU SUPÉRIEUR – ÉPREUVE 2
INGLÉS B – NIVEL SUPERIOR – PRUEBA 2

Tuesday 10 May 2011 (afternoon)
Mardi 10 mai 2011 (après-midi)
Martes 10 de mayo de 2011 (tarde)

1 h 30 m


instructions to candidates
 Do not turn over this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Choose one task.

INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS
 Ne retournez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
 Choisissez une tâche.

INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS
 No dé la vuelta al examen hasta que se lo autoricen.
 Elija una tarea.




2211-2239                                                                                       2 pages/páginas
                                                                 © International Baccalaureate Organization 2011
                                                    –2–                 M11/2/ABENG/HP2/ENG/TZ0/XX

Complete one of the following tasks in at least 400 words.

1.    Write a letter to one of your favourite literary characters in which you tell him/her how his/her
      thoughts and actions have affected your understanding of love. Remember to mention the name of
      the book.


2.    Young people have a love-hate relationship with TV reality shows. Your teacher has set this as the
      topic of your next essay. Write an essay discussing the positive and negative aspects of reality shows.


3.    As one of your CAS activities, you have decided to organize a summer drama camp for IB Diploma
      students at your school. Write a brochure in which you encourage students to join the camp and
      describe the activities you have planned and their benefits.


4.    A famous person visited your town. As a member of your school’s Journalism Club, you interviewed
      this person and asked about what s/he does to support humanitarian causes. Write an article based
      on this interview to be published in your school magazine.


5.    Your school’s Student Council is looking for a restaurant in which to hold the senior class dinner.
      You have a few restaurants in mind which you think everyone will like. Write a review of at least
      three restaurants to be presented at the next Student Council meeting.


6.    Your parents and the parents of your best friend have agreed that, before you start university, you will
      both take a gap year with all expenses paid. Write an e-mail to your best friend suggesting the ways
      in which the two of you could spend this time.




2211-2239
