M11/2/A2ENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX




     22112015

ENGLISH A2 – STANDARD LEVEL – PAPER 1
ANGLAIS A2 – NIVEAU MOYEN – ÉPREUVE 1
INGLÉS A2 – NIVEL MEDIO – PRUEBA 1

Tuesday 3 May 2011 (morning)
Mardi 3 mai 2011 (matin)
Martes 3 de mayo de 2011 (mañana)

1 hour 30 minutes / 1 heure 30 minutes / 1 hora 30 minutos


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

   Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
   Section A consists of two passages for comparative commentary.
   Section B consists of two passages for comparative commentary.
   Choose either Section A or Section B. Write one comparative commentary.
   It is not compulsory for you to respond directly to the guiding questions provided. However,
    you may use them if you wish.

INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS

   N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
   La section A comporte deux passages à commenter.
   La section B comporte deux passages à commenter.
   Choisissez soit la section A, soit la section B. Écrivez un commentaire comparatif.
   Vous n’êtes pas obligé(e) de répondre directement aux questions d’orientation fournies.
    Vous pouvez toutefois les utiliser si vous le souhaitez.

INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS

   No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
   En la Sección A hay dos fragmentos para comentar.
   En la Sección B hay dos fragmentos para comentar.
   Elija la Sección A o la Sección B. Escriba un comentario comparativo.
   No es obligatorio responder directamente a las preguntas de orientación que se incluyen,
    pero puede utilizarlas si lo desea.




2211-2015                                                                                   5 pages/páginas
                                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2011
                                                                    –2–                        M11/2/A2ENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Choose either Section A or Section B.

                                                              SECTION A

Analyse and compare the following two texts.

Discuss the similarities and differences between the texts and their theme(s). Include comments on the
ways the authors use elements such as structure, tone, images and other stylistic devices to communicate
their purposes. It is not compulsory for you to respond directly to the guiding questions provided.
However, you are encouraged to use them as starting points for your comparative commentary.

Text 1

                     An eight-year-old girl in the neighbourhood lugged over her five Barbies1, in two pink
            vehicles, for my inspection.  While twirling and braiding the long blonde hair on one of them,
            she explained that although she doesn’t want to be Barbie, she really likes to play with her.  
            “We make up stories that are like real life and then we make the Barbies act them out,” she said
      5     with admirable clarity.  “Her body isn’t very realistic,” she admits, pointing the ballistic2 bosom
            of one toward me.  “In fact, the only realistic thing about it is her ears.”  If she were designing
            them, she would go for more variation.  “Like, it would be neat to have a tattooed Barbie, or one
            with a bigger head.  Her head is too small for her body.”  And Ken’s3 definitely stuck in his ways.  
            “I wouldn’t mind a bald Ken, for example” …
    10               However retrograde4 she appears to be, I sense Barbie is a survivor.  Her maddeningly firm
            little bosom and fashion-victim personality, her fickle5 careers are all voodoo tricks to ward off 6
            parental approval.  If we had given Barbie a social conscience and sensible shoes, she might have
            moldered away at the bottom of the toy bin.  As it is, girls play with their uneducational Barbies
            as they always have, playing out the “mean babysitter” scenario, madly acting away, with no
    15      parent-pleasing values to inhibit their stories.  Barbie is a blank slate – she can create a private,
            privileged space where any and every feeling is permitted.   May Barbie be “bad” as long as
            she reigns, for it is her lack of redeeming social value that helps keep her true to the child’s sense
            of play, instead of the parents’ worst fears.

                                                                                    Marni Jackson, adapted from the essay
                                                                   “Gals and Dolls: The Moral Value of ‘Bad’ Toys” (1991)



1
    Barbies: fashion dolls created in the 1950s.  Barbie has long blond hair and an impossibly perfect figure
2
    ballistic: cone-like
3
    Ken: Barbie’s less-popular male counterpart
4
    retrograde: backward, un-modern
5
    fickle: changeable
6
    ward off: guard against




2211-2015
                                                                   –3–                        M11/2/A2ENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Text 2

                                                             Dolls Like Me

                           Building Self-esteem In Children of Color, One Toy At A Time

                   We are a toy retailer with a conscience.  We provide better books, toys and baby gifts that
            accurately represent today’s children.
                   We recognize how important it is that all children have multicultural books, toys and
            characters – they teach acceptance, tolerance, cultural awareness and self-esteem.   This is
      5     particularly important for children of color.  For children of color, these products also help enhance
            their sense of belonging in our society and are key to their sense of self-importance.  Yet, despite
            our desire to develop strong, healthy, sensitive and aware children, there is still a painfully small
            sampling of toys that resemble America’s growing population of multicultural children.
                   We help meet this growing need by researching and identifying unique and interesting
    10      multicultural children’s products and bringing them to you at fair and reasonable prices.

            Our Philosophy

                  Our philosophy is simple: children need to see the world the way it really is.  They need to
            begin to develop global understanding, cultural awareness, and self-esteem as early as possible –
            and children of color need positive images that look like them.  We provide quality toys that:

            – Reflect all children in a positive light, particularly children of color …  We take our commitment
    15      to building self-esteem seriously!

            – Are age-appropriate …  No Br*** dolls* here!

            – Are safe …  Review our Toy Safety statement for more information.

            – Are fun …  Isn’t that what it’s all about?

            We also provide parents with resources and information.

    20                                       Because every child deserves a “doll like me”.

                                                                              From the website www.dollslikeme.com (2010)


* Br*** dolls: Bratz dolls; popular and controversial line of plastic dolls distinguished by skinny bodies,
   revealing clothing and make-up



       – Comment on point of view in these two texts, in terms of genre and purpose.

       – How does the tone differ in each text and what are its effects?

       – Examine the similarities and differences in the stylistic devices used.


2211-2015                                                                      Turn over / Tournez la page / Véase al dorso
                                                                  –4–                       M11/2/A2ENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

                                                            SECTION B

Analyse and compare the following two texts.

Discuss the similarities and differences between the texts and their theme(s). Include comments on the
ways the authors use elements such as structure, tone, images and other stylistic devices to communicate
their purposes. It is not compulsory for you to respond directly to the guiding questions provided.
However, you are encouraged to use them as starting points for your comparative commentary.

Text 3

                   Lately, I’ve been thinking about death.
                   Actually, I haven’t.
                   I don’t like to think about death.  Whenever the subject of death springs to mind, the two
            thoughts that form in my brain are scary, and go away.  It’s my son, Lester, who has been thinking
      5     about death, and he has been asking me all sorts of practical questions.
                   “How do people get to Heaven, do they walk?”
                   He tossed out this particular query from the back seat of our rented Pontiac Firebird while
            we were driving to the Cape Breton Regional Hospital to visit his granny, who had told him two
            days previous – tremulous1, clutching a rosary2 – that she expected to be in Heaven soon with
    10      her husband, Stan.  This is not the sort of thing that I would generally encourage grandparents to
            say to five-year-olds, particularly when their mother has not yet prepared them for the concept of
            finite3 existence.  But Lester took from it what he could, which is to say nothing, beyond the idea
            of Heaven itself as a new destination.  Now Earth consists of four places: our summer cottage,
            Toronto, Cape Breton and Heaven.
    15             The North American wind was buffeting the car, so cold that my earlobes were still throbbing
            in spite of the car’s heater and I could barely keep my shivering hands still on the wheel.
                   “No, I don’t think they walk to Heaven,” I replied.
                   In truth, I haven’t got the faintest idea how people get to Heaven.   I have never read
            the Bible.   Nor the Talmud, the Koran or the Tibetan Book of the Dead.   If any of them have
    20      specified the transit route to the afterlife, I am simply unaware.  So.
                   “They float,” I told Lester, experimentally.
                   “Do they float in the lake?”  Lester asked.
                   “I beg your pardon?”
                   “When people go to Heaven, do they have to wear a life jacket?”
    25             “No, they – I don’t think they float on water, Lester, they float in the air.  They don’t float like
            fish, they float like leaves.  Except up.”
                   “Where, up?”


                             Excerpted from Believe Me by Patricia Pearson. Copyright © 2005 Patricia Pearson.
                                            Reprinted by permission of Random House Canada.

1
    tremulous: trembling, shaking
2
    rosary: string of beads used in praying
3
    finite: having bounds or limits




2211-2015
                                                                 –5–                      M11/2/A2ENG/SP1/ENG/TZ0/XX

Text 4

                                           Explaining Death in a Child’s Terms

                   Be honest with kids and encourage questions.  This can be hard because you may not have all
            of the answers.  But it’s important to create an atmosphere of comfort and openness, and send the
            message that there’s no one right or wrong way to feel.  You might also share any spiritual beliefs
            you have about death.
      5            A child’s capacity to understand death – and your approach to discussing it – will vary
            according to the child’s age.  Each child is unique, but here are some rough guidelines to keep
            in mind.
                   Until kids are about 5 or 6 years old, their view of the world is very literal.  So explain the
            death in basic and concrete terms.  If the loved one was ill or elderly, for example, you might
    10      explain that the person’s body wasn’t working anymore and the doctors couldn’t fix it.  If someone
            dies suddenly, like in an accident, you might explain what happened – that because of this very sad
            event, the person’s body stopped working.  You may have to explain that “dying” or “dead” means
            that the body stopped working.
                   Kids this young often have a hard time understanding that all people and living things
    15      eventually die, and that it’s final and they won’t come back.  So even after you’ve explained this,
            kids may continue to ask where the loved one is or when the person is returning.  As frustrating as
            this can be, continue to calmly reiterate that the person has died and can’t come back.
                   Avoid using euphemisms*, such as telling kids that the loved one “went away” or “went
            to sleep” or even that your family “lost” the person.   Because young kids think so literally,
    20      such phrases might inadvertently make them afraid to go to sleep or fearful whenever someone
            goes away.
                   Also remember that kids’ questions may sound much deeper than they actually are.  
            For example, a 5-year-old who asks where someone who died is now probably isn’t asking whether
            there’s an afterlife.  Rather, kids might be satisfied hearing that someone who died is now in the
    25      cemetery.  This may also be a time to share your beliefs about an afterlife or heaven if that is part
            of your belief system.  
                                                         © 1995-2011. The Nemours Foundation/KidsHealth®. Reprinted with permission.




* euphemisms: the use of mild expressions rather than ones thought to be harsh or blunt



       – What point of view are these two texts written from?

       – How does the tone differ in each text and to what effect?

       – How is death and dying represented in each of these texts?




2211-2015
