M10/1/A1ENG/HP2/ENG/TZ1/XX




       22100086


ENGLISH A1 – HIGHER LEVEL – PAPER 2
ANGLAIS A1 – NIVEAU SUPÉRIEUR – ÉPREUVE 2
INGLÉS A1 – NIVEL SUPERIOR – PRUEBA 2

Monday 10 May 2010 (morning)
Lundi 10 mai 2010 (matin)
Lunes 10 de mayo de 2010 (mañana)

2 hours / 2 heures / 2 horas


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

 Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on at least two of the Part 3 works
  you have studied. You may include in your answer a discussion of a Part 2 work of the same
  genre if relevant. Answers which are not based on a discussion of at least two Part 3 works will
  not score high marks.
 You are not permitted to bring copies of the works you have studied into the examination room.

INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS

 N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
 Traitez un seul sujet de composition. Vous devez baser votre réponse sur au moins deux
  des œuvres de la 3e partie que vous avez étudiées. Le cas échéant, vous pouvez inclure
  dans votre réponse une discussion sur une œuvre du même genre littéraire étudiée dans
  la 2e partie du programme. Les réponses qui ne sont pas basées sur au moins deux des
  œuvres de la 3e partie n’obtiendront pas une note élevée.
 Vous n’êtes pas autorisé(e) à amener des exemplaires des œuvres que vous avez étudiées
  dans la salle d’examen.

INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS

 No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
 Elija un tema de redacción. Su respuesta deberá basarse en al menos dos de las obras
  estudiadas en la Parte 3. Se podrán hacer comentarios sobre una obra de la Parte 2 del
  mismo género, si fuera necesario. Las respuestas que no incluyan una discusión sobre al
  menos dos obras de la Parte 3 no recibirán notas altas.
 No se permite traer a la sala de examen copias de las obras estudiadas.




2210-0086                                                                                   3 pages/páginas
                                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2010
                                                  –2–                M10/1/A1ENG/HP2/ENG/TZ1/XX

Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on at least two of the Part 3 works you
have studied. You may include in your answer a discussion of a Part 2 work of the same genre if relevant.
Answers which are not based on a discussion of at least two Part 3 works will not score high marks.

Drama

1.    Drama can be said to contain something of the ritual – something to be repeated in front of an
      audience for a significant occasion, event or purpose, or simply everyday routines and patterns
      of behaviour. In what ways have at least two plays you have studied made use of the notion of
      ritual in this way and to what effect?


2.    “The dramatic life of any play often emerges from what is not said rather than what is.”
      Examine the role and significance of all or any of silence, suggestion and subtext in at least two
      plays you have studied.



Poetry

3.    “We see, not with our eyes but with our mind.” Compare the way in which at least two poets
      you have studied explore the role of the imagination and the success with which they use it as a
      means to interpret the external world.


4.    “Poetry should be difficult because life is complex.” Referring closely to poems by at least two
      poets you have studied, discuss how far you agree with this statement.



Prose: The Novel and Short Story

5.    “Where other people exist genuine individuality is never possible.” To what extent does this
      statement reflect the experiences of the central characters and the problems encountered by them
      in at least two works of prose fiction you have read?


6.    Discuss the ways in which at least two writers you have studied have sought to undermine or
      interfere with the “voices” of their characters in order to persuade, manipulate or instruct their
      audience.




2210-0086
                                                    –3–                 M10/1/A1ENG/HP2/ENG/TZ1/XX

Prose: Other than the Novel and Short Story

7.    “Surprisingly, non-fictional prose as a genre tends to be intensely personal, betraying a close sense of
      the personality of the writer.” Exploring at least two works you have studied, say how far you agree
      with this statement.


8.    “In order to achieve its aims, non-fictional prose cannot confine itself to documenting experience
      but must make use of persuasion and/or heightened imaginative effects.” Exploring at least two
      works you have studied, say how far you agree with this statement.



General Questions on Literature

9.    Compare the presentation and significance of older people in at least two works you have studied.


10.   “With the exception, perhaps, of music and dance, in all kinds of art it is possible to distinguish the
      content from the form.” In what ways do at least two works you have studied make use of this
      relationship between content and form?


11.   Discuss the role of education and/or learning (in the widest sense) in at least two works you have
      studied.


12.   Literature often deals with the themes of coincidence, chance, or accident. To what extent, and in
      what ways, have at least two works you have studied dealt with all or any of these ideas?




2210-0086
