M10/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX




       22100092


ENGLISH A1 – STANDARD LEVEL – PAPER 2
ANGLAIS A1 – NIVEAU MOYEN – ÉPREUVE 2
INGLÉS A1 – NIVEL MEDIO – PRUEBA 2

Monday 10 May 2010 (morning)
Lundi 10 mai 2010 (matin)
Lunes 10 de mayo de 2010 (mañana)

1 hour 30 minutes / 1 heure 30 minutes / 1 hora 30 minutos


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

 Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on at least two of the Part 3 works
  you have studied. You may include in your answer a discussion of a Part 2 work of the same
  genre if relevant. Answers which are not based on a discussion of at least two Part 3 works will
  not score high marks.
 You are not permitted to bring copies of the works you have studied into the examination room.

INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS

 N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
 Traitez un seul sujet de composition. Vous devez baser votre réponse sur au moins deux des
  œuvres de la 3e partie que vous avez étudiées. Le cas échéant, vous pouvez inclure dans votre
  réponse une discussion sur une œuvre du même genre littéraire étudiée dans la 2e partie
  du programme. Les réponses qui ne sont pas basées sur au moins deux des œuvres de
  la 3e partie n’obtiendront pas une note élevée.
 Vous n’êtes pas autorisé(e) à amener des exemplaires des œuvres que vous avez étudiées dans
  la salle d’examen.

INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS

 No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
 Elija un tema de redacción. Su respuesta deberá basarse en al menos dos de las obras
  estudiadas en la Parte 3. Se podrán hacer comentarios sobre una obra de la Parte 2 del
  mismo género, si fuera necesario. Las respuestas que no incluyan una discusión sobre al
  menos dos obras de la Parte 3 no recibirán notas altas.
 No se permite traer a la sala de examen copias de las obras estudiadas.




2210-0092                                                                                   3 pages/páginas
                                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2010
                                                   –2–                  M10/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX

Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on at least two of the Part 3 works you
have studied. You may include in your answer a discussion of a Part 2 work of the same genre if relevant.
Answers which are not based on a discussion of at least two Part 3 works will not score high marks.

Drama

1.    With reference to at least two plays by different dramatists, consider in what ways and to what
      extent they present life as being difficult to understand.


2.    Dramatists introduce their main characters in different ways and with differing effects. Compare or
      contrast the ways in which characters have been introduced in at least two plays you have studied,
      and consider what dramatic use is made of these introductions.



Poetry

3.    “Some poets criticise; other poets praise.” In what ways are criticism and/or praise conveyed in
      works by at least two poets?


4.    “Poetry has a greater emotional impact than prose.” Discuss the techniques by which at least two
      poets evoke emotional responses.



Prose: The Novel and Short Story

5.    In what ways do authors convey their attitudes and ideas by using one or more points of view?
      Discuss with reference to works by at least two writers.


6.    In what ways, and to what effect, have at least two writers made use of rivers, lakes, oceans and/or
      water in any form?



Prose: Other than the Novel and Short Story

7.    “Cities are like mazes in which one can lose or find oneself.” Discuss this statement with relation to
      works of at least two writers.


8.    In what ways, and to what effect, have at least two writers conveyed self-hatred and/or self-esteem
      with respect to themselves or others?




2210-0092
                                                    –3–                  M10/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ2/XX

General Questions on Literature

9.    In what ways, and to what effect, have physical and/or spiritual journeys been presented in works
      by at least two writers?


10.   Hunger, thirst, physical deprivation – all of these have featured in literature. Consider the role of one
      or more of these elements and how they have been presented in works by at least two writers.


11.   Consider the presentation and effects of ignorance or lack of awareness in works by at least two
      writers.


12.   Sounds and noises feature in many works of literature. How have at least two writers included
      sounds and/or noises in their work and in what way have they been made significant?




2210-0092
