M10/1/A1ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


                    May / mai / mayo 2010

        ENGLISH / ANGLAIS / INGLÉS A1

                        Higher Level
                      Niveau Supérieur
                       Nivel Superior

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




5 pages/páginas
                              –2–         M10/1/A1ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorisation of IB Cardiff.
                                                –3–            M10/1/A1ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


Provisional marking

During the early period of your marking your team leader (or principal examiner in the case
of team leaders) will contact you to discuss the standard of marking and the interpretation of
the marking notes. Before this discussion, it is necessary to have provisionally marked
(in pencil) about ten scripts.

If your team leader has failed to make contact with you, please try to make contact with him
or her yourself, by phone or e-mail.


                                 ASSESSMENT CRITERIA
Criteria A and B

The danger of rewarding or penalizing the use of illustration/references/quotations twice in both
these categories should be avoided.

Criterion B

The passages for commentary offer candidates a variety of possibilities for analysis and
interpretation. The test of any interpretation is that it has to be tied carefully to the words, images
and relevant details of the text. Personal response, in the same way, must be tied to the passage.

In the descriptor for level 2, there may be other conditions under which a “2” may be awarded,
such as a limited use of evidence or a generally weak response. Substantiation of points may be
made but be very weak/superficial.

What is sought by “personal response” is an individual voice and engagement with how the
text works. Engaged and individual commentaries will usually make themselves clear by the depth
of insight into the text and the quality and interest of the details cited in support.

The first person singular does not automatically constitute a personal response and conversely an
impersonal academic style does not necessarily indicate a lack of personal response.

Criterion C

“Awareness” and “appreciation” of literary features are the key elements under this criterion.
The mere labelling, without appreciation, of literary features will not score the highest marks.
On the other hand, the candidate who is attentive to literary features and deals with them in a
meaningful way, but who does not consistently use the vocabulary of literary criticism, can still be
awarded the higher achievement levels.

Reminder: the term “literary features” is broad and includes elements as basic as plot, character
etc., attention to which is valid and must be rewarded as appropriate.
                                                 –4–            M10/1/A1ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M



Criterion D

Any form of structuring to the commentary will be rewarded if it is effective and appropriate.
Different conventions are in operation and therefore all approaches, including the linear, (line by
line analysis) are acceptable and will be judged on the basis of their effectiveness.
Examiners should remember that structure does not exist by itself, but any structure must be
measured by appropriate reference to the passage or poem and by its capacity to integrate these
towards the development of an organized and coherent commentary.

Reminder: In this criterion, supporting examples must be evaluated in terms of how fluently they
are incorporated/integrated to shape/advance the argument, not in terms of their appropriateness
or accuracy.

Criterion E

If you have reservations about awarding a four, you should ensure that these are well founded
before awarding a three. The breadth of achievement in level three sometimes makes examiners
reluctant to award four.

Use judgment when dealing with lapses in grammar, spelling and punctuation; therefore do not
unduly penalize.

Mechanical accuracy is only a part of this criterion.            Ensure that all the other elements
are considered.

Examiners should be careful to avoid being prejudiced in their application of this criterion by
achievement levels in other criteria. It is possible to score highly on this criterion even if candidates
have scored in the lower levels on the other criteria, and vice versa.

These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking and as a supplement to
the published external assessment criteria for written paper 1. They are not offered as an exhaustive
and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must rigidly adhere. Good ideas or
angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate. Similarly, answers
which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here may still be very good answers.

Of course, some of the points listed below will appear in weaker papers, but are unlikely to
be developed.
                                                –5–           M10/1/A1ENG/HP1/ENG/TZ2/XX/M


The following elements are particularly relevant to criteria A, B and C:

Question 1. Prose

Satisfactory and good papers, three to four, on a spectrum of increasing precision and detail, may:

  discuss the alternating presentation of the two women, and something of the contrasts, in lines
  1–22
  consider the presentation of Mr Marroner
  show a sense of the viewpoints (Mrs Marroner/Mr Marroner/the narrator) towards Gerta and the
  situation in general
  make some comment on syntax and paragraph structure
  offer an explanation of the implications of “She wept for two” and “something which could not
  be denied”.

Very good to excellent papers, four to five, on a spectrum of increasing sophistication and literary
sensibility, may also:

  notice finer nuances and most of the significant details in lines 1–22, and the way access is given
  to the thoughts/feelings of the two women
  show a more subtle appreciation of the neutrality/objectivity of report of Mr Marroner’s
  conversations and letters
  consider the sensuous nature of some of the detail, especially in relation to Gerta
  notice irony and other ways in which the situation is explicitly/implicitly revealed during the
  course of the passage, perhaps even (in the very best) suggesting a certain playfulness
  consider more closely the syntax and structure, e.g. the build-up of clauses in long but clearly
  phrased and balanced sentences
  observe the subtleties of the tone of the piece, possibly as a guide to where the reader’s
  sympathies might lie.


Question 2. Poem

Satisfactory and good papers, three to four, on a spectrum of increasing precision and detail, may:

  discuss the characteristics of being foreign
  comment on what we learn about the speaker
  make some comment on the final stanza
  consider the effects of structure
  note and discuss the use of simile and metaphor.

Very good to excellent papers, four to five, on a spectrum of increasing sophistication and literary
sensibility, may also:

  show awareness of the identity of the “you” towards the end of the poem
  explore wider notions of identity in the poem
  give more detailed comments on imagery (food, domestic conditions, scratching, etc.)
  show an awareness of the role of language and writing in the poem
  show a more perceptive understanding of the final stanza.
