M10/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


                    May / mai / mayo 2010

        ENGLISH / ANGLAIS / INGLÉS A1

                       Standard Level
                       Niveau Moyen
                        Nivel Medio

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2




8 pages/páginas
                              –2–          M10/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive use of
examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate and
must not be reproduced or distributed to any other person
without the authorisation of IB Cardiff.
                                                –3–            M10/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


Provisional marking

During the early period of your marking your team leader (or principal examiner in the case
of team leaders) will contact you to discuss the standard of marking and the interpretation of
the marking notes. Before this discussion, it is necessary to have provisionally marked
(in pencil) about ten scripts.

If your team leader has failed to make contact with you, please try to make contact with him
or her yourself, by phone or e-mail.


                                   ASSESSMENT CRITERIA

Criteria A and B

The danger of rewarding or penalizing the use of illustration/references/quotations twice in both
these categories should be avoided.

Criterion B

“Personal response” and “independence of thought” appear as the levels of the descriptors increase.
What is sought is an engaged and individual treatment of the chosen topic. Engaged and individual
essays will usually make themselves clear by showing insight into the implications of the question
and the quality and interest of the details cited in support.

The first person singular does not automatically constitute a personal response and conversely an
impersonal academic style does not necessarily indicate a lack of personal response.

Criterion C

It is expected that every question set will provide candidates with ample opportunities to
demonstrate their awareness of the demands of this criterion. However, where a question does not
explicitly offer such opportunities, examiners should interpret criterion C broadly, to ensure that
candidates are not unfairly disadvantaged. In such cases it would be sufficient for candidates
to show, as appropriate to the question, an awareness of how elements such as plot, character,
setting, structure, voice, etc. are used by writers to meet their purposes. No matter how the question
is phrased, candidates must also address related matters of style and technique.

“Awareness” and “appreciation” of literary features are the key elements under this criterion.
The mere labelling, without appreciation, of literary features will not score the highest marks.
On the other hand, the candidate who is attentive to literary features and deals with them in a
meaningful way, but who does not consistently use the vocabulary of literary criticism, can still be
awarded the higher achievement levels.

Reminder: the term “literary features” is broad and includes elements as basic as plot, character
etc., attention to which is valid and must be rewarded as appropriate.
                                                 –4–            M10/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


Criterion D

Any form of structuring to the essay will be rewarded if it is effective and appropriate. Different
conventions are in operation and therefore all approaches are acceptable and will be judged on the
basis of their effectiveness. Examiners should remember that structure does not exist by itself,
but any structure must be measured by appropriate reference to the terms of the question and by its
capacity to integrate these towards the development of an organized and coherent essay.

Reminder: In this criterion, supporting examples must be evaluated in terms of how fluently they
are incorporated/integrated to shape/advance the argument, not in terms of their appropriateness
or accuracy.

Criterion E

If you have reservations about awarding a four, you should ensure that these are well founded
before awarding a three. The broadness of achievement in level three sometimes makes examiners
reluctant to award four.

Judgment needs to be used when dealing with lapses in grammar, spelling and punctuation;
therefore do not unduly penalize.

Mechanical accuracy is only part of this criterion. Ensure that all the other elements are considered.

Examiners should be careful to avoid being prejudiced in their application of this criterion by
achievement levels in other criteria. It is possible to score highly on this criterion even if candidates
have scored in the lower levels on other criteria, and vice versa.

These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking and as a
supplement to the published external assessment criteria for written paper 2. They are not
offered as an exhaustive and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must
rigidly adhere. Good ideas or angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded
as appropriate. Similarly, answers which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested
here should not be so heavily penalized as to distort appreciation of individuality.

With reference to criterion C, the better answers will contain examples that show an adequate
sense of stylistic features with some awareness of their effects, using critical analysis and
pertinent detail.

The best answers will show a strong sense of the stylistic and comparable features of the
works, as well as the effects of these features.

Of course, some of the points listed below will appear in weaker papers, but are unlikely to
be developed.

These apply to all answers below.
                                               –5–           M10/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M




All adequate to good answers (3–4) must include some pertinent detail (described,
paraphrased or directly quoted) to support assertions and reveal knowledge of the texts
studied. Relevant discussion of literary features must appear in every response. Answers
should evince some discernible form of organization and demonstrate standard written
English.

Good to excellent answers (4–5) must be grounded in the features demanded for “adequate”
answers and may go beyond that basis in the ways described below as well as in other,
somewhat unpredictable features which show individual thinking and an engaged,
well-supported address of the texts.

Drama

1.   Adequate to good answers will identify the issue of social class and one or more of the ways
     in which it is represented in at least two of the works. An attempt to address the issue of
     its/their dramatic significance will also be made.

     Good to excellent answers may provide more sophisticated analysis of the way(s) in which
     the issue(s) of social class is/are presented and address the degree(s) of significance in more
     detail. A greater awareness of dramatic importance (in terms of portrayal of character,
     creation of tension, furtherance of the play’s action and so on) may well be shown.


2.   Adequate to good answers will identify examples of “rational” and “irrational” behaviour and
     discuss the relationship, possibly including tension, between the two. They will show some
     awareness of the techniques used to present both the tension/relationship and behaviour as
     well as make some effort to explore the impact on dramatic action.

     Good to excellent answers may offer more detailed and persuasive analysis of the presentation
     of rational and irrational behaviour. Supporting detail is likely to be more pertinent.
     Increasingly subtle assessment of the way in which dramatic action is developed through the
     resulting relationship (possibly including tension) may also be demonstrated.
                                              –6–           M10/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


Poetry

 Poems should be taken from the works of at least two poets.

 If the candidate fails to use at least two poets, mark down two levels in criterion A,
 Knowledge and Understanding of Works and criterion B, Response to the Question.

 Contrary to previous instructions, answers must not be penalized for using two poems only,
 providing each poem is by a different poet.

3.   Note: the identification of any means through which poets employ “sound” in their
     works should be rewarded.

     Adequate to good answers will be able to identify various kinds of sound-related poetic
     devices and suggest some of the fundamental effects achieved by them.

     Good to excellent answers may provide a more sophisticated understanding of the varied
     ways in which listening to poetry is a different experience from reading it. In addition to
     exploring the effects of sound-related poetic devices with increasing subtlety, they may
     additionally consider the devices’ fundamental role in the creation of meaning.


4.   Note: responses to this question should not be judged primarily on the exactness of the
     definition provided for the terms “affirm” and “console” but the candidate’s ability to
     provide relevant examples for whatever form the definitions have taken. This is in
     order to widen the possibility of “relevant” responses in light of the terms used.

     Adequate to good answers will identify the presence of the chosen capacities of poetry,
     address some of the stylistic ways by which they are presented and their effects in the works.

     Good to excellent answers may interpret affirmation or consolation in a more persuasive and
     detailed manner. Other interpretations of these capacities may also show increased
     complexity. They may show an increased ability to demonstrate the technical and stylistic
     means through which these capacities of poetry are achieved.
                                              –7–           M10/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


Prose: The Novel and Short Story

5.   Adequate to good answers will identify one or more social problems in at least two of the
     works, show some understanding of the ways these problems are presented and their role in
     the works.

     Good to excellent answers may show more sophisticated understanding of the social problems
     themselves, the manner of their presentation and authorial purpose in the works as a whole.


6.   Note: “narrative perspective” may be understood in a number of ways: examiners
     should be open to responses about “perspective” and “point of view” or “voice” in
     the works.

     Adequate to good answers will show some understanding of different narrative
     perspectives/points of view in at least two of the works, explore their features, using some
     pertinent examples as illustrations, and show some appreciation of the role they play in the
     works.

     Good to excellent answers may additionally demonstrate a more perceptive and thorough
     understanding of the subtleties of narrative perspectives and may show more sophisticated
     analysis of the ways authors use narrative perspective including their effect on the work as
     a whole.


Prose: Other than the Novel and Short Story

7.   Adequate to good answers will show some understanding of optimistic or pessimistic attitudes
     as they appear in at least two works, and explore their features, showing some understanding
     of the role of these elements in the works and using some pertinent examples as illustrations.

     Good to excellent answers may show more sophisticated analysis and discussion; they may
     additionally demonstrate a more perceptive and thorough understanding of the way authors
     attempt to persuade us to accept their views/attitudes, with a discerning choice of examples.


8.   Adequate to good answers will seek to define one or more of these purposes as seen in at least
     two works and identify relevant examples that illustrate the chosen purposes. They will show
     how these purposes have been presented through some literary techniques and how they
     contribute to the works.

     Good to excellent answers may show more sophisticated (personal and discriminating)
     analysis, greater awareness of the means of presentation and a deeper understanding of their
     effects on the works as a whole.
                                                –8–           M10/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ1/XX/M


General Questions on Literature

9.    Note: a clash between the “modern” and “traditional” may be understood in a variety of
      ways including generational changes, technological changes, shifts in social norms and
      mores, and others.

      Adequate to good answers will identify, define and explore conflict as created by change
      over time in at least two works. They will discuss some of the techniques used to present the
      conflict(s) and the effect(s) of conflict on the works.

      Good to excellent answers may present a more sophisticated depiction of the conflict(s),
      a more detailed analysis of how these clashes are presented and greater insight into their
      effects on the works as a whole.


10.   Adequate to good answers will offer a contextual definition of “making the world a better
      place,” show some of the ways writers have presented this duty, or lack of duty, and consider
      the effects on the works.

      Good to excellent answers may provide a more sophisticated/complex approach to the
      statement and may make more perceptive links between technique and the effects on the
      works as a whole.


11.   Note: “Cultural practices and/or values” may be identified or interpreted in a number
      of ways and examiners should be open to a variety of definitions and understanding of
      the terms.

      Adequate to good answers will identify examples of cultural practices and/or values within at
      least two texts. They will discuss how these practices and/or values are presented and the
      effects on the works.

      Good to excellent answers may show a greater awareness of how these practices and/or values
      are presented. They may consider more fully the significance that the cultural practices
      and/or values have in the texts as a whole.


12.   Adequate to good answers will identify the presence, or not, of closure and/or resolution in at
      least two works, discuss some of the ways in which texts present, or resist, this element and
      show some appreciation of the effects of the nature of the resolution, or not, on the works.

      Good to excellent answers may provide a more detailed and more convincing explanation
      of the nature of the works’ conclusions, their means of presentation and their effects on the
      works as a whole, perhaps even indicating the possibility that texts can both offer and
      simultaneously resist “neat” conclusion or resolution.
