M10/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ1/XX




       22100088


ENGLISH A1 – STANDARD LEVEL – PAPER 2
ANGLAIS A1 – NIVEAU MOYEN – ÉPREUVE 2
INGLÉS A1 – NIVEL MEDIO – PRUEBA 2

Monday 10 May 2010 (morning)
Lundi 10 mai 2010 (matin)
Lunes 10 de mayo de 2010 (mañana)

1 hour 30 minutes / 1 heure 30 minutes / 1 hora 30 minutos


INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES

 Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
 Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on at least two of the Part 3 works
  you have studied. You may include in your answer a discussion of a Part 2 work of the same
  genre if relevant. Answers which are not based on a discussion of at least two Part 3 works will
  not score high marks.
 You are not permitted to bring copies of the works you have studied into the examination room.

INSTRUCTIONS DESTINÉES AUX CANDIDATS

 N’ouvrez pas cette épreuve avant d’y être autorisé(e).
 Traitez un seul sujet de composition. Vous devez baser votre réponse sur au moins deux des
  œuvres de la 3e partie que vous avez étudiées. Le cas échéant, vous pouvez inclure dans votre
  réponse une discussion sur une œuvre du même genre littéraire étudiée dans la 2e partie
  du programme. Les réponses qui ne sont pas basées sur au moins deux des œuvres de
  la 3e partie n’obtiendront pas une note élevée.
 Vous n’êtes pas autorisé(e) à amener des exemplaires des œuvres que vous avez étudiées dans
  la salle d’examen.

INSTRUCCIONES PARA LOS ALUMNOS

 No abra esta prueba hasta que se lo autoricen.
 Elija un tema de redacción. Su respuesta deberá basarse en al menos dos de las obras
  estudiadas en la Parte 3. Se podrán hacer comentarios sobre una obra de la Parte 2 del
  mismo género, si fuera necesario. Las respuestas que no incluyan una discusión sobre al
  menos dos obras de la Parte 3 no recibirán notas altas.
 No se permite traer a la sala de examen copias de las obras estudiadas.




2210-0088                                                                                   3 pages/páginas
                                                             © International Baccalaureate Organization 2010
                                                    –2–                  M10/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ1/XX

Answer one essay question only. You must base your answer on at least two of the Part 3 works you
have studied. You may include in your answer a discussion of a Part 2 work of the same genre if relevant.
Answers which are not based on a discussion of at least two Part 3 works will not score high marks.

Drama

1.    Explore the ways in which social class has been presented dramatically in at least two plays you
      have studied and consider its significance in each play.


2.    To what extent do at least two plays you have studied explore the relationship and tension between
      rational and irrational behaviour as a means to further the action of the drama?



Poetry

3.    “Poetry, like music, is to be heard.” Consider the ways in which at least two poets you have studied
      use the sound of their words to affect our response to their ideas.


4.    “A significant feature of poetry is its capacity to affirm or console.” Paying attention to the stylistic
      means used, consider the truth of this statement in the work of at least two poets you have studied.



Prose: The Novel and Short Story

5.    “Writers have always been interested in the kind of society in which they live and have
      highlighted problems of behaviour, hypocrisies and inequalities that have existed.” Discuss this
      assertion referring to at least two works you have studied.


6.    With reference to at least two works you have studied, compare the use made of narrative
      perspective and consider to what extent the reader’s attitude to the events and characters is influenced
      by this perspective.



Prose: Other than the Novel and Short Story

7.    “Is the cup half full or half empty?” To what extent, and in what ways, have the writers of
      at least two works you have studied concentrated on an optimistic or a pessimistic view of
      the world?


8.    “The point of non-fiction is primarily to inform and/or provoke rather than amuse and entertain.”
      To what extent is this statement true of at least two works you have studied?


2210-0088
                                                  –3–                 M10/1/A1ENG/SP2/ENG/TZ1/XX

General Questions on Literature

9.    To what extent have at least two works you have studied depicted the clash between the modern
      and the traditional?


10.   “It is always a writer’s duty to strive to make the world better.” Discuss this assertion, making
      reference to at least two works you have studied.


11.   Discuss and compare the presentation of features of cultural practices and/or values in at least two
      works you have studied.


12.   Compare the ways in which at least two works you have studied handle the issue of closure
      and/or resolution.




2210-0088
