M10/1/A1NOR/HP2/NOR/TZ0/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


                    May / mai / mayo 2010

 NORWEGIAN / NORVÉGIEN / NORUEGO
               A1


                        Higher Level
                      Niveau Supérieur
                       Nivel Superior

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2



5 pages/páginas
                          –2–         M10/1/A1NOR/HP2/NOR/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive
use of examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate
and must not be reproduced or distributed to any other
person without the authorisation of IB Cardiff.
                                               –3–          M10/1/A1NOR/HP2/NOR/TZ0/XX/M


All adequate to good answers must include some pertinent detail (described, paraphrased or
directly quoted) to support assertions and reveal knowledge of the texts studied. Relevant
discussion of literary features must appear in every response. Answers should demonstrate
some discernible form of organization and demonstration standard use of language.

Good to excellent answers must be grounded in the features demanded for “adequate”
answers. In going beyond those features, it may be in the ways described below as well as
in other, somewhat unpredictable ways which show individual thinking and an engaged,
well-supported address of the texts.

Drama

1.   An adequate to good answer will identify how an individual is part of a collective and discuss
     relevant examples from the plays. They should also comment on the techniques used by
     authors to show the relationship between the individual and the collective.

     A good to excellent answer may additionally provide well-chosen examples that show
     deeper insight into the various ways in which an individual is part of a collective.
     They should also discuss the techniques used by authors to show the relationship between the
     individual and the collective.


2.   An adequate to good answer will, using relevant examples, include some observations about
     the relationship between the main character and the antagonist(s) and how the antagonist(s) is
     portrayed. Additionally, the candidate must address how the role of the antagonist affects the
     overall understanding of the play.

     A good to excellent answer may additionally provide well-chosen examples that precisely and
     skilfully demonstrate the degree to which the portrayal of the antagonist(s) contributes to the
     interpretation of the play.



Novel

3.   An adequate to good answer will, using relevant examples, identify and discuss some of the
     techniques that the authors use to capture the reader’s interest. They should also make some
     comment on the effectiveness of such techniques.

     A good to excellent answer may additionally, using pertinent examples, clearly and skilfully
     demonstrate how and with what effect the writer has tried to capture the reader’s interest from
     the beginning.


4.   An adequate to good answer will, using relevant examples, be able to identify and discuss
     how main characters are forced to compromise. They should also make some comment on
     how this affects the understanding of the work as a whole.

     A good to excellent answer will additionally, using pertinent examples, clearly identify and
     convincingly describe how these compromises are depicted and discuss how they contribute
     to the understanding of the work as a whole.
                                               –4–          M10/1/A1NOR/HP2/NOR/TZ0/XX/M


Short Story

5.   An adequate to good answer will, using relevant examples, identify and discuss some of the
     techniques that the authors use to surprise the reader. They should also comment on the effect
     that the use of these techniques has on the understanding of the work as a whole.

     A good to excellent answer may in addition, using pertinent examples, clearly identify and
     convincingly discuss the techniques that the authors use to surprise the reader and discuss
     how these techniques contribute to the understanding of the work as a whole.


6.   An adequate to good answer will, using relevant examples, be able to identify and describe
     how the stories chosen express the same theme(s) in different ways.

     A good to excellent answer will additionally, using pertinent examples, precisely and skilfully
     compare the treatment of the theme(s) in the stories chosen.



Poetry

 Note: Poems should be taken from the works of at least two poets.
 If the candidate fails to use at least two poets, mark down two levels in criterion A,
 Knowledge and Understanding of Works.

7.   An adequate to good answer will provide examples of the contrast between perfection and
     imperfection in the poems, and will comment on how such contrasts are presented and their
     effects on the reader.

     A good to excellent answer will additionally give pertinent and convincing examples that
     show how the contrasts between perfection and imperfection are presented and discuss how
     this affects the understanding of the poems as a whole.


8.   An adequate to good answer will provide some examples showing how nature and/or
     elements from nature are used as symbols in poetry.

     A good to excellent answer will additionally give pertinent and convincing examples that
     show how nature and/or elements from nature are used as symbols in poetry. Some answers
     may include reflections on how elements of nature (as symbols) influence our understanding
     of the poem as a whole.
                                              –5–          M10/1/A1NOR/HP2/NOR/TZ0/XX/M


General Questions on Literature

9.    An adequate to good answer will, using relevant examples, discuss whether and to what
      extent authors of the works chosen appeal more to our feelings or to our reason.

      A good to excellent answer may additionally demonstrate deeper insight into the discussion,
      using well-chosen examples from the texts.


10.   An adequate to good answer will, using relevant examples, describe and discuss how winners
      and losers are portrayed in the works chosen. They should also comment on how the contrast
      between winners and losers contributes to our overall understanding of the works chosen.

      A good to excellent answer may additionally, using pertinent examples, demonstrate deeper
      insight into the discussion of the contrast between winners and losers, and discuss how that
      contributes to the works chosen.


11.   An adequate to good answer will, using relevant examples, identify and discuss some
      elements that make their chosen works enjoyable.

      A good to excellent answer may additionally discuss the definition of “enjoyable” and
      demonstrate with pertinent examples how and to what extent the elements chosen contribute
      to making the works chosen enjoyable.


12.   An adequate to good answer will, using relevant examples, show how content and form work
      together in the works chosen.

      A good to excellent answer may additionally try to define why the form is relevant in the
      works chosen, and use pertinent examples to discuss this relationship between content and
      form in the works chosen.
