M10/1/A1SWE/SP1/SWE/TZ0/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


                    May / mai / mayo 2010

        SWEDISH / SUÉDOIS / SUECO A1


                       Standard Level
                       Niveau Moyen
                        Nivel Medio

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




5 pages/páginas
                          –2–         M10/1/A1SWE/SP1/SWE/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive
use of examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate
and must not be reproduced or distributed to any other
person without the authorisation of IB Cardiff.
                                                –3–            M10/1/A1SWE/SP1/SWE/TZ0/XX/M


Provisional marking

During the early period of your marking your team leader (or principal examiner in the case
of team leaders) will contact you to discuss the standard of marking and the interpretation of
the marking notes. Before this discussion, it is necessary to have marked provisionally (in
pencil) about ten scripts.

If your team leader has failed to make contact with you, please try to make contact with him
or her yourself, by phone or e-mail. Owing to work commitments and differences between
time zones it is often difficult for team leaders to make contact with all examiners in their
teams.

                                 ASSESSMENT CRITERIA
Criteria A and B

The danger of rewarding or penalizing the use of illustrations/references/quotations twice in both
these categories should be avoided.

Criterion B

The passages offer candidates a variety of possibilities for analysis and interpretation. The test of
any interpretation is that it has to be tied carefully to the words, images and relevant details of the
text. “Personal response”, in the same way, must be tied to the passage.

Criterion C

“Awareness” and “appreciation” of literary features are the key elements under this criterion. The
mere labelling, without appreciation, of literary features will not score the highest marks. On the
other hand, the candidate who is attentive to literary features and deals with them in a meaningful
way, but who does not consistently use the vocabulary of literary criticism, can still be awarded the
higher achievement levels.

Reminder: The term “literary features” is broad and includes elements as basic as plot, character
etc., attention to which is valid and must be rewarded as appropriate.

Criterion D

Any form of structuring to the commentary will be rewarded if it is effective and appropriate.
Different conventions are in operation and therefore all approaches (including the line by line
analysis) are acceptable and will be judged on the basis of their effectiveness. Examiners should
remember that structure does not exist by itself, but any structure must be measured by appropriate
references to the passage or poem and by its capacity to integrate these towards the development of
an organized and coherent commentary.

Reminder: In this criterion, supporting examples must be evaluated in terms of how fluently they
are incorporated/integrated to shape/advance the argument, not in terms of their appropriateness or
accuracy.
                                                 –4–            M10/1/A1SWE/SP1/SWE/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion E
If you have reservations about awarding a four, you should ensure that these are well founded
before awarding a three. The breadth of achievement in level three sometimes makes examiners
reluctant to award four.
Use judgment when dealing with lapses in grammar, spelling and punctuation; therefore do not
unduly penalize.
Mechanical accuracy is only a part of this criterion.         Ensure that all the other elements are
considered.
Examiners should be careful to avoid being prejudiced in their application of this criterion by
achievement levels in other criteria. It is possible to score highly on this criterion even if candidates
have scored in the lower levels on the other criteria, and vice versa.


These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking and as a supplement to
the published external assessment criteria for written paper 1. They are not offered as an exhaustive
and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must rigidly adhere. Good ideas or
angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate. Similarly, answers
which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here may still be very good responses.

Of course, some of the points listed below will appear in weaker papers, but are unlikely to be
developed.
The following elements are particularly relevant to criteria A, B and C.

Question 1. Prose

A barely satisfactory answer is likely to grasp the content of the extract, how the mother has
endured giving birth to seven dead children and how this has led to her empty look in the empty
surroundings of today’s Sweden. In an answer of this quality one would also expect some words on
the language and form, the direct address and finally the direct speech and how this affects
our impression.

A better answer manages to analyze the qualities of the structure of this extract and how it is built
on the striking contrast between Kurdistan and Sweden, but more, of course, on the contrast
between the beautiful young mother and the old woman with the empty look. In an answer of this
quality the candidates can identify the tight relationship between mother and son, which is mostly
manifested through the language.

The best answers, in addition to the features above, will include some comments on the wider
meaning of the situation, such as the difficulties of adapting to a new modern society. In answers
of this quality one would expect the candidates to identify at least the main literary features of
the extract, e.g. the repetitions and the intensifications.
                                               –5–           M10/1/A1SWE/SP1/SWE/TZ0/XX/M


Question 2. Poem

A barely satisfactory answer can identify the situation and the persons involved even if they are
not all so well defined (others). An answer of this quality can see the progress in the poem and can
identify the circular composition where the vacuum cleaner both opens and ends the poem.
Some remarks on the humorous use of the important rhyme words in the first stanza should
be made.

A better answer can identify (at least) two layers in the poem – the everyday-like and rather
humorous tone in the beginning contrasted with the more solemn one in the second and third.
When it comes to the content, an answer of this kind can bring about some well founded examples
of how the guests are being treated and how (badly) they behave (hypocrisy).

The best answers, in addition to those above, will comment on how the title of the poem, together
with the circular composition and the use of the keyword dammsugarhjärtat (heart of the vacuum
cleaner) underlines, at least partly, the general purpose of this poem, to show a somewhat too
ambitious cleaning lady.
