M10/1/A1SWE/SP2/SWE/TZ0/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


                    May / mai / mayo 2010

        SWEDISH / SUÉDIOS / SUECO A1


                       Standard Level
                       Niveau Moyen
                        Nivel Medio


                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 2




5 pages/páginas
                          –2–         M10/1/A1SWE/SP2/SWE/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive
use of examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate
and must not be reproduced or distributed to any other
person without the authorisation of IB Cardiff.
                                                  –3–           M10/1/A1SWE/SP2/SWE/TZ0/XX/M


All adequate to good answers must include some pertinent detail (described, paraphrased or
directly quoted) to support assertions and reveal knowledge of the texts studied. Relevant
discussion of literary features must appear in every response. Answers should demonstrate
some discernible form of organization and demonstrate standard use of language.

Good to excellent answers must be grounded in the features demanded for “adequate”
answers. In going beyond those features, it may be in the ways described below as well as in
other, somewhat unpredictable ways which show individual thinking and an engaged,
well-supported address of the texts.

Drama

1.       An adequate to good answer will, using relevant examples, identify and discuss how intrigue
         is developed and show some understanding of how this affects the understanding of the play
         as a whole.

         A good to excellent answer may additionally discuss pertinent examples of how the intrigue
         is developed and demonstrate deeper insight into how this affects the understanding of the
         play as a whole.


2.       An adequate to good answer will, using relevant examples, identify and discuss how
         problems are presented in the plays chosen. They will also show some awareness of how
         this contributes to the interpretation of the plays.

         A good to excellent answer may additionally discuss the treatment of these problems using
         pertinent examples and convincingly demonstrate how this contributes to the interpretation
         of the plays.



Poetry

 Note: Poems should be taken from the works of at least two poets.
 If the candidate fails to use at least two poets, mark down two levels in criterion A,
 Knowledge and Understanding of Works.

3.       An adequate to good answer will, using relevant examples, identify and compare the lyrical
         “I” in different poems chosen and discuss how this affects the understanding of the poems.

         A good to excellent answer may additionally use pertinent examples to demonstrate
         convincingly how the authors’ use of the lyrical “I” affects the interpretation of the poems.


4.       An adequate to good answer will, using relevant examples, identify and discuss how
         the poems chosen reflect the times in which they were written (themes, style, motifs,
         language use, etc). It will also include a discussion of how this affects the interpretation of
         the poems.

         A good to excellent answer will in addition, using pertinent examples, clearly and
         convincingly identify and discuss how the poems chosen reflect the times in which they
         were written and clearly demonstrate how this affects the interpretation of the poems.
                                                 –4–           M10/1/A1SWE/SP2/SWE/TZ0/XX/M

Short Story

5.      An adequate to good answer will, using relevant examples, identify and discuss techniques
        that the chosen authors use to make the characters interesting for the reader.

        A good to excellent answer may additionally, using pertinent examples, compare and
        discuss the in-depth techniques that authors use to make characters interesting for the reader.
        They may also offer some discussion about what makes a character interesting.


6.      An adequate to good answer will, using relevant examples, discuss the effectiveness of the
        choice of titles and consider the role of the title in interpreting the stories.

        A good to excellent answer may additionally, using pertinent examples, discuss in depth the
        effectiveness of the choice of titles and demonstrate insight into the role of the title in
        interpreting the stories.



Novel

7.      An adequate to good answer will, using relevant examples from the novels chosen,
        identify and discuss whether the main characters’ upbringing has great importance for their
        adult lives. One also expects some comments on the effect this aspect has on the
        understanding of the works as a whole.

        A good to excellent answer may in addition demonstrate deeper insight into whether the
        main characters’ upbringing has great importance for their adult lives and may discuss the
        effect this aspect has on the understanding of the works as a whole.


8.      An adequate to good answer will, using relevant examples, identify and discuss whether and
        to what extent the environment is important for our overall understanding of the works
        chosen.

        A good to excellent answer may in addition, by way of pertinent examples,
        convincingly demonstrate to what extent the author’s choice of environment is important
        for the overall understanding of the works chosen.
                                               –5–            M10/1/A1SWE/SP2/SWE/TZ0/XX/M

General Questions on Literature

9.    An adequate to good answer will, using relevant examples, identify some different types of
      “truths” that are conveyed in the works discussed (e.g. emotional, political, social, etc.)
      and discuss the extent to which these are the main concerns of the writers. They should also
      comment upon some techniques that the writers use to convey these “truths”.

      A good to excellent answer may additionally, using pertinent examples, demonstrate
      understanding of different types of “truths” that are conveyed in the works discussed
      (e.g. emotional, political, social, etc.) and show insight into the extent to which these are the
      main concerns of the writers. They should also discuss techniques that the writers use to
      convey these “truths”.


10.   An adequate to good answer will, using relevant examples, identify and discuss the extent to
      which literature has a function in improving us as human beings and how this affects the
      overall understanding of the works. (Please note that a wide range of interpretations of
      “upbringing” will be accepted.)

      A good to excellent answer may in addition, using pertinent examples, compare and discuss
      the extent to which literature has a function in improving us as human beings and clearly
      demonstrate the ways this is significant for the overall understanding of the works. (Please
      note that a wide range of interpretations of “upbringing” will be accepted.)


11.   An adequate to good answer will, using relevant examples, identify and discuss how
      problems in relationships/marriages are treated in the works.

      A good to excellent answer may additionally, using pertinent examples, compare and
      discuss in depth how problems in relationships/marriages are treated.


12.   An adequate to good answer will, using relevant examples from the works chosen,
      identify and discuss how the theme and message are supported by the form of the work.

      A good to excellent answer may additionally, using pertinent examples from the
      works chosen, demonstrate convincingly how the theme and message are supported by the
      form of the work.
