M10/1/A1SWE/HP1/SWE/TZ0/XX/M




         MARKING NOTES
   REMARQUES POUR LA NOTATION
    NOTAS PARA LA CORRECCIÓN


                    May / mai / mayo 2010

        SWEDISH / SUÉDOIS / SUECO A1


                        Higher Level
                      Niveau Supérieur
                       Nivel Superior

                  Paper / Épreuve / Prueba 1




5 pages/páginas
                          –2–         M10/1/A1SWE/HP1/SWE/TZ0/XX/M




These marking notes are confidential and for the exclusive
use of examiners in this examination session.

They are the property of the International Baccalaureate
and must not be reproduced or distributed to any other
person without the authorisation of IB Cardiff.
                                                –3–          M10/1/A1SWE/HP1/SWE/TZ0/XX/M



Provisional marking

During the early period of your marking your team leader (or principal examiner in the case
of team leaders) will contact you to discuss the standard of marking and the interpretation of
the marking notes. Before this discussion, it is necessary to have marked provisionally
(in pencil) about ten scripts.

If your team leader has failed to make contact with you, please try to make contact with him
or her yourself, by phone or e-mail. Owing to work commitments and differences between
time zones it is often difficult for team leaders to make contact with all examiners in their
teams.


                                 ASSESSMENT CRITERIA
Criteria A and B

The danger of rewarding or penalizing the use of illustrations/references/quotations twice in both
these categories should be avoided.

Criterion B

The passages offer candidates a variety of possibilities for analysis and interpretation. The test of
any interpretation is that it has to be tied carefully to the words, images and relevant details of
the text. “Personal response”, in the same way, must be tied to the passage.

Criterion C

“Awareness” and “appreciation” of literary features are the key elements under this criterion.
The mere labelling, without appreciation, of literary features will not score the highest marks.
On the other hand, the candidate who is attentive to literary features and deals with them in a
meaningful way, but who does not consistently use the vocabulary of literary criticism, can still be
awarded the higher achievement levels.

Reminder: The term “literary features” is broad and includes elements as basic as plot, character
etc., attention to which is valid and must be rewarded as appropriate.

Criterion D

Any form of structuring to the commentary will be rewarded if it is effective and appropriate.
Different conventions are in operation and therefore all approaches (including the line by line
analysis) are acceptable and will be judged on the basis of their effectiveness. Examiners should
remember that structure does not exist by itself, but any structure must be measured by appropriate
references to the passage or poem and by its capacity to integrate these towards the development of
an organized and coherent commentary.

Reminder: In this criterion, supporting examples must be evaluated in terms of how fluently they
are incorporated/integrated to shape/advance the argument, not in terms of their appropriateness
or accuracy.
                                                 –4–            M10/1/A1SWE/HP1/SWE/TZ0/XX/M


Criterion E
If you have reservations about awarding a four, you should ensure that these are well founded
before awarding a three. The breadth of achievement in level three sometimes makes examiners
reluctant to award four.
Use judgment when dealing with lapses in grammar, spelling and punctuation; therefore do not
unduly penalize.
Mechanical accuracy is only a part of this criterion.         Ensure that all the other elements are
considered.
Examiners should be careful to avoid being prejudiced in their application of this criterion by
achievement levels in other criteria. It is possible to score highly on this criterion even if candidates
have scored in the lower levels on the other criteria, and vice versa.


These notes to examiners are intended only as guidelines to assist marking and as a supplement to
the published external assessment criteria for written paper 1. They are not offered as an exhaustive
and fixed set of responses or approaches to which all answers must rigidly adhere. Good ideas or
angles not offered here should be acknowledged and rewarded as appropriate. Similarly, answers
which do not include all the ideas or approaches suggested here may still be very good responses.

Of course, some of the points listed below will appear in weaker papers, but are unlikely to
be developed.
The following elements are particularly relevant to criteria A, B and C.

Question 1. Prose

A barely satisfactory answer is likely to identify the young man Felix and Aunt Ghobé and say
something about their relation. In an answer of this quality one would also expect some response to
the rather subtle description of the elderly ladies and how Felix/the author sees them. An answer of
barely satisfactory quality should also be able to comment on the significance of the passage where
Cinderella is mentioned.

A better answer is likely to see Felix as a representative for youth in general and Aunt Ghobé as
the model for rich elderly ladies in Saltsjöbaden. A better answer can produce well founded
comments on how these ladies are characterised through an abundance of linguistic means.

The best answers, in addition to the points above, can also recognise the elegant structure of the
extract as well as the subtle relationship between the contemporary youth and how the elderly ladies
react to them. The best answers should also bring about well chosen examples of the inventive and
elegant language of the extract. One would e.g. expect some comments on the language in line 22
about the frieze of stone with flying birds.
                                                –5–           M10/1/A1SWE/HP1/SWE/TZ0/XX/M


Question 2. Poem

A barely satisfactory answer, regardless of the interpretation, is likely to present the main features
of the content and structure, e.g. the obvious contrast between the ground and the earth vs. the air
and heaven. An answer of this quality should also include some comments on the vocabulary
and language.

A better answer will go into more detail on the points above. One would expect a more elaborate
commentary of how the author has used the repetition/variation of the main symbols earth/ground.
In an answer of this quality one would also expect something of the background of the “I” in
the poem.

The best answers go even deeper in the above and add to this a well founded personal response to
the main ideas of the poem as they see it. The strong and elegant last stanza and the use of the three
key words here ground, town, and heaven are likely to be commented upon.
