© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Design technology
Standard level
Paper 1

11 May 2023

Zone A afternoon   Zone B morning   Zone C afternoon


45 minutes

Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y Answer all the questions.
y For each question, choose the answer you consider to be the best and indicate your choice on
  the answer sheet provided.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [26 marks].




                                                                                             2223 – 6202
      16 pages                                           © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
               –2–           2223 – 6202


1.


          Question removed


     		
                                                 –3–                                         2223 – 6202


2.   Figure 1 shows the Herman Miller Mirra 2 chair.

                              Figure 1: The Herman Miller Mirra 2 chair




     What anthropometric data is most appropriate for the design of the Herman Miller Mirra 2 chair?

     A.   5th–95th percentile

     B.   5th percentile

     C.   50th percentile

     D.   1st–99th percentile


3.   Which of the following is a source of primary data?

     A.   Journal article

     B.   Literature search

     C.   Internet search

     D.   Interview


4.   In which way is dynamic data used in the clothing industry?

     A.   In the design of sports shoes

     B.   When advertising products

     C.   To determine collar size

     D.   To determine market size

                                                                                             Turn over
                                                 –4–                                           2223 – 6202


5.   Fashion designers can develop collections with the use of virtually simulated garments, see
     Figure 2. With this technology, they are able to significantly reduce the number of physical
     garments made while improving their range of designs.

                         Figure 2: A range of virtually simulated garments




     What may be an eco-design reason to include these new innovations into the fashion cycle?

     A.   Promotes circular economy

     B.   Avoids overproduction and environmental footprint

     C.   Avoids dematerialization

     D.   Promotes a linear economy
                                                –5–                                        2223 – 6202


6.   Social and environmental factors need to be considered when obtaining renewable and
     non-renewable resources.

     Which of the following economic factors also needs to be considered?

          I.     Set-up cost
          II.    Dematerialization
          III.   Decommissioning

     A.   I and II only

     B.   I and III only

     C.   II and III only

     D.   I, II and III


7.   To redesign components or products to improve their appearance or performance is known as…

     A.   re-engineering.

     B.   retro-styling.

     C.   repairing.

     D.   re-using.


8.   Eco-design focuses on which of the following issues?

          I.     Materials
          II.    Energy
          III.   Pollution

     A.   I and II only

     B.   I and III only

     C.   II and III only

     D.   I, II and III




                                                                                           Turn over
                                                  –6–                                         2223 – 6202


9.    Design for the environment (DfE) software is used to help designers in the assessment of:

           I.     Environmental implications
           II.    Particular facets of a design
           III.   Cost strategies

      A.   I and II only

      B.   I and III only

      C.   II and III only

      D.   I, II and III


10.   At what stage of the design cycle would system level solutions appear?

      A.   After conceptual design but before detailed design

      B.   After conceptual design and detailed design

      C.   Before conceptual design and detailed design

      D.   Before conceptual design and after detailed design
                                                    –7–                                            2223 – 6202


11.   Microsoft has been trying to address the fact that virtual interaction does not lead to a positive
      user experience because you can’t touch anything. This has led to the development of the
      Microsoft CLAW, see Figure 3.

                                     Figure 3: The Microsoft CLAW




                                      Removed for copyright reasons



      What technology has Microsoft incorporated into the Microsoft CLAW in order to get a sense
      of touch?

      A.    Haptic

      B.    Animation

      C.    Virtual reality (VR)

      D.    Fidelity




                                                                                                   Turn over
                                                –8–                                         2223 – 6202


12.


                                          Question removed


      		


13.   What type of model exists in the mind and is used to help us know and understand ideas?

      A.   Concept model

      B.   Data model

      C.   Aesthetic model

      D.   Physical model
                                                  –9–                                         2223 – 6202


14.   Figure 4 shows a two-cycle engine assembly drawing which was created in MicroStation Modeler.

                             Figure 4: A two-cycle engine assembly drawing




                                     Removed for copyright reasons



      Which of the following statements are true of solid modelling?

           I.     They are representations of the product assembly
           II.    They contain no data about internal components
           III.   They provide a comprehensive set of data for the product assembly to be realized

      A.   I and II only

      B.   I and III only

      C.   II and III only

      D.   I, II and III




                                                                                             Turn over
                                                   – 10 –                                     2223 – 6202


15.   Figure 5 shows custom coloured headphones from Custom Sounds.

                                 Figure 5: Custom coloured headphones




      This interactive website allows you to pick and choose colours for each part of your headphones.
      What type of process is this?

      A.    Continuous flow

      B.    Mass customization

      C.    Just in case (JIC)

      D.    Feedback loop


16.   Robots are classified in different generations.

      An autonomous networked robot is classified as…

      A.    1st generation.

      B.    2nd generation.

      C.    3rd generation.

      D.    4th generation.
                                                 – 11 –                                        2223 – 6202


17.   Which of the following are decorative textile manufacturing processes?

           I.     Lacemaking
           II.    Yarn
           III.   Embroidery

      A.   I and II only

      B.   I and III only

      C.   II and III only

      D.   I, II and III


18.   Wool is commonly used for blankets, jumpers, rugs and structural insulation. Which of the following
      statements identify the properties of wool?

           I.     Excellent absorbency
           II.    Good elasticity
           III.   Fast drying

      A.   I and II only

      B.   I and III only

      C.   II and III only

      D.   I, II and III


19.   Concrete is classified as…

      A.   an aggregate.

      B.   a compound.

      C.   a composite.

      D.   a cement.




                                                                                              Turn over
                                                   – 12 –                                      2223 – 6202


20.   Which of the following is an advantage of craft production?

      A.   Every product is identical

      B.   Set-up costs are minimal

      C.   It’s based on automated processes

      D.   It’s produced on a large scale


21.   Which of the following could be characteristics of a composite?

           I.     Made up entirely of non-metals
           II.    Are made from two or more constituent materials
           III.   Can have different characteristics than their original materials

      A.   I and II only

      B.   I and III only

      C.   II and III only

      D.   I, II and III


22.   Wood recycling is the process of turning waste timber into usable products. Recycling timber is a
      practice that was popularized in the early 1990s.

      Which of the following issues triggered this trend?

      A.   Demand for MDF

      B.   Deforestation and climate change

      C.   Warping of existing wood

      D.   Oxidization resistance
                                                 – 13 –                           2223 – 6202


23.


                                           Question removed


      		


24.   Which of the following describes the maturity phase in the product cycle?

           I.     Sales start to reduce
           II.    Sales peak but remain steady
           III.   Maximum profit is achieved

      A.   I and II only

      B.   I and III only

      C.   II and III only

      D.   I, II and III




                                                                                  Turn over
                                                 – 14 –                                         2223 – 6202


25.   The Dr. Martens 1460 boot, see Figure 6, is an iconic design first worn in its modern British-made
      form in 1960. The air cushion sole from which the boot gets it name was called “Dr. Maertens” and
      was a German invention from 1945. The German “Dr. Maertens” sole was originally incorporated in
      shoes in Germany and Austria and sold to women. In 1960, a British shoe making company bought
      the licence for the outsole and designed the boot which we now know as the iconic “Dr. Martens”
      boot. This included Anglicising “Dr. Maertens” to “Dr. Martens”. The British company made design
      innovations to the boot to emphasise that this was something new, including adding a distinctive
      yellow stitch, a two-toned grooved sole edge, a black and yellow heel loop and a unique sole
      pattern.

                                    Figure 6: The Dr. Martens boot




      The Dr. Martens boot is now worn by a diverse range of individuals all over the world. This constant
      presence in a changing context is known as…

      A.   affordance.

      B.   obsolescence.

      C.   omnipresence.

      D.   personae.


26.   Art Deco is considered a classic design from the 1920s and 1930s. The style became popular
      decades later due to the mass production of products using different materials, such as metals,
      plastic and glass. Later products made in this style were classified as…

      A.   image-styling.

      B.   Bauhaus.

      C.   retro-styling.

      D.   De Stijl (the style).
                                                  – 15 –                                          2223 – 6202


Questions 27–30 relate to the following case study. Please read the case study carefully and answer
the questions.

The kitchen is often referred to as the centre of the home. A smart refrigerator, see Figure 7, can help
manage the consumption of food which will reduce the amount of food waste a household generates.

Different members of the same household can program the smart refrigerator to keep a record of what
kinds of food and drink products are being stored and consumed.

It is also possible to use interactive online programs such as Expert Follow the Chef with the smart
refrigerator. This enables individuals to learn various cooking skills and experiment with ingredients from
around the world.

                                     Figure 7: A smart refrigerator




27.   Psychological factors have been considered to improve the design of the smart refrigerator.

      Which of the following are the four psychological factors used in the design of the
      smart refrigerator?

      A.    Comfort, health, performance and user’s safety

      B.    Health, comfort, performance and price

      C.    Comfort, performance, price and user’s safety

      D.    Performance, health, price and user’s safety




                                                                                                 Turn over
                                                   – 16 –                                    2223 – 6202


28.   Designers need to develop innovative solutions to meet the growing demand for
      sustainable consumption.

      Which waste mitigation strategy applies to the design of the smart refrigerator?

      A.    Re-use

      B.    Repair

      C.    Re-engineer

      D.    Recondition


29.   Designers have used life cycle analysis (LCA) to reduce the ecological impact of the
      smart refrigerator.

      Which of the following is a stage of life cycle analysis (LCA)?

      A.    Incremental

      B.    End-of-pipe

      C.    Maturity

      D.    Utilization


30.


                                             Question removed


      		
References:
Figure 1      Mirra 2 chair images provided by Herman Miller
Figure 2      "Stop Looking! Fashion Runway 2011" by henryjose is licensed under CC BY 2.0. To view a copy of this license,
              visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/?ref=openverse. Source adapted.
Figure 6      Images with permission from Dr. Martens.
Figure 7      LG OFFICIALLY LAUNCHES FIRST IN RANGE OF SMART GRID-READY SMART APPLIANCES (image) by LG.
              www.flickr.com/photos/lge/5633727630/in/photostream/. Creative Commons Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC BY 2.0).
              https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/.


All other texts, graphics and illustrations © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
