© International Baccalaureate Organization 2023

All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems,
without the prior written permission from the IB. Additionally, the license tied with this
product prohibits use of any selected files or extracts from this product. Use by third
parties, including but not limited to publishers, private teachers, tutoring or study services,
preparatory schools, vendors operating curriculum mapping services or teacher resource
digital platforms and app developers, whether fee-covered or not, is prohibited and is a
criminal offense.

More information on how to request written permission in the form of a license can be
obtained from https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-
license/.

© Organisation du Baccalauréat International 2023

Tous droits réservés. Aucune partie de ce produit ne peut être reproduite sous quelque
forme ni par quelque moyen que ce soit, électronique ou mécanique, y compris des
systèmes de stockage et de récupération d’informations, sans l’autorisation écrite
préalable de l’IB. De plus, la licence associée à ce produit interdit toute utilisation de tout
fichier ou extrait sélectionné dans ce produit. L’utilisation par des tiers, y compris, sans
toutefois s’y limiter, des éditeurs, des professeurs particuliers, des services de tutorat ou
d’aide aux études, des établissements de préparation à l’enseignement supérieur, des
fournisseurs de services de planification des programmes d’études, des gestionnaires de
plateformes pédagogiques en ligne, et des développeurs d’applications, moyennant
paiement ou non, est interdite et constitue une infraction pénale.

Pour plus d’informations sur la procédure à suivre pour obtenir une autorisation écrite
sous la forme d’une licence, rendez-vous à l’adresse https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/
ib-publishing/licensing/applying-for-a-license/.

© Organización del Bachillerato Internacional, 2023

Todos los derechos reservados. No se podrá reproducir ninguna parte de este producto
de ninguna forma ni por ningún medio electrónico o mecánico, incluidos los sistemas de
almacenamiento y recuperación de información, sin la previa autorización por escrito del
IB. Además, la licencia vinculada a este producto prohíbe el uso de todo archivo o
fragmento seleccionado de este producto. El uso por parte de terceros —lo que incluye,
a título enunciativo, editoriales, profesores particulares, servicios de apoyo académico o
ayuda para el estudio, colegios preparatorios, desarrolladores de aplicaciones y
entidades que presten servicios de planificación curricular u ofrezcan recursos para
docentes mediante plataformas digitales—, ya sea incluido en tasas o no, está prohibido
y constituye un delito.

En este enlace encontrará más información sobre cómo solicitar una autorización por
escrito en forma de licencia: https://ibo.org/become-an-ib-school/ib-publishing/licensing/
applying-for-a-license/.
Sports, exercise and health science
Higher level
Paper 1

2 May 2023

Zone A afternoon   Zone B morning   Zone C morning


1 hour

Instructions to candidates
y Do not open this examination paper until instructed to do so.
y Answer all the questions.
y For each question, choose the answer you consider to be the best and indicate your choice on
  the answer sheet provided.
y The maximum mark for this examination paper is [40 marks].




                                                                                             2223 – 6601
      15 pages                                           © International Baccalaureate Organization 2023
                                                     –2–                                     2223 – 6601


1.   What type of bone is a metacarpal?

     A.   Flat

     B.   Short

     C.   Irregular

     D.   Long


2.   Which are features of the elbow joint?


     A.    hinge                          synovial

     B.    pivot                          cartilaginous

     C.    hinge                          fibrous

     D.    pivot                          synovial



3.   The diagram shows a hamstring stretch being performed. Which muscle tissue characteristic is
     demonstrated by the hamstrings when an athlete performs a static stretch as part of their cool
     down routine?




     A.   Contractility

     B.   Hypertrophy

     C.   Extensibility

     D.   Elasticity
                                                     –3–                                  2223 – 6601


4.   The diagram shows a trace of pulmonary ventilation. Which number shows tidal volume for a
     person who is jogging?




                      Total lung capacity       2



                                                                         4
                                            1


                                                               3




                                                        Time

     A.   1

     B.   2

     C.   3

     D.   4


5.   Which of the following occurs during inhalation?

          I.       Diaphragm contracts
          II.      Chest cavity volume increases
          III.     Chest cavity pressure increases

     A.   I only

     B.   II only

     C.   I and II only

     D.   I, II and III




                                                                                          Turn over
                                                 –4–                                          2223 – 6601


6.   Which are functions of erythrocytes and leucocytes?


           Erythrocytes                                  Leucocytes

     A.    Carry O2 in blood                             Carry CO2 in blood

           Help with clotting of blood in damaged
     B.                                                  Carry O2 and CO2 in blood
           areas of the body
                                                         Help with clotting of blood in damaged
     C.    Help fight infections in the body
                                                         areas of the body

     D.    Carry O2 and CO2 in blood                     Help fight infections in the body



7.   What is the cardiovascular response during the first 5 minutes after completing a cycle race?


           Cardiac output                 Heart rate                    Stroke volume

     A.    Remains constant               Decreases                     Increases

     B.    Decreases                      Decreases                     Decreases

     C.    Increases                      Increases                     Increases

     D.    Remains constant               Remains constant              Remains constant



8.   Which describes the blood pressure in the vascular system?

     A.   Systolic blood pressure is a measure of the blood pressure in a person’s veins when they are
          doing a flexed arm hang.

     B.   Diastolic blood pressure is measured when the left ventricle contracts.

     C.   Systolic blood pressure increases when someone goes for a 20-minute training run.

     D.   Diastolic blood pressure always adjusts equally with systolic blood pressure.


9.   Which of the following is considered a micronutrient?

     A.   Calcium in milk

     B.   Protein in chicken

     C.   Fat from pork

     D.   Water from a bottle
                                                     –5–                                        2223 – 6601


10.   Which types of fat are classified correctly?


            Relatively high saturated fat content          Relatively high unsaturated fat content

      A.    Sunflower oil                                  Coconut oil

      B.    Dairy yogurt                                   Avocado

      C.    Coconut oil                                    Palm oil

      D.    Avocado                                        Olive oil



11.   Which best defines metabolism?

      A.    The breakdown of complex organic compounds into smaller ones.

      B.    The controlled release of energy in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) from
            organic compounds.

      C.    The production of larger biochemical molecules from smaller ones.

      D.    All of the biochemical reactions that occur within an organism.


12.   Which component of the aerobic energy system also occurs in the anaerobic system?

      A.    Krebs cycle

      B.    Electron transport chain

      C.    Glycolysis

      D.    There are no common components




                                                                                                Turn over
                                              –6–                              2223 – 6601


13.   The diagram shows a neuromuscular junction. What does X represent?


                                              Action potential




                                                                           X




      A.   Calcium ions

      B.   Sodium ions

      C.   Cholinesterase

      D.   Acetylcholine
                                                    –7–                                          2223 – 6601


14.   The diagram shows someone performing a bench press. Which muscle is the primary agonist, and
      what movement occurs at the shoulder during the upward phase of a bench press?




            Primary agonist muscle                        Movement at shoulder

      A.    biceps                                        extension

      B.    pectoralis major                              adduction

      C.    triceps                                       flexion

      D.    deltoid                                       abduction



15.   How does a first class lever differ from a third class lever in the body?


            In the middle of a first class lever          In the middle of a third class lever

      A.    fulcrum                                       effort

      B.    load                                          fulcrum

      C.    fulcrum                                       load

      D.    effort                                        fulcrum




                                                                                                 Turn over
                                                      –8–                                        2223 – 6601


16.   How is the flight of a golf ball affected when it is hit with backspin?

      A.    It will tend to move to the right as it moves through the air

      B.    It will tend to lift up and hold its flight path as it moves through the air

      C.    It will tend to move to the left as it moves through the air

      D.    It will tend to drop more rapidly than normal as it moves through the air


17.   Which correctly identifies an open and a closed skill?


             Open                                            Closed

      A.     Receiving a serve in badminton                  Taking a penalty kick in soccer

      B.     Passing a ball while on the run                 Surfing along a wave

      C.     Putting a golf ball towards the hole            Riding a horse in a field

      D.     Cycling on an exercise machine                  Hitting a forehand shot in tennis



18.   Which is an example of an exteroceptor being used by the body?

      A.    Sensory information received from the inner ear while performing a somersault.

      B.    Chemoreceptor in an artery detecting the chemical changes in the blood.

      C.    The pressure on the hand as a person holds onto a bicycle handlebar.

      D.    Sensory information received from muscles that detect limb movement when catching a ball.


19.   A coach trains their team to use a number and letter sequence for a penalty move. Which type of
      memory improvement technique is being used?

      A.    Chunking

      B.    Coding

      C.    Clarity

      D.    Organization
                                                                  –9–                                2223 – 6601


20.   What type of skill transfer occurs when a soccer player performs kicking drills as part of their
      warm-up before a big match?

      A.    Principles to skill

      B.    Skill to skill

      C.    Practice to performance

      D.    Abilities to skill


21.   A coach plans training sessions with periods of work and short rest breaks in between. Which type
      of practice is this?

      A.    Massed

      B.    Drill

      C.    Variable

      D.    Distributed


22.   The graph shows athletes’ mean 10 km trial times following four different warm-up methods. Which
      method resulted in the smallest variation in trial times?

                                              70

                                              60
                      Time / minutes (± SD)




                                              50

                                              40

                                              30

                                              20

                                              10

                                               0
                                                   No warm-up    Jog     Stretch   Jog and stretch

                                                                Warm-up method

      A.    No warm-up

      B.    Jog only

      C.    Stretch only

      D.    Jog and stretch



                                                                                                     Turn over
                                                  – 10 –                                        2223 – 6601


23.   Which defines randomization?

      A.   The order of treatments for an experiment is arranged to ensure that no carry over effect is
           seen in the results.

      B.   The dependent variable of an experiment is measured randomly.

      C.   A substance that in every way appears to be the treatment substance is used in an
           experiment, but it has no known effect.

      D.   The subject and the experimenter are randomly aware of the treatment being administered.


24.   Which is considered a limitation of a maximal fitness test?

      A.   Participants are typically able to perform repeats of the task more quickly

      B.   It is very stressful on participants

      C.   It is not strongly correlated to true values of performance

      D.   Test accuracy is not very strong


25.   What component of fitness is described as ‘the ability to use your muscular strength quickly’?

      A.   Muscular strength

      B.   Muscular speed

      C.   Muscular power

      D.   Muscular endurance


26.   Which is correct with regard to skin?

      A.   Adipose tissue lies between the dermis and the epidermis

      B.   Epidermis is the outermost layer of the skin

      C.   The base of the sweat gland is embedded below the fat layer

      D.   Dermis lies above the epidermis
                                                  – 11 –                                           2223 – 6601


27.   Which lobe of the brain is primarily responsible for visual processing and interpretation?

      A.   Temporal

      B.   Parietal

      C.   Frontal

      D.   Occipital


28.   Which endocrine organ is found in the neck?

      A.   Pituitary gland

      B.   Pineal gland

      C.   Thyroid gland

      D.   Adrenal gland


29.   Which hormones are released by the pancreas?

      A.   Glucagon and insulin

      B.   Glucagon and adrenalin

      C.   Glycogen and insulin

      D.   Glycogen and adrenalin


30.   Which of the following would be considered an indication of peripheral fatigue?

      A.   An increase in creatine phosphate stores due to training

      B.   A reduction in a person’s vertical jump height after repeated trials

      C.   A reduction in the levels of lactate and hydrogen ions in the blood

      D.   An increase in calcium ion availability for release




                                                                                                   Turn over
                                                    – 12 –                                     2223 – 6601


31.   Which of the activities are correctly classified in terms of their exercise intensity?


             High intensity                                  Endurance

      A.     30 minute row                                   Swimming 2 km

      B.     Short sprints                                   Plyometric exercises

      C.     Flexibility training                            Swimming 25 m at 100 %

      D.     Plyometric exercises                            Jogging 5 km



32.   Which correctly describes the static and dynamic friction experienced by the bobsled as the team
      pushes off at the start but before the bobsled begins to move?




      A.    The static friction is equal to the dynamic friction.

      B.    The static friction is larger than the dynamic friction.

      C.    The static friction is smaller than the dynamic friction.

      D.    The static friction stays the same and the dynamic friction gradually increases.
                                                  – 13 –                                         2223 – 6601


33.   Which force(s) act to slow down a runner as they accelerate out of the blocks at the start of
      a 100 m sprint?




           I.       Air resistance
           II.      Ground reaction force
           III.     Push force

      A.   I only

      B.   I and II only

      C.   II and III only

      D.   I, II and III


34.   Which is a feature of non-linear pedagogy in sports coaching?

      A.   It helps to develop the athlete’s creative problem-solving processes.

      B.   The coach dictates what is to be learnt in a training session.

      C.   The coach has full responsibility for when and how learning will occur in each session.

      D.   The athlete’s learning is very content focused.


35.   A coach records shooting position on the court in a basketball game. What type of notation system
      is being used?

      A.   Frequency table

      B.   Flow chart

      C.   Scattergram

      D.   Sequential system


                                                                                                Turn over
                                                    – 14 –                                         2223 – 6601


36.   What does a football coach use performance analysis software (e.g. Prozone) for?

      A.   To review decisions made by the umpire

      B.   To provide feedback on an athlete’s sleep patterns

      C.   To determine the nutritional intake of an athlete

      D.   To determine the speed and fitness level of an athlete


37.   Which statements about genotype and phenotype are correct?


            Genotype                                           Phenotype

      A.    The genetic makeup of an athlete                   An athlete’s arm span

            The physical expression of an athlete’s
      B.                                                       The genetic code of a cell
            genetic material
            Genetic characteristics can be influenced by       How likely a characteristic is to be expressed
      C.
            an athlete’s environment                           by a person
            The percentage of fast twitch muscle fibres        The expression of a characteristic can be
      D.
            in an athlete’s gastrocnemius muscle               influenced by an athlete’s parents


38.   Which are considered to be an environmental influence on an athlete’s characteristics?

           I.     An athlete’s lung capacity
           II.    An athlete’s training programme
           III.   An athlete’s nutritional intake

      A.   I and II only

      B.   I and III only

      C.   II and III only

      D.   I, II and III
                                                   – 15 –                                       2223 – 6601


39.   Which is a chemical mechanism that the body uses to inhibit an infectious agent?

      A.   The production of B lymphocyte cells

      B.   Localized inflammation

      C.   The formation of a blood clot

      D.   The alkaline or acidic conditions found in different bodily fluids


40.   Which are potential effects of intense training which impact the immune system for an elite athlete?

           I.     Tissue inflammation
           II.    Reduced resting heart rate
           III.   Increased levels of cortisol

      A.   I and II only

      B.   I and III only

      C.   II and III only

      D.   I, II and III
